EGYPT
ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Head of state: Muhammad Hosni Mubarak
Head of government 'Atif Muhammad 'Ubayd
(replaced Kamal Ahmed El-Canzouri in October)
Capital: Cairo
Population: 62.1 million
Official language: Arabic
Death penalty: retentionist
1999 treaty ratifications/signatures: African Charter
on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
Fourteen prisoners of conscience were sentenced to prison terms and five prisoners of conscience sentenced in previousyears remained held. While hundreds of suspected supporters of banned Islamist groups were released, thousands of others, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained held without charge or trial, sometimes for years. Others served sentences aftergrossly unfairtrials before military courts. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued to be systematic. Prison conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment At least 108 people were sentenced to death and at least 16 people were executed.
Background
President Hosni Mubarak, the sole candidate in a presidential referendum held in September, was confirmed for his fourth six-year term in office. In October he appointed a new Prime Minister, 'Atif Muhammad 'Ubayd, who formed a new government. A state of emergency declared in 1981 remained in force.
At the end of December tensions in a village in Upper Egypt led to the worst outbreak of sectarian violence in years. More than 20 people, almost all of them Christians, were killed.
Freedom of expression and association
Civil society institutions, such as political parties, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), professional associations and trade unions, and the news media, continued to face legal restrictions and government control.
In May a new law regulating NGOs came into force, which imposed a wide range of restrictive conditions, including a requirement that NGOs seek prior approval from the authorities for various activities at the international and local level. Breaches of the law carry prison sentences of up to one year.
Scores of prisoners of conscience—including leaders of professional associations, NGO activists and political activists—were detained on charges relating to their non-violent activities. Human rights defenders
The Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) continued to face official investigations into its publications and funding, followinga report it issued
94
Amnesty International Report 2000	94
ECY
on human rights violations in a village in Upper Egypt. The investigations focused on Hafez Abu Sa'ada, General Secretary of the EOHR, who remained on bail following his release from several days' detention in December 1998.
In October Fathi al-Masri, board member of the Centre for Trade Union and Workers' Services, was arrested in the town of al-Mahalla al-Kubra. He was accused of "disturbing public order", because he had distributed leaflets criticizing medical services at a state-owned company. He was released after four weeks, but he and another staff member of the NGO were still under investigation.
Prisoners of conscience
In October, 20 doctors, lawyers and other professionals, most of whom held leading positions in professional bodies, were arrested for alleged membership of the banned Muslim Brothers. In December their trial began before the Supreme Military Court, The defendants included former prisoner of conscience Muhammad Sa'd 'Aliywa al-Sayid Taha, a board member of the Giza branch of the doctors' association, who was sentenced to three years' imprisonment in 1995 by the same court. More than 160 other alleged members of the Muslim Brothers, all possible prisoners of conscience, were held for weeks or months in so-called "preventive detention" before being released. Dozens of them were held for nearly six months, the maximum period after which, according to the Criminal Procedure Code, a decision has to be taken on whether to go to trial.
Q Five prisoners of conscience, each serving a five-year prison term, remained in Mazra't Tora Prison at the end of 1999. They were among 54 prisoners of conscience tried and sentenced for membership of the Muslim Brothers in 1995.
Q In December 1998,20 people accused of spreading ■"extremist ideas" regarding a religion were detained for advocating modifying Islamic rules. In July 1999 a State Security Court in al-'Atarein sentenced the leader of the group, Muhammad Ibrahim Mahfouz, and 13 of his followers to prison terms ranging from one to five years.
Detention under emergency legislation
In April more than 1,000 political detainees were released and in December further releases were reported. Dozens of new cases of administrative detention under emergency legislation were reported, which was fewer than in previous years. However, thousands of suspected members or sympathizers of banned Islamist groups arrested in previous years, including possible prisoners of conscience, were still held as administrative detainees without charge or trial. Others were acquitted by military or (Emergency) Supreme State Security Courts but remained in detention.
Q 'Abd al-Mun'im Gamal al-Din "Abd al-Mun'im, a freelance journalist, remained in detention. He had been held since February 1993 despite having been acquitted by military courts in separate trials in 1993 and 1999 on charges of belonging to Islamist armed groups.
Q Hassan al-Gharbawi Shahhata, a lawyer arrested in January 1989, remained in detention at the end of 1999 despite having been acquitted in May 1990. At least 90 lawyers arrested in previous years remained in administrative detention.
Q A group of 29 young people from al-Kum al-Ahmar, near Cairo, including 17-year-old students, who were arrested in November 1998 and accused of membership of the al-Gama'aal-Islamiya, Islamic Group, were issued with administrative detention orders in August and September, after the prosecution dropped charges against them. They remained in detention in Damanhour Prison and al-Fayoum Prison at the end of 1999.
Prison conditions
Thousands of detainees were held in prisons where conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Scores of Islamist activists in administrative detention were reportedly suffering from illnesses including tuberculosis, skin diseases and paralysis, which were common because of lack of hygiene and medical care, overcrowding and poor food quality. Several prisoners reportedly died as a result of diseases which received little or no treatment.
Thousands of political detainees continued to be denied the right to be visited by lawyers and family members. For several years the Ministry of the Interior has routinely extended a ban on any visits to four prisons holding political detainees. However, in December the Administrative Court at the State Council decided that 14 detainees at prisons where visits continued to be banned should be given permission to receive visitors. They were among dozens of detainees on whose behalf complaints had been filed in a bid to lift the ban.
Unfair trials
Trials of alleged members of armed Islamist groups before military or (Emergency) Supreme State Security courts continued to be grossly unfair. Q In April 1999 the Supreme Military Court issued its verdict in a trial of 107 people, 60 in absentia, accused of membership of the Islamist armed group al-Gihad (Holy Struggle). Nine defendants were sentenced to death in absentia, 78 received prison sentences ranging from three years to life imprisonment, and 20 were acquitted. The defendants included more than a dozen people forcibly returned to Egypt from various countries including Albania, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Returned defendants were interrogated over several months while held in unacknowledged incommunicado detention by the State Security Intelligence (SSI), and defence lawyers were not allowed to meet the defendants until they appeared in court in February. Several defendants alleged that they had been tortured, but no independent investigation was apparently carried out.
Torture
Torture continued to be systematic in the headquarters of the SSI in Lazoghly Square in Cairo, SSI branches elsewhere in the country and police stations. Torture of
Amnesty International Report 2000
95
ECY
criminal suspects in police custody continued to be widely reported. The most common methods reported were electric shocks, beatings, suspension by the wrists or ankles and various forms of psychological torture, including death threats and threats of rape or sexual abuse of the detainee or a female relative. Q On 20 September, 23-year-old Sami "Amer Hassan Ahmad was reportedly blindfolded with his hands tied behind his back and beaten with a stick, including on the soles of his feet (falaka), in a police station in the al-Muski district of Cairo, On 22 September he was released and filed a complaint, despite having been threatened by police officers. Deaths in custody
At least seven people died in police custody in circumstances suggesting that torture and ill-treatment may have caused or contributed to their deaths. O Ahmed Muhammad Mahmoud Tamam, a 19-year-old student, was taken from his home on 19 July to "Omraniya Police Station in Cairo reportedly following an argument with a neighbour. He told a visiting relative at the police station that police officers were beating him. On 21 July he died in a police vehicle where police officers had reportedly beaten him—including hitting his head against the metal frame of the vehicle. UN Committee against Torture Having examined Egypt's third periodic report, the UN Committee against Torture recommended in May 1999 "that Egypt takes effective measures to prevent torture in police and State Security Intelligence custody and that perpetrators are vigorously prosecuted". It also recommended that "effective steps... be taken to protect women [in custody] from sexual abuse... [andl that a proper registry of detainees, both police and State Security Intelligence, which is accessible to members of the public be established and maintained." Inadequate investigation Although hundreds of victims of torture have filed complaints with the authorities over the past decade, no prompt and impartial investigations meeting international human rights standards are known to have been conducted.
Q In August the General Prosecution reopened investigations into allegations of torture in the course of a murder investigation in 1998 in the predominantly Coptic Christian village of al-Kushh, Upper Egypt. The investigation was reopened after the authorities received a list containing the names of hundreds of villagers who alleged that they had been tortured and ill-treated by police officers. Initial investigations into a torture complaint filed on behalf of 14 villagers — including people who had pictures of their injuries widely publicized—were closed in December 1998 on the grounds that forensic examination did not reveal injuries inflicted under torture. The authorities failed to conduct prompt investigations into allegations by other villagers, including women and children, whose testimonies were reported by the media and human rights organizations.
Q In October 1998 Alexandria Criminal Court referred the investigation into the involvement of 13 police officers in torturing Muhammad Badr al-Din Isma'il in
1996 and 1997 to the Public Prosecution, but at the end of 1999 it had not yet decided how to proceed with the case.
'Disappearances'
In February 1999 the Cairo Court of Appeal ordered the Egyptian Ministry of the Interior to pay Baha al-'Emari compensation for having failed to provide the necessary protection for her husband, Mansour Kikhiya, a prominent Libyan opposition leader and human rights activist who "disappeared" in 1993 in Egypt (see Libya entry). However, on 7 April the Court of Cassation suspended the ruling.
In October the Human Rights Centre for the Assistance of Prisoners, a local human rights organization, stated that relatives had located two detainees who had "disappeared" in previous years. In both cases relatives learned that their family member was detained in a prison where visits are banned, and were able to meet them after they had been transferred to other prisons. However, several other people who reportedly "disappeared" after arrest in previous years remained unaccounted for.
Death penalty
The death penalty continued to be used extensively. Nine people were sentenced to death, all in absentia, by a military court after an unfair trial which allowed no appeal. At least 12 women and 87 men were sentenced to death by criminal courts during 1999, the majority of them on charges of murder. At least three women and 13 men were executed.
Armed groups
Isolated incidents of clashes between security forces and armed Islamist groups were reported. In March the leadership of the main armed Islamist group, al-Gama 'a al'Islamiya. reiterated that it had halted its armed operations.
In September four member of an armed Islamist group were kilted when security forces raided a flat in Cairo. The circumstances of the incident suggested that the four men may have been extrajudicially executed.
Dr Nasr Hamed Abu-Zeid^ subject to a court ruling that he had insulted Islam through his writings, remained under threat of death from the Islamist group al-Gihad He and his wife, Dr Ibtihal Younis, continued to live abroad fearing for their safety if they returned home.
Al country visit
In October and November Al delegates conducted a research visit to Egypt where they met victims of human rights violations, representatives of human rights organizations, other members of civil society and government officials. In meetings with officials they raised concerns about the lack of proper investigation of and efficient preventive measures against human rights violations in Egypt.
96
Amnesty International Report 2000	96
