UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Head ofstate: Al-Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahyan
Head of government: Al-Sheikh Maktum bin Rashid
al-Maktum
Capital: Abu Dhabi
Population: 2.7 million
Official language: Arabic
Death penalty: retentionist
Death sentences were reportedly handed down and flogging was imposed as a judicial punishment. No executions were carried out. Reports of death in custody, forcible return, torture and ill-treatment were received.
Death sentences and cruel judicial punishments
At least two people were sentenced to death by Shari 'a (Islamic) courts in Fujairah and Dubai. Both men had been convicted of murder.
At least i8 flogging sentences were passed during the year, all allegedly for adultery and all but two were passed on foreign nationals by Shah 'a courts in Fujairah and Dubai.
Death in custody and 'disappearance'
Between May and August, five Libyan nationals were arrested. All five men had escaped from Libya several years earlier, fearing arrest in connection with their political or religious activities. One of the five, 'Abdullah Abu al-Oasim al-Ghazal, was arrested in 'Ajman on 31 August. His wife was summoned to al-Khalidiya Police Station in Abu Dhabi on 6 September and was informed that he had committed suicide. She refused to collect his body and asked for an autopsy to be carried out on the grounds that there were marks on his body and that the official notification papers for his death reportedly stated the cause of death as
"unknown". No information was available regarding any investigation into the death of 'Abdullah Abu al-Qasim al-Ghazal or the current whereabouts and status of the other four men.
Political arrests
In the aftermath of the 11 September attacks in the USA and military intervention by the USA and its allies in Afghanistan, scores of nationals of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) were arrested throughout the Emirates between September and November. They were arrested at their places of work, homes or a local mosque. Dozens had been released by the end of the year. However, there were fears that others might be held incommunicado and could be at risk of human rights violations including torture or ill-treatment.
Forcible return
Jawid al-Ghussein, a yo-year-old Palestinian businessman, was forcibly returned to areas under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority on 22 April, where he was held incommunicado in a presidential guesthouse for several weeks. (See Palestinian Authority entry.)
Intergovernmental organizations
In June, the UAE acceded to International Labour Organisation Conventions No.iii on Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) and No. 182 on Worst Forms of Child Labour. In November, press reports stated that the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs was studying proposed amendments to the UAE Labour Law. Although the law prohibits child labour in the UAE, children from Asia and Africa are often trafficked to the UAE to work as jockeys in camel races. They endure extremelypoor conditions and are often abused.
Freedom of expression
in September 2000, an unidentified individual claiming to represent the Ministry of Information reportedly contacted newspapers, including al-Khaleej, and television shows in the UAE, informing them that approximately 15 presenters and writers could no longer appear in their respective media. This alleged ban appeared to remain in force at the end of 2001.
In March, three US nationals were arrested in Dubai for promoting Christianity by distributing Christian religious materials on busy streets. They were released on bail in early April, and press reports of 11 April quoted US embassy sources stating that all three had been deported.
254
Amnesty International Report 2002
