PORTUGAL
PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC
Head of state: Jorge Fernando Branco de Sampaio
Head of government: Antonio Manuel de Oliveira
Guterres
Capital: Lisbon
Population: 10 million
Official language: Portuguese
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
The excessive length of criminal, administrative or disciplinary inquiries into allegations that police officers had ill-treated, or used disproportionate force against, suspects continued to cause concern. Some sentences handed down failed to reflect the seriousness ofthe crimes committed and raised doubts about the ability of the judicial system to deal effectively with cases of tortu re, ill-treatment and excessive use of force by law enforcement officers. Several deaths in prisons were being investigated. Claims of possible prison guard involvement in some killings were also being examined. Allegations persisted about acts of violence by custodial staff, and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment in prisons. Some new reports were received about ill-treatment in police custody.
OPT report
In July, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) published its report on a visit carried out in April 1999 to several police establishments and to the prisons of Coimbra, Leiria, Lisbon and Oporto. Regarding prisons, the CPT concluded that, although it had received fewer allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners by staff than on previous occasions, allegations continued to be made about verbal abuse, rough treatment and the removal of inmates from their cells during the night by prison officers, who then struck them with batons. The CPT also received many accounts of ill-treatment by fellow inmates, including physical assault and intimidation. It remained concerned about the continuing level of inter-prisoner violence in general and in Oporto Central Prison (Custôias) in particular—a problem it considered "far from being resolved". The report described drugs-related problems there as "dramatic" and as constituting a "veritable marketplace of drugs as part of the daily routine".
The CPT also commented that there were fewer allegations of police ill-treatment than formerly, but that the "persistence of some allegations of ill-treatment by the police" (kicks, blows with fists, truncheons and other objects), particularly at the time of arrest, underlined the need for the authorities to remain vigilant.
Deaths and ill-treatment in prison
In October, two prisoners were killed at the penitentiary of Vale de Judeus (Alcoentre), reportedly by two fellow inmates. One of those killed, Augusto Morgado Fernandes, was reported to have been involved in a dispute with the prison authorities, and to have complained to the Ombudsman about persecution by custodial staff. He was allegedly stabbed 14 times with the end of a spoon that had been worked into a knife. Part of his skull was then crushed with an iron bar. The alleged killers were placed under investigation by the Judicial Police. Some reports implicated custodial staff in the killings, at least through negligence, particularly by allowing cell doors to be left open at night. However, the Ministry of Justice subsequently assured Al that the deaths did not occur "at an hour of the night when the cells should have been closed". It was generally recognized that the situation at Vale de Judeus had been tense for some time. Other violent incidents, including another killing, had taken place in recent months.
New reports reinforced the concern earlier expressed by the CPT about the situation at Custôias. One report, received in August, described continuing abuse of power by custodial staff, who delivered habitual and arbitrary beatings. It also referred to the inaction of prison guards in relation to serious inter-prisoner violence, to the daily and systematic sale of drugs and to the general lack of hygiene. Replying to Al's expression of concern about allegations that prison guards were physically ill-treating inmates at Linhô Prison (Sintra) and that conditions in the prison
Amnesty International Report 2002
199
POR
were inhuman and degrading, the Director General of Prison Services stated that in many cases the prisoner had been subjected to disciplinary measures for violent or disruptive acts, but little or no information had been received that would substantiate allegations of violence by guards. However, in the case of Nelio Henrique Sa who was assaulted by the deputy chief prison officer in Linho Prison in April 2000, the officer had been issued with a written reprimand for inappropriate conduct. The Director General also stated that Linho Prison was being comprehensively renovated and that improved sanitary facilities were being introduced. After the deaths at Vale de Judeus penitentiary, new security measures were announced. However, there was some concern that any possible withdrawal of rights, such as those affecting work, telephone access or relative freedom of movement within wings, could further heighten tension.
Police ill-treatment
There were some new reports of police ill-treatment and abuse of authority, particularly at the time of arrest. Investigations were carried out by the Interior Ministry's police oversight agency, the General Inspectorate of internal Administration (IGA!) into 11 of the more serious allegations. In November, the IGAl informed AI that disciplinary action had been taken against police officers in three of these cases. O In November, a judicial investigation was opened into two joint complaints against Public Security Police (PSP) officers in Portimao. French nationals Nathalie julien and her brother, Didier julien, alleged that they were assaulted by five officers following an argument in a bar. They claimed that they were beaten with truncheons and kicked. Didier Julien suffered a fractured collar bone, allegedly caused by a blow delivered after he was handcuffed. Both had bruises and haematoma.
Effective impunity
Judicial inquiries into ill-treatment or excessive use of force by the police continued to make unacceptably slow progress. By the end of the year a number of judicial proceedings were still continuingafter several years.
O Rui Matias Oliveira, suspected of theft, was shot dead by a PSP officer in May 1990 during a car pursuit in Lisbon. He was unarmed. One of the three shots pierced Rui Oliveira's skull. The bullet was never recovered from the car, which had allegedly been emptied of contents and cleaned by officers of the same PSP division. In March 2001,11 years later, the officer who fired the fatal shot was sentenced by the Court of Boa Hora to a suspended two-year prison term for negligent homicide.
Updates on deaths in custody
A judicial inquiry continued into the death of Paulo Silva, who died of internal injuries in January 2000 after complaining that he had been badly beaten while in the custody of PSP officers in Oporto. An appeal against the 2001 decision to close, without further action, the case
of the death in custody in 2000 of Alvaro Rosa Cardoso was still pending. In July a follow-up report of the Portuguese government in response to the CPT report stated that, in the case of Antonio Mendes dos Santos, who died in 2000 after being held in police custody for 10 days in Coimbra, there was "a suspicion" that he had died as a result of police ill-treatment. The prosecutor nevertheless advised that the case be closed owing to lack of evidence of police responsibility, but the victim's family requested a continuation of the judicial inquiry, which was proceeding at the end of the year.
Update: Anadia case
The IGAI informed AI that it had established that seven officers from an investigation unit of the paramilitary National Republican Guard in Anadia had either direct or indirect responsibility for the ill-treatment or illegal detention of several individuals. Disciplinary measures were being taken. The IGAI had informed the Attorney General's Office so that a judicial inquiry could be opened, but a prosecutor had decided that the inquiry should be assigned instead to the Military Tribunal of Coimbra.
AI action
AI was in correspondence with the government on the subject of prisons and individual cases of police ill-treatment. A report originally submitted to the UN Committee against Torture was updated and published in July. The report summarized Al's concerns about prisons and policing over several years. While welcoming the establishment and work of the IGAI, the report noted that there was no independent police oversight agency. AI urged that all allegations of torture, ill-treatment or other abuse by police officers be automatically investigated as "public crimes", where the filing of a judicial complaint was automatic.
AI country reports/visits
Report
• Portugal: "Small problems...?" A summary of concerns
{AI Index: EUR 38/002/2001) Visit
An AI delegate visited Portugal in Decemberto gather information.
200
Amnesty International Report 2002	200
