HAIT
HAITI
Head of state: Jean Bertrand Aristide (replaced René Préval in February)
Head of government: Jean Marie Chérestal (replaced
Jacques Edouard Alexis in February)
Capital: Port-au-Prince
Population: 8.3 million
Official languages: French, Creole
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
Seven years after Haiti's return to constitutional order in 1994, many of the important human rights gains made in that time were in danger. Following the February inauguration of President Jean Bertrand Aristide, there were repeated indications that the police and justice systems were becoming more politicized. The President's June announcement of a "zero tolerance" policy towards crime was followed by an increase in killings by police in disputed circumstances; in "popularjustice" killings of suspected criminals; and in attacks by increasingly intolerant partisans of the ruling party Fanmi Lavalas{?l) on perceived opponents, including human rights defenders and journalists. Tensions were exacerbated by an attack in July on several police stations by unidentified and heavily armed assailants, and another such attack in December on the National Palace. The investigation into the
murder in April 2000 of prominent radio journalist Jean Dominique and his radio station guard Jean Claude Louissaint was repeatedly obstructed.
Background
Haiti became further isolated from the international community as disputes continued over the validity of the 2000 elections, despite negotiations facilitated by the Organization of American States (OAS). Seven FL senators, whose victories had been contested, resigned in an unsuccessful effort to resolve the conflict. In addition to the closure in February of the UN field mission, present since 1993, the UN's Independent Expert on Haiti stepped down and was not replaced. Haiti's precarious economic situation worsened with the decision by the European Union to freeze aid to the country. The USA cut off bilateral aid, giving only to non-governmental organizations (NGOs). In November the US Congressional Black Caucus wrote to President George W. Bush to protest at the impact of the measures on the poorest country in the Western hemisphere. The OAS reactivated the group of governments called "Friends of Haiti", expanding it to 14 members.
The opposition coalition named a parallel "provisional president", who called for a return of the notorious Haitian Armed Forces (FADH) disbanded by President Aristide in 1995. In March several hundred former soldiers demonstrated in support. In response, an organization of coup victims petitioned for a constitutional amendment to formally abolish the FADH, and presented the Senate with over 100,000 signatures in October.
On 28 July heavily armed men, reportedly claiming to be former members of the FADH, attacked police stations in Port-au-Prince and the Central Plateau and killed five police officers. Following the attacks, a former soldier was killed in disputed circumstances in Hinche and dozens of people were arrested, although all were subsequently released. For several hours on the morning of 17 December, more heavily armed men took possession of the National Palace in Port-au-Prince; in the course of the attack and the subsequent pro-government mob violence more than 10 people, including an assailant and two police officers, were killed. FL partisans burned four offices belonging to opposition parties, as well as an NGO office and homes belonging to several opposition figures. Journalists attempting to cover the events received death threats, and several radio stations were forcibly closed by pro-FL mobs. Investigations were reportedly opened into both attacks and their aftermath, although no results were made public.
Freedom of expression
At a press conference held in January, FL supporters threatened violence against certain key opposition politicians, as well as journalists and religious figures whom they accused of undermining the party. One of the speakers was later questioned by the Public Prosecutor but no further action was taken. In October, human rights defenders from two NGOs, the National
118
Amnesty international Report 2002
HAI
Coalition for Haitian Rights and the Platform of Haitian Human Rights Organizations, reported that they had received death threats which they believed were linked to their publicizing of human rights violations and partisan behaviour by the police. The failure by the police to halt mob violence against journalists and opposition figures following the December attack on the National Palace, or to arrest any perpetrators, was perceived as further evidence of growing intolerance and of the impunity enjoyed by government supporters. Attacks on journalists
There was a series of attacks against journalists, most frequently by the police or pro-government crowds. Q On 12 October. Radio Haïti Inter¡ournaWsX lean Robert Delciné was assaulted and threatened by police officers after investigating the alleged killing of Mackenson Fleurimon (see below) by police officers in Cité Soleil. The police inspector implicated refused to respond to summonses from the prosecutor and from the force's internal investigative unit. Q On 3 December, the news director of Radio Echo 2000, Brignol Lindor, was hacked to death in Petit Goave by a mob which included members of a pro-PL organization. Several days before, the PL assistant mayor had called for "zero tolerance" against Brignol Lindor, whom he accused of supporting a rival party. Although several of the perpetrators admitted to the murder, warrants issued had not been executed by the end of 2001.
Q Following the attack on 17 December on the National Palace, many reporters and radio stations were targeted for attack by pro-government crowds. Several, including a Radio Méfropo/e correspondent in Gonaives, were attacked in the street as they tried to cover events. Radio stations 5/^/7a/fM and Caraïbes FM were surrounded and threatened by crowds, and the latter had windows broken and vehicles damaged on their premises. Other stations such as Métropole, Vision 2000 and Kiskeya curtailed their coverage after receiving telephone threats. Up to 10 journalists were reported to have fled the country due to attacks and threats received during this period.
Jean Dominique investigation
The April 2000 killings of respected Radio Haïti Inter journalist Jean Dominique and station guard Jean Claude Louissaint continued to dominate the political scene as human rights groups, journalists, churches, elected officials and grassroots groups across the political spectrum collectively pressed for the perpetrators to be brought to justice. During a visit in March to the radio station, the President publicly committed his efforts to ensuring full and impartial justice in the case, and declared a "National Press Day" on the anniversary of the deaths.
In spite of such public support, numerous death threats reportedly received by the investigating judge were seen as attempts to intimidate them into dropping influential people from the investigation. The judge resigned briefly, citing insufficient attention to his security and lack of adequate resources. The Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights requested that the Haitian government undertake precautionary measures to protect him for a period of six months.
in response to the prosecutor's request for supplementary information, the judge formally requested in August that the parliamentary immunity of a sitting FL senator be lifted. The request remained pending before the Senate at the end of the year. Arrest warrants for prominent FL activists who had failed to respond to the judge's summons were not acted upon by the police, in spite of repeated opportunities to do so; the activists only appeared before the judge after a delay of several months, reportedly after urging from the President. The investigation was further hampered by the failure of the police to heed the judge's recommendations regarding protection of a key suspect; the man was killed by a mob in Léogâne shortly after his arrest in November. The local police commissioner was briefly detained following this incident.
Haitian National Police
Nearly all senior police officials were replaced following President Aristide's inauguration. The post of Inspector General of the police internal oversight unit was fil led after nearly a year's vacancy. There were reports of ill-treatment, particularly of suspected criminals during arrest. The police were accused of excessive use of force In some crowd-control situations, while in others, such as mob violence in the wake of the attack on 17 December, they reportedly failed to intervene at all.
In response to rising public concern about crime levels, the President announced in June a "zero tolerance" policy towards law-breakers. NGOs reported a subsequent increase in killings of alleged criminal suspects. Several were reportedly attributed to police officers, and others were by crowds carrying out "popular justice".
Q On 11 October Mackenson Fleurimon, aged 16, was reportedly shot dead by the police in the Cité Soleil neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince. Family members and witnesses claimed that police officers killed him after failing to find his brother, whom they suspected of gang activity, A police inspector and a commissioner were questioned by prosecutors on 18 October, but the former apparently went into hiding rather than respond to further summonses. A warrant was issued for his arrest.
Justice system
There was growing concern about the lack of independence of the justice system, partly due to public awareness of obstacles to the Jean Dominique investigation. The Ministry of Justice expressed hope that the reconstitution in October of the Cour de Cassation, the highest court in Haiti, after a long period of inactivity, could reinforce independence by serving as a channel for appeals against improper decisions. However, incidents of elected officials and party loyalists pressurising judges continued at every level. Q In March, a former justice of the peace in Maissade was threatened, and a member of his family assaulted.
Amnesty International Report 2002
119
HON
by the local mayor and armed supporters. Several of these were reportedly arrested, but freed after the mayor and his group visited the police station to demand their release. The judge was forced to go into hiding.
Q In Hinche, also in March, the local mayor and his armed group burst into the court and physically assaulted two justices of the peace, whom they reportedly accused of not being FL supporters. The mayor was later arrested but the Minister of the Interior reportedly intervened to obtain his release. The mayor was replaced, reportedly by presidential decree, in December,
Overcoming impunity
Efforts to bring to justice those responsible for past human rights violations continued, Q Little progress was made regarding an appeal to the Cour de Cassation against the guilty verdict in the trial in 2000 of those accused of the 1994 Raboteau massacre. In June, immigration officials arrested Carl Dorelien, a former Haitian army colonel, as he attempted to enter the USA. He had been found guilty in November 2000 in Haiti of involvement in the massacre and sentenced in absentiaxo life imprisonment. Q On 26 May former military general Prosper Avril was arrested by riot police in Port-au-Prince. Prosper Avril. who had been head of security under former President jean Claude Duvalier, led Haiti following a military coup in 1988 until March 1990, a period marred by serious human rights violations. He was arrested on a warrant dating from 1996, on charges of torture, assault and illegal arrest. State security charges were also filed against him. The case was assigned to an investigating Judge.
In September President Aristide announced that the documents confiscated by US troops from military and paramilitary headquarters in 1994 had been returned to Haiti. It was not clear if the documents were intact. Victims' groups and legal groups working on past cases pressed for access to the files, which they believed could be useful in prosecuting those responsible for past human rights violations.
Prisons
A crisis in the country's prisons was acknowledged as delays in the criminal Justice system meant that of a prison population of over 4,000, some 80 per cent were held in pre-trial detention. The Ministry of Justice convened a seminar on criminal justice in May to discuss possible remedies. In September, two investigating magistrates and three substitute prosecutors were permanently assigned to the National Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince to try to resolve the situation of the pre-trial detainees among its 2,000 inmates. Despite reduced budgets for prisoners, improvements were made to prison administration and the provision of food. Over 100 new prison guards were trained and deployed. Killings of detainees
On the night of 15/16 November, at least four prisoners were reportedly killed in the National Penitentiary as
specialized police units attempted to break up a riot. Around a dozen inmates were believed to have been wounded. According to press reports, the riot was sparked by the beating to death of a detainee by prison guards. The Minister of Justice announced the formation of an investigative commission into the incident, made up of police and Justice officials; no report was made public by the end of the year.
Al country reports/visits
Reports
•	Haiti; Human rights challenges facing the new government (Al Index: AMR36/002/2001)
•	Haiti: Steps forward, steps back - human rights 10 yearsafterthecoup(AI Index: AMR36/010/2001)
Visit
Al delegates visited Haiti in October
