BOLIVIA
REPUBLIC OF BOLIVIA
Head of state and government: Jorge Quiroga Ramirez
(replaced Hugo BanzerSuárez in August)
Capital: La Paz
Population: 8.5 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes
Ill-treatment of detainees by members of the armed forces continued to be reported. Excessive use of force and killings by members ofthe security forces in disputed circumstances occurred in El Chapare region and during demonstrations. Human rights defenders continued to suffer attacks and harassment, including death threats.
Background
In August, Vice-President Jorge Quiroga Ramirez was sworn in as President following the resignation of President Hugo Banzer Suárez. During both administrations the issues of economic restructuring and the increasing militarization of El Chapare region led to violent confrontations between demonstrators and members of the security forces. In December an Argentine federal judge requested the provisional arrest, pending requests for extradition, of former President Hugo Banzer Suárez for his alleged involvement in a criminal plan characterized by a systematic pattern of forced disappearances known as "Operation Condor".
Suppression of demonstrations
There were reports that the security fprces ill-treated peaceful protesters, and may have used excessive force to break up demonstrations. In April, a number of people, including women, were beaten during a march for "People's Life and Sovereignty". Several participants, including members of the Asamblea Permanente de Derechos Humanos (APDH), Permanent Human Rights Assembly, were arbitrarily detained by the security forces. Journalists who tried to cover the events were attacked. Several deaths were recorded. Organizers were repeatedly harassed. Oscar Olivera, a spokesman for the mobilizing committee of the march publicly expressed his concern at a list reported to be circulating of people, including himself, who were to be "eliminated". There was no information on investigations reportedly initiated into these incidents.
During the march the police tried to disperse the crowd by throwing tear gas canisters, allegedly causing the deaths of two people. The police reportedly claimed that they had acted in response to being stoned by the crowd but this version was disputed by witnesses.
Q Ezequiel Daniel Vela Cuba, was reportedly killed by a tear gas canister which witnesses said was fired at point-blank range.
Killings in El Chapare
Several people were killed during operations by the security forces to eradicate coca-leaf crops which often appeared to involve excessive use of force. There were reports that investigations into the incidents had been initiated under the military justice system. Q Ramón Pérez was killed in September when members of the police and army Joint Task Force fired at a group of six journalists he was taking to visit a military camp in Loma Alto. Q In October Hilda Escobar Aguilar died during confrontations near Isarzama between peasants and members of the Joint Task Force after being hit by a tear gas canister.
Human rights defenders
Attacks on and harassment of human rights defenders and members of their families were reported during the year.
Q In January, a member of the Unidad Móvil para el PatrullajeRuraliUMOPAK), Mobile Rural Patrol Unit, shot at two representatives of the Ombudsperson's Office in El Chapare as they approached the community of Nuevo Tacapari, Cochabamba department, to investigate reports of human rights violations. The District Attorney's Office reportedly opened an investigation.
Members of APDH continued to be targets of harassment,
Q Waldo Albarracin, national president of APDH, and his family received death threats in February and March.
Q The arrest of Adalberto Rojas, regional president of APDH in Santa Cruz, was ordered by a provincial prosecutor investigating the arrests of students.
Refugees
Several political refugees and immigrants from Peru reported discrimination and harassment by the security forces. Many feared being returned to Peru where they claimed they would face ill-treatment. Q Rumaldo Juan Pacheco Oseo and his wife, Fredesvinda Tineo Godos, were detained in La Paz in February by officials of the Bolivian Servicio Nacional de Migración. National Migration Service, and handed over, together with their three children, to the Peruvian police. In Peru the couple were reportedly transferred to the Sala Nacional Corporativa, National Corporative Court, which deals with cases of "terrorism". They were eventually released.
Intergovernmental organizations
In May the UN Committee against Torture examined Bolivia's initial report on the implementation of the UN Convention against Torture. In its concluding observations and recommendations, the Committee noted the lack of human rights training provided to law enforcement officials and members of the armed forces, it also noted the number of complaints by detainees of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, on many occasions resulting in deaths, and the impunity for alleged perpetrators
Amnesty International Report 2002
51
BOS
arising from the slow pace and inadequacy of investigations into complaints. The Committee was concerned at the lack of effective action by the authorities to eradicate these practices and, in particular, the gross dereliction of duty on the part of the Public Prosecutor's Office and the courts. It also noted the excessive and disproportionate use of force and of firearms by the police and the armed forces in suppressing mass demonstrations,
Al country reports/visits
Reports
•	Bolivia: A summary of Amnesty Internatiorial's concerns presented to the Bolivian Ministerof Justice and Human Rights {Al Index: AMR 18/006/2001)
•	Bolivia: Torture and ill-treatment-Amnesty International'sconcernsiAl Index: AMR 18/008/2001)
