UKRAINE
UKRAINE
Head of state: Leonid Kuclima
Head of government: Anatoliy Kinakh (replaced Viktor
Yushchenko in May)
Capital: Kiev
Population: 49.1 million
Official language: Ukrainian
Death penalty: abolitionist forall crimes
Ukraine was criticized by a number of intergovernmental organizations for human rights violations, including persistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by police officers, and restrictions on press freedom. No progress was made in bringing to justice those responsible for the possible "disappearance" of journalist Georgiy Gongadze in 2000. Several journalists were attacked by unknown assailants; at least one died as a result.
Background
In June and July, after several years of debate, the Ukrainian parliament adopted a package of lo laws on judicial and legal reforms. The new legislation, which was intended to bring Ukraine's legislation into conformity with Council of Europe standards, included a new Criminal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure as well as a series of laws which amended existing legislation relating to the judiciary, the procuracy, the police and pre-trial detention.
Torture and ill-treatment
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by law enforcement officials persisted and appeared to be widespread. Allegations were frequently accompanied by reports that detainees were refused prompt access to legal representation and were not allowed to inform family members of their detention. Concern about alleged torture and ill-treatment was expressed by several intergovernmental organizations which, in the latter half of 2001, considered periodic reports submitted by Ukraine.
In August the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed concern about reports of police brutality against the Roma population, including arbitrary arrest and illegal detention, and recommended that Ukraine take immediate steps to stop such abuses.
In October the UN Human Rights Committee expressed concern, during its consideration of Ukraine's fifth periodic report, about "the persistence of widespread use of torture". It urged Ukraine to ensure that all allegations of torture were effectively investigated by an independent body, that those responsible for torture be prosecuted and that victims be given adequate compensation.
In November the UN Committee against Torture echoed similar concerns during its consideration of
Ukraine's fourth periodic report, recommending that Ukraine "[tlake effective measures to prevent acts of torture and ill-treatment in its territory, in view of the persistent reports that torture is still regularly practised". Armed forces
Reports of the torture and ill-treatment of young conscripts were received in relation to Ukraine's armed forces where soldier on soldier violence persisted in the form of hazing. In October and November respectively the UN Human Rights Committee and the UN Committee against Torture urged Ukraine to strengthen measures to end hazing, prosecute offenders and undertake training and educational activities to eradicate the culture which encouraged its practice in the armed forces.
Harsh prison conditions
Conditions in prisons and pre-trial detention centres continued to fall below international minimum standards. Prisoners were poorly fed, received inadequate medical care and were held in poorly heated and ventilated conditions in overcrowded cells, despite efforts to reduce the prison population through ongoing prison amnesties.
Possible'disappearance'
No progress was made in determining who was responsible for the abduction and apparent killing of the independent journalist Georgiy Gongadze who failed to return to his home in the city of Kiev on 16 September 2000. A decapitated body which was believed to be that of Georgiy Gongadze was found several weeks later in a shallow grave in woodland on the outskirts of Kiev. The alleged involvement of President Leonid Kuchma and two other senior state officials in the abduction of the then 31-year-old editor of the Internet newspaper Ukrayinskaya Pravda resulted in a wave of protests throughout the country. Various international bodies expressed concern about the promptness and impartiality of the investigation into Georgiy Gongadze's "disappearance".
Freedom of expression
Press freedom continued to come under pressure from the Ukrainian authorities. Editors of privately owned newspapers and television companies complained of being repeatedly subjected to a number of administrative checks by the authorities in an apparent attempt to stifle their Journalistic activities. The charge of criminal libel, though later decriminalized, was resorted to by state officials on a number of occasions in order to silence critical journalism. There were also reports of journalists being physically attacked by unknown assailants; at least one died as a result. The circumstances surrounding these attacks remained unclear and those responsible were rarely brought to justice.
Q Igor Alexandrov, head of the TOR television station in the town of Slavyansk, died on 7 July of injuries to his head sustained during an attack by unknown assailants wielding baseball bats four days earlier as he arrived at
Amnesty International Report 2002
253
UNI
work. Colleagues believed that his murder was related to tor's coverage of alleged government corruption and organized crime.
Al country reports/visits
Reports
•	Ukraine before the United Nations Human Rights Committee (Al Index: EUR 50/001 /2001)
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2001: Ukraine (Al Index: EUR 01/003/2001)
