MAURITANIA
ISLAMIC REPUBLICOF MAURITANIA
Head of state: Maaouiya Quid Sid AhmedTaya Head of government: Cheikh El Avia Quid Mohamed Khouna
Capital: Nouakchott
Population: 2.7 million
Official language: Arabic
Death penalty: retentionist
2001 treaty ratifications/signatures: UN Women's
Convention
Three members of an opposition party were convicted on politically motivated charges after an unfair trial. The government continued to deny the existence of slavery. Human rights organizations, including those campaigning against slavery, remai ned il lega I, a nd freedom of expression remained limited. Female genital mutilation was reported to be widespread and no specific legislation was enacted prohibiting the practice. No steps were taken by the government to investigate massive human rights violations committed during the late 1980s and early 1990s. One death sentence was passed.
Background
Local and parliamentary elections were held in October, with the ruling party maintaining a large majority. Two political parties remained banned since
2000, following an increase in political tension and demonstrations. Political opponents continued to be harassed and freedom of expression was limited. Human rights organizations, including those campaigning against slavery, continued to operate without authorization, leaving human rights defenders liable to prosecution under law for "administerlingl associations which are functioning without authorization".
Slavery and similar practices
Further evidence emerged to suggest that, despite official abolition in 1981, slavery or practices analogous to slavery and related practices, continued. Evidence also showed continued discrimination based on slave-related status. Although the government strenuously denied that slavery existed, few practical measures seemed to have been implemented to eradicate it. Precise data was not available on the extent of the practice.
Unfair trial of a political opponent
The arrest and detention of three members of the opposiiion Front populaire mauritanien ifPH), Popular Mauritanian Front, including its leader, Mohamed Lemine Chbih Ould Cheikh Melaïnine, was the latest example in a pattern of harassment of political opponents.
Q Mohamed Lemine Chbih Ould Cheikh Melanine, Mokhtar Ould Haïbetna and Bouba Ould Hassena, were convicted on 14 June by Aioun criminal court on charges of conspiracy to commit acts of sabotage and "terrorism". Al considered them to be prisoners of conscience.
The lawyers for the three men alleged numerous serious irregularities in investigation and trial proceedings, and initially withdrew from the case in protest. During the trial, both prosecution witnesses were dismissed as unreliable. Lawyers had already objected to their testimony as the two men were originally arrested with Mohamed Chbih and were then presented as prosecution witnesses by the police. One of the two men acknowledged in court that he was a police informant. Their incriminating testimony formed the bulk of the evidence against Mohamed Chbih. The three defendants stated that their signed statements had been obtained under duress. Following demonstrations in support of Mohamed Chbih by FPM supporters, the Supreme Court ruled on 13 May that the case should be transferred from Nouakchott to a court some 8ookm away in the town of Aioun.
Two people who had applied to observe the trial were refused permission, although a representative of the Senegalese Rencontre africaine pour la défense des droits de l'homme, African Assembly for the Defence of Human Rights, was permitted to attend.
The sentence was confirmed by the cassation chamber of the Supreme Court in December. At the end of the year, the three men remained in Aioun prison, where conditions were known to be very harsh and whose remote position posed difficulties for family support.
168
Amnesty International Report 2002
MAU
Freedom of expression further attacked
The pattern of repression of freedom of expression and harassment of members of the press continued. & In April. Mohammed Lemine Ould Ba, the Mauritanian correspondent for Radio France Internationale, was banned by the government from working with a foreign media organization. The reason for the ban, which had not been lifted by the end of the year, was not clear.
Death penalty
One man was sentenced to death after being convicted of murder.
Intergovernmental organizations
In September, the European Parliament passed a resolution on Mauritania calling for the immediate and unconditional release of Mohamed Chibh and his two co-detainees, for the right of free expression to be guaranteed and for immediate steps to be taken to end slavery.
The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child considered the initial report of Mauritania in September. The Committee expressed concern that the report did not mention human rights issues such as female genital mutilation and slavery. It also said that insufficient resources were being used to tackle the effect of poverty on children, particularly in rural areas, and expressed concern at evidence of discrimination against minorities.
Al country reports/visits
Statement
• Mauritania: Prisoners of conscience sentenced to five
years in prison (Al Index: AFR 38/005/2001) Visits
Al made several requests seeking authorization to visit Mauritania to discuss human rights issues, including slavery, with government authorities. Despite apparent initial openness, no firm reply was received and the organization was not able to visit the country.
