JOR
JORDAN
HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN
Head of state: King 'Abdallah bin Hussein Head of government: 'Ali Abu Ragheb Capital: Amman Population: 5.1 million Official language: Arabic Death penalty: retentionist
Hundreds of people, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested for political reasons. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by members of the security services. Trials of most of those charged with political offences continued to be heard before the State Security Court whose procedures did not meet international fairtrial standards. Around 13 people were sentenced to death and at least nine people were executed. There were at least 19 cases of family or "honour" killings. Three people linked to Islamistgroups remained in forcible exile.
Background
Unauthorized public meetings were banned in August under temporary legislation. In October, in the wake of the attacks in the USA on ii September, a provisional law broadened the definition of "terrorism" and allowed for the freezing of suspects' bank accounts. Further interim amendments to the Penal Code were introduced expanding the number of offences carrying the death penalty, restricting freedom of expression, and giving the Prime Minister discretion to refer more cases to the State Security Court, including those relating to the "national economy". The amendments were approved by King 'Abdallah following the dissolution of parliament prior to elections scheduled for 2002-
Arrestsand incommunicado detention
Hundreds of people were arrested for political reasons. During September and October scores of people were arrested on suspicion of involvement with Islamist groups, and demonstrations supporting the Palestinian intifada and protesting against the bombing campaign in Afghanistan by the USA and its allies. Some of those arrested were held incommunicado at the General Intelligence Department (GID) detention centre. Most were later released without charge, Q Dozens of people, including prisoners of conscience, were detained around September, They were reportedly arrested by the GID in connection with a rally on 28 September to mark the anniversary of the Palestinian intifada. All were released without charge by the end of November, All were held incommunicado, three for up to 60 days including 'Ali 'Abdallah and'Abd al-Karim al-Hasanat who stated that they were punched, slapped and kicked during interrogation by police and GID officers. They were
reportedly deprived of sleep for a number of days and held in solitary confinement until their release without charge on 26 November.
Q In October, three students were reportedly beaten by university campus guards in connection with a demonstration in Jordan University in protest against the bombing campaign in Afghanistan. They were hospitalized and later arrested at the hospital by police officers. They were held for about two days and released without charge.
Torture and ill-treatment
Reports continued to be received of torture and ill-treatment by members of the security forces and prison services. Some victims were reportedly tortured whi le held in incommunicado detention by the GID. There were also reports of beatings by members of the police and other security services.
Q Ra'ed Muhammad Hijazi remained in prison at the end of the year; his trial was continuing. He had been arrested in October 2000 after being extradited from Syria and held incommunicado in the GID detention centre for up to three weeks. He alleged that during that time his life was threatened and he was beaten with sticks and cables. He said that he signed "confessions" under duress relating to alleged membership of al-Qa 'ida (the Base) and to conspiring to bomb tourist sites in Jordan, He was reportedly beaten intermittently in prison until early 2001. At a court hearing in May a doctor testified that there was bruising on his body. During a hearing in September a doctor confirmed that he had treated Ra'ed Muhammad Hijazi for severe pneumonia possibly caused by damp and poorly ventilated prison conditions. Q In January, 'Ali Abu Sukkar, a member of the unauthorized Anti-Normalization Committee, a subcommittee of Jordanian professional unions which opposes relations with Israel, was arrested by armed security agents. He was reportedly beaten to the floor and shackled while a gun was held to his head. Eight members of the Committee were charged with libel and membership of an illegal organization, 'Ali Abu Sukkar and "Ali Hattar were also charged with possession of explosives. All were released on bail after about two weeks and their case was referred to the State Security Court. In October, the case was dropped. Q Thirteen men arrested in early 2001 and charged with offences in connection with alleged membership of the Islamist group Tanzim al-Khalaya, Cells Organization, were brought to trial before the State Security Court around July. They were reportedly tortured and ill-treated during interrogation by the GID. including by being beaten on the soles of their feet (falaqa), deprived of sleep for prolonged periods, made to remain in a sitting position without a chair and blindfolded. They were held incommunicado in solitary confinement. According to reports, the interrogation period lasted for over a month.
Unfairtrials
Political prisoners continued to be tried before the State Security Court, a court which invariably used
142
Amnesty International Report 2002
KAZ
panels of military judges and failed to provide adequate safeguards for fair trials.
Q During a retrial in July before the State Security Court, nine alleged members of the Islamist group Jama'atal-lslah wa'l-Tahaddi, Reform and Challenge Group, accused of bomb attacks during 1998, were sentenced to life imprisonment despite allegations that their confessions were made under torture. No proper investigation was ever carried out into these allegations. The nine had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1999 by the State Security Court, following a flawed trial; the verdict had been overturned by the Court of Cassation in April 2001.
Death penalty
At least nine people were executed and at least 13 people were sentenced to death, some after unfair trials,
O In May Ra'ed 'Abdallah Najib Abu-Shamma and Basim "Abdallah Najib Abu-Shamma were sentenced to death for murder following an unfair trial. The Court of Cassation upheld the death sentences against the two men even though one of the judges reportedly refused to sign the decision on the grounds that the trial was unfair-
Family or'honour' killings
There were at least 19 family or "honour" killings during 2001. During December, the government amended Article 340 of the Penal Code to prevent exemption from penalty for men who murder their wives or female relatives on grounds of adultery. However, the Article still allows for the reduction of the penalty if the victim is found in an "adulterous situation". The reduction of the penalty is now also allowed for women who kill husbands found in an "adulterous situation" at home. Q In May the Criminal Court reduced the sentence imposed on Nidal Mahmud for the murder of his sister, Huwayda, in April to one year's imprisonment. Nidal Mahmud had initially been sentenced to seven and a half years' imprisonment. Following a review by the Court of Cassation, his case had been returned to the Criminal Court for consideration under Article 98 of the Penal Code which reduces sentences for crimes committed in a "fit of rage" caused by unlawful or dangerous acts on the part of the victim. Huwayda had previously spent three years in protective custody after being raped.
Forcible exile
Three of the four leaders of the Islamist organization Hamas remained in forcible exile. A fourth, Ibrahim Ghosheh, was allowed to return from Qatar at the end of June on condition he agreed to refrain from activities in the name of Hamas.
