CROATIA
REPUBLICOFCROATIA
H ea d of sta te: Stj e pa n M esic
Head of government: Ivica Racan
Capital: Zagreb
Population: 4.7 million
Official language: Croatian
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2001 treaty ratifications: Optional Protocol to the UN
Women's Convention; Rome Statute ofthe International
Criminal Court
Croatia continued to sufferthe legacy ofthe 1991-1995 armed conflict, particularly impunity for war crimes and otherviolations of human rights. Significant progress was made in cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal forthe former Yugoslavia (the Tribunal). The domestic criminal justice system improved its record in investigating and prosecuting war crimes committed by both Croats and Croatian Serbs, although not all proceedings were conducted thoroughly and impartially. Return ofthe country's pre-war Serb population continued to be marred by discriminatory laws and political obstruction. Allegations that law enforcement officials ill-treated detainees were not investigated promptly and thoroughly.
Background
In March amendments to the Croatian Constitution abolished the upper chamber of Parliament (Sabor), the Chamber of Deputies. The incumbent government coalition of six parties narrowly won municipal elections in May, while the opposition Hrvatska demokratska zajednica (HDZ), Croatian Democratic Union, gained significant support. In October Croatia signed a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union, which was ratified in December by the European Parliament.
In November the Ministry of the Interior announced that some 38,000 files compiled on individuals by the security services would be made accessible in the state archives. During 10 years of HDZ rule (1990-2000), many journalists and opposition politicians were placed under surveillance, which was apparently unlawful because itwas not justified by reasons of national security or the prevention or detection of crime. However, administrative and legal procedures prevented those responsible from being brought to account.
Human Rights Committee
In March, Al briefed the Human Rights Committee prior to its examination of Croatia's initial report under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In April, the Committee requested that Croatia report back on measures taken to investigate and prosecute those responsible for human rights violations after
Amnesty International Report 2002
83
CRO
army offensives in 1995, and to provide more information on the application of the 1996 Amnesty Law which, the Committee feared, allowed perpetrators of human rights violations to escape accountability. It also recommended measures to facilitate the return of refugees and displaced persons.
Investigations and prosecutions for war crimes
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
Cooperation improved with the Tribunal. Croatian army General Rahim Ademi was surrendered to its custody in August, after his indictment for war crimes against Croatian Serb civilians in 1993 had been unsealed. However. Croatia failed to surrender former Croatian army General Ante Gotovina, charged with war crimes committed during army operations in 1995. The Tribunal Prosecutor criticized the government for allowing him to escape arrest despite being informed about his indictment before it was unsealed. In November Bosnian Croat Pasko Ljubif ic, indicted for war crimes in central Bosnia, gave himself up to Croatian police and was subsequently surrendered to the Tribunal.
In October, the Tribunal Prosecutor charged the former President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), Slobodan Milosevic, with war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Croatia. Also named in the indictment were 15 other Serb and Croatian Serb men, all former officials and armed forces officers. The indictment covered the murders of hundreds of non-Serbs, the illegal detention of thousands of people, many of whom were tortured or ill-treated, and the expulsion of over 170,000 others from Serb-occupied areas.
Domestic prosecutions
At least six trials of Croatian army and police officers charged with human rights violations against Croatian Serbs during the war continued or commenced before Croatian courts. They included retrials of people whose earlier acquittals had been quashed by the Supreme Court.
However, prosecutions progressed slowly and the criminal justice system remained ill-equipped to investigate and prosecute these sensitive cases thoroughly and impartially. In July the government proposed a law to set up an independent prosecution office which would take over the investigation and prosecution of war crimes. By the end of 2001, the draft law had not yet been introduced into Parliament. Q In March, police investigated the torture and subsequent "disappearance" of scores of Serb and Montenegrin prisoners in the Lora military prison in Split during the war. In September, seven former military police officers suspected of these crimes were arrested. In October a former detainee was reportedly threatened and photographed by war veterans at Split County Court while waiting to be questioned by the investigative judge. Anonymous threats were reportedly also received by the Split County Public Prosecutor. In December the Dalmatia-Split County Prefect visited the seven suspects in prison and
publicly expressed hopes that they would be freed, compromising the independence of judicial proceedings.
Scores of criminal proceedings continued against Croatian Serbs charged with human rights violations, many in the absence of the accused. At least 300—and possibly hundreds more—international arrest warrants were issued, most of them for Croatian Serb suspects believed to be abroad. Many concerned individuals convicted in absentia and on the basis of insufficient evidence. In May Al reiterated its recommendation that Croatia establish a system analogous to the Rules of the Road procedure in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Under this procedure domestic courts must refer potential war crimes cases to the Tribunal prosecutor for an independent assessment. Q In March a warrant was issued for the arrest of Edita Radjen-Potkonjak, a Croatian Serb dental nurse. In 1995 she had been convicted and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment after a trial in absentia, with 25 others, in connection with mass executions of Croatian civilians in 1991. Her conviction appeared to have been based on hearsay evidence from one witness.
Allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officials
Investigations into several reports that detainees were ill-treated by prison officers and did not receive immediate or adequate medical treatment were not conducted promptly and thoroughly. Q In June Tomica Bajsic, a detainee under investigation in Karlovac District Prison, went into a coma, allegedly as a result of ill-treatment or excessive use of force. He was reportedly denied immediate medical care following his collapse. In August the government said there was no evidence of ill-treatment but that an investigation into the conduct of personnel at the prison was ongoing. However, the outcome of any investigation was not known to have been made public by the end of 2001.
Refugee returns
According to estimates by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, less than one third of the 300,000 Croatian Serbs who fled the country during the war had returned to the country. Official government statistics listed around 10,000 people as having returned from the FRY and the Republika Srpska in 2001, a significant decrease from 2000.
The return of property belonging to Croatian Serbs remained slow. Local housing commissions failed to implement promptly the provisions of the Return Programme, which allowed the temporary occupant to remain if no alternative accommodation was available. By contrast, in eastern Slavonia, the local authorities applied different legislation, allowing them to evict Croatian Serbs occupying houses belonging to Croats, without having provided the former with alternative housing. In August the government issued instructions requiring housing commissions to tackle the problems of illegal and double occupation of property belonging to returnees.
84
Amnesty International Report 2002	84
CUB
However, In November the government said it was under no obligation to restore the tenancy rights of Croatian Serbs. In 1995, tens of thousands lost their right to rent socially owned apartments for life and were consequently unable to return to their pre-war homes. Many Croatian Serbs had also lost tenancy rights as a result of unfair civil proceedings, or after being illegally and violently evicted.
Al country reports/visits
Report
• Concerns In Europe, January-June 2001: Croatia (Al Index: EUROl/003/2001)
