CZECH REPUBLIC
CZECH REPUBLIC
Head of state: Vaclav Havel
Head of government: Milos Zeman
Capital: Prague
Population: 10,3 million
Official language: Czech
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2001 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict
The authorities failed to conduct thorough and impartial investigations into reported cajes of arbitrary detention and police ill-treatment. Roma who were subjected to racist violence were frequently inadequately protected by police officers.
Inadequate investigations
Investigations continued into reports that dozens of people suspected of involvement in anti-globalization demonstrations in Prague on 26 and 27 September 2000 had been arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by police. Investigations into complaints of criminal behaviour by police officers were carried out by the Inspectorate of the Ministry of the Interior, There were concerns that the investigations could not be considered independent and impartial as both those conducting investigations and those being investigated were under the control of the same authority—the Ministry of the Interior.
Q The Environmental Law Service, a nongovernmental human rights organization based in Brno, filed 27 criminal complaints on behalf of victims of human rights abuses. The Inspectorate of the Ministry of the Interior decided to investigate only three cases
of police ill-treatment. All other complaints were referred to the Department of Inspection and Complaints of the Police Presidium which investigates alleged misdemeanours by officers. The Department failed to establish that any police officer was responsible for a misdemeanour in connection with the September demonstrations.
The Inspectorate of the Ministry of the Interior's investigations reportedly confirmed that police in two Prague police stations may have ill-treated detainees. In one case, forensic experts established that a tooth and two of the 10 bloodstains found in the police station belonged to a Polish national. He was one of the very few victims questioned in the course of the investigation. He was able to identify one of the police officers he believed was responsible for ill-treating him. However, the Inspectorate was still unable to establish the identity of any of the perpetrators.
The conduct of the Inspectorate in these investigations was consistent with its persistent failure to promptly and impartially investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment in previous years. The failure to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations contributed to an atmosphere in which police officers felt they could commit abuses with impunity.
In May the UN Committee against Torture recommended that the Czech authorities "ensure the independence and thoroughness of investigations of all allegations of ill-treatment in general, and in connection with the IMF/World Bank meeting in September 2000 in particular, and to provide the Committee in its next periodic report with information on the findings and measures taken, including prosecutions and compensation to victims, as appropriate".
In July, the UN Human Rights Committee, reviewing the Czech Republic's compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, concluded, among other things, that the current system of investigating complaints against the police "lacks objectivity and credibility and would seem to facilitate impunity for police involved in human rights violations",
Roma
There were numerous reports that the police failed to protect Roma from attack or to effectively investigate violent assaults against them. Where prosecutions did take place, the courts tended to convict those responsible for racist attacks of lesser offences. Q In April a group of about 45 skinheads reportedly attacked a group of some 20 Romani men with baseball bats in a bar in Novy Bor in the north of the country. The group of mainly Czech and German youths were celebrating the anniversary of Hitler's birth. Although eight Roma were said to have been injured in the attack, according to reports no one had been charged with any criminal offence by the end of the year. Q Ota Absolon, a 30-year-old man of Romani origin, was stabbed to death in July in Svitavy, East Bohemia. The young man charged with this attack had a long
Amnesty International Report 2002
87
DOM
record of previous convictions for violent crimes. He had, for example, been given a suspended sentence in 1997 for stabbing another Romani man in the stomach. Apparently that offence had not been considered by the court to be a racially motivated attack, v/hich v/outd have carried a stiffer penalty. More recently he had been convicted of another violent crime. The judge allowed him to remain at liberty pending the outcome of his appeal against this most recent conviction, reportedly because he considered that the young man would not commit any further offences.
In May the UN Committee against Torture expressed concern about the "continuing incidents of discrimination against Roma, including by local officials, and particularly about reports of degrading treatment by the police of members of minority groups, continuing reports of violent attacks against Roma and the alleged failure on the part of police and Judicial authorities to provide adequate protection, and to investigate and prosecute such crimes, as well as the lenient treatment of offenders". Similar concern was expressed in July by the Human Rights Committee.
AI country reports/visits Report
• Czech Republic: Arbitrary detention and police ill-treatment following September2000 protests {AI Index: EUR 71/001/2001)
