BULGARIA
REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA
Head of state: PetarStoyanov
Head of government: Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha
{replaced Ivan KostovinJuly)
Capital: Sofia
Population: 7.9 million
Official language: Bulgarian
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2001 treaty signatures/ratifications: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvementof children in armed conflict
Reports of ill-treatment and torture by law enforcement officials were widespread. Very few of the suspected perpetrators were brought to justice. Many of the victims, some of whom were minors, were Roma. Law enforcement officials continued to use firearms in circumstances prohibited by international standards, resulting in deaths and injuries. Conditions in many institutions for adults with mental disabilities amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Restrictions on the right to freedom of expression continued to be imposed. An organization of ethnic Macedonians was prevented from holding a peaceful assembly.
Torture and ill-treatment by police
Numerous incidents of police ill-treatment and torture were reported. At least one person died in suspicious circumstances following an incident in which he was beaten by police officers.
Q In January, police officers in Sofia searching for a murder suspect apprehended Mehmed Mumun (also known as Milotin Mironov), who reportedly tried to evade a police check. Police reportedly kicked him all over his body after he had been immobilized on the ground, Mehmed Mumun lost consciousness and died before he could receive emergency medical treatment. A spokesman for the Ministry of the Interior later claimed that Mehmed Mumun had resisted arrest and had to be handcuffed. Following an investigation into his death, two officers were charged; their trial was continuing at the end of the year.
The vast majority of those who complained about police torture and ill-treatment alleged that following their arrest they were not allowed to contact their lawyer or inform members of their family of their whereabouts, and that they were denied medical treatment.
Q In July, Veska Voleva, a lawyer, intervened in the eviction of a family from an apartment in Sofia. Two police officers handcuffed her, dragged her down the stairs and took her to the 9th Regional Police Department. In a barred holding cell she was reportedly slapped and kicked all over the body for about 15 minutes by five officers, and then handcuffed to an iron bar for between two and three hours. She was
58
Amnesty International Report 2002
BUL
held for 24 hours in a bare cell where she slept on the cement floor. Her requests to contact her family and to be medically examined were denied.
Only a few of the reported perpetrators were brought to justice. Even then, the investigations appeared to be unnecessarily prolonged and hampered by the suspected perpetrators who, it was reported, frequently harassed witnesses. O In January, two former police officers from Nikopol were sentenced to five and six years' imprisonment respectively for the beating of a detainee who died in November 1994 from injuries suffered as a result of ill-treatment. The incident had been observed by a witness who kept silent about it for a year because he was threatened by the police officers. Roma
There were reports of police torture and ill-treatment of members of the Romani community throughout the year, t^any of the victims were minors. The Human Rights Project, a local non-governmental organization, investigated over 90 complaints of serious human rights violations suffered by Romani victims. In the majority of reported cases complaints were filed with the military prosecutors. However, investigations frequently appeared not to be conducted in a thorough and impartial manner.
Q In May, a 16-year-old youth was apprehended in Stara Zagora by a man, who introduced himself as a police officer, in front of the house where the youth had picked some plums from a tree. He was handcuffed and taken into the officer's house where he was reportedly punched, kicked and beaten with a truncheon all over his body. The officer then reportedly pointed a gun at the boy's head and asked his wife: "What shall 1 do with his body after 1 have killed him?" Shortly afterwards the youth's parents arrived and the youth was released. That evening he was treated for contusions to the chest, head and face.
Q In February, Nikolay Nikolovov was reportedly beaten with a truncheon by a police officer in Pavlikeni Regional Police Department who questioned him about the theft of a hi-fi system. On the same day he was examined by a forensic medical expert who noted weals 12 to 15 centimetres long on his arms, back and right thigh. In June the Military Prosecutor ofTarnovo decided not to initiate a criminal investigation against the officer because his conduct was considered to be of a "clearly insignificant degree of social danger".
Use of firearms by police
There were numerous reports of police shootings which breached internationally recognized standards. The authorities failed to address adequately this pernicious human rights problem. At least three people were killed in such incidents. In February, Emanuil Yordanov, then Minister of the Interior, reportedly stated that he would re-examine all provisions concerning the use of firearms by both police officers and civilians, but it was only for the latter that proposals were formulated. He also ordered that all police officers undergo psychological examinations within a three-month period and that there should be stricter internal
inspections within the Ministry of the Interior. However, it appeared that these measures had little effect.
Conditions in homes for adults with mental disabilities
People with mental disabilities placed in state institutions for permanent care were subjected to conditions which amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Social homes, the official title for such institutions, were typically located in remote areas. Residents were housed in unsuitable, dilapidated quarters with extremely poor standards of hygiene and with no signs that residents were permitted any personal belongings. They were sometimes subjected to cruel forms of restraint and seclusion. These institutions were often inadequately staffed by untrained personnel. The medical care available was usually inadequate and resources for rehabilitation non-existent. In some homes the lack of adequate medical care, heating and food appeared to contribute to deaths. Autopsies were seldom carried out to establish the cause of death and no criminal investigations appear to have been initiated to establish the responsibility for grossly negligent care of people with a mental disability. O In the Sanadinovo home for mentally disabled women, those who "misbehaved" were held in a cage made of two brick walls with iron bars and wire on the remaining two sides. In October, an Al delegate witnessed six women being held in this 3m x 1.5m space. They looked withdrawn and vacant and appeared non-aggressive. The cage was full of urine and faeces and the women were covered in filth. One woman was naked from the waist down and many sores were visible on her skin. It was not possible to establish how long anyone would be subjected to this form of seclusion as no records of this appeared to be maintained.
Freedom of expression
Several people peacefully exercising their right to freedom of expression were detained on charges of "hooliganism",
Q In January, four men and a minor were detained in Sofia after they had held a banner at a public ceremony with the slogan "Out NATO supporters!" on which the NATO emblem had been altered to resemble a swastika. After the ceremony President Petar Stoyanov reportedly stated: "This is blasphemy! it is high time that we took decisive measures against such ruffians..." The protesters were taken to a police station where they were held until the following day. An investigation was opened on the orders of the Prosecutor before the Supreme Court of Cassation who considered that the protesters had committed an offence of "hooliganism". However, the charge was dismissed by the Sofia County Court in April.
Q In September, the Pleven County Court quashed on appeal the conviction of Aleksandar Kandjov. He had been sentenced to four months' imprisonment, suspended for three years, for aggravated hooliganism
59	Amnesty International Report 2002

BUR
because he had organized the signing of a petition in which the Minister of Justice was described as "top idiot of the judiciary". Aleksandar Kandjov had been held in custody for four days following his arrest in July 2000.
OMO'llinden'
In March, the Blagoevgrad Public Prosecutor initiated a criminal investigation for incitement to racial or national hatred in connection with leaflets distributed by the United Macedonian Organization "llinden" (OMO "llinden"), calling on the residents of the region to declare themselves in the census as Macedonians. However, no one had been charged by the end of the year.
In July, police prevented OMO "llinden" activists from holding a peaceful assembly to commemorate a national anniversary. Three activists filming the police action were detained for three hours before being released without charge. In October the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the authorities had violated the right to freedom of assembly and association when they prohibited OMO "llinden" activists from holding similar commemorative meetings in the period between 1994 and 1997.
Al country reports/visits Report
• Bulgaria: Disabled women condemned to "slow death" (Al Index: EUR 15/002/01)
