PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY
President: Yasser 'Arafat Official language: Arabic Death penalty: retentionist
Hundreds ofpeople, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested for political reasons during 2001. Those arrested included people suspected of "collaborating" with the Israeli authorities and suspected members of armed opposition groups. Reports of torture and ill-treatment were widespread. Three people died in custody. Twelve people were sentenced to death and two people were executed.
Background
The al-Aqsa intifada (uprising), which started on 29 September 2000, continued throughout 2001. More than 460 Palestinians were killed by the Israeli security forces, the vast majority of them unlawfully, when no lives were in danger. A total of 187 Israelis, including 154 civilians, were killed by Palestinian armed groups and individuals. Thousands of other people were wounded; many were maimed for life. (See also Israel and the Occupied Territories entry.)
Palestinian members of armed groups attacked Israeli military personnel and civilians, including children. Armed groups and individuals arbitrarily killed 65 Israeli civilians in the Occupied Territories and 89 Israeli civilians within Israel. The main armed groups involved in attacks on Israelis were Fatah, Hamas and Islamic Jihad.The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) also carried out attacks on civilians. Other civilians were killed by new groups whose political organization remained vague or by individual Palestinians unconnected with armed groups. It is unclear how much control the Palestinian Authority (PA) has over any of these groups. Arbitrary arrest and detention Hundreds of suspected "collaborators" with Israel were arrested. Most were held in prolonged incommunicado detention and reportedly tortured. Scores of alleged members oi Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Fatahwere arrested. After the assassination of Israeli Tourism Minister Rehavam Ze'evi by members of the PFLP on 17 October, more than 60 suspected members ofthe PFLP were arrested. Some of those arrested may have been prisoners of conscience.
Q Attorney Yunis al-Jarru, former deputy head of the Palestinian Bar Association in Gaza, and Dr Rabah Muhanna, the Gaza Director of the Union of Health Work Committees, were arrested on 18 October, Both were members of PFLP. On 27 October the Palestinian
190
Amnesty International Report 2002
PAL
High Court of Justice ordered the prosecutor to explain the reasons for their arrest. On 4 November the Palestinian Attorney General stated that they were detained under the jurisdiction of the State Security Court, charged with "damaging the interests of the state". On 7 November, the Palestinian High Court of Justice rejected this argument and ordered their immediate release. They were eventually released on 15 November.
Q Yusra Fayek, aged 29 and the mother of six children, was arrested on i June 2001 by the mukhabarat{Genera\ Intelligence) in Khan Younis. She was two months pregnant when arrested, and had reportedly told the interrogator that this was the case. She was beaten, lost consciousness, woke up in hospital and realized that she had miscarried. Reportedly, the mukhabarat wanted her to be awitness in a case against two alleged "collaborators" who were also in detention, Yusra Fayek remained in detention at the end of 2001.
Q Jawid al-Ghussein, a yo-year-old businessman, was forcibly taken in April from the United Arab Emirates to Gaza, where he was held incommunicado in a presidential guesthouse for several weeks. He was ostensibly being pursued for US$6.5 million dollars, which he was said to have borrowed or taken to invest in 1991. However, he was never charged or brought to trial and Al believes that he may have been detained on account of past criticisms of leading members of the PA. In October his health deteriorated and he was placed under house arrest with his family in Gaza. In November he was transferred to hospital in Cairo where he remained at the end of the year, apparently under armed Palestinian guard, unable to travel as his passport was held by the PA.
Torture and ill-treatment
Reports of torture and ill-treatment by various Palestinian security forces remained widespread. Methods used included beatings, suspension from a height and burning with cigarettes. Many of the reports of torture concerned those detained on suspicion of "collaboration" with the Israeli authorities. Q Mohammed Lahloh, aged 25. was arrested on 3 September in Jenin and held in solitary confinement until around 20 October. He stated that he was tortured throughout his detention. He was reportedly beaten and burned with cigarettes and had nails driven into his knees. He had some access to his family, but was not examined by a doctor and was denied access to his lawyer until 20 October. He was eventually released without charge on 7 November. Deaths in custody
Three men died in custody in circumstances which suggested that torture or ill-treatment may have caused or contributed to their deaths. One Palestinian sentenced to death was killed, allegedly while trying to escape.
Q Sulayman 'Awad Muhammad Abu "Amra, aged 38, from Deir al-Balah, the father of eight children, was arrested on 8 August in Gaza by the istikhbaratiMWixaTy Intelligence). He was held incommunicado in the
istikhbaratdetention centre. His family was informed on 15 August that he had died the previous day. An autopsy was performed and revealed that death resulted from "several injuries in the body and sensitive parts, such as the abdomen and scrotum, caused by repeated blows by solid objects. All the wounds were recent and took place one week prior to death." President 'Arafat ordered an official inquiry into the death of Sulayman Abu 'Amra. The results of this inquiry had not been made public by the end of the year and no one was known to have been arrested in connection with his death.
Unlawful killings
Three demonstrators, including a 14-year-old boy, were killed in Gaza on 8 October by Palestinian police when hundreds of unarmed demonstrators took to the streets to protest against the bombing in Afghanistan by the USA and its allies.
Extrajudicial executions
More than 20 Palestinians suspected of "collaboration" with the Israeli authorities were killed or found dead in circumstances which suggested that they had been extrajudicially executed. Some extrajudicial executions were said to have been carried out by members of Palestinian security services, others by members of armed groups or individuals. The PA consistently failed to investigate these killings. Even when eyewitnesses said that they had seen the alleged killer, no investigations were believed to have been carried out and no one was brought to justice.
Q On 27 January, Samir al-Bakri, a 46-year-old shop owner, was shot nine times by unidentified persons who knocked on the door of his home in Nablus at 5am. He died before reaching the hospital. He was said to have been suspected of "collaborating" with Israel in the past. No investigation is known to have been initiated into his death.
Death penalty
Twelve people were sentenced to death after unfair and summary trials in Higher State Security Courts or Military Courts. Most of those sentenced to death were accused of treason and "collaboration" with the Israeli authorities. Two Palestinians were executed in January; one was executed by firing squad the day after his trial. Those sentenced to death by the State Security Court were not entitled to appeal against their sentence. Their sentences had not been ratified by President 'Arafat by the end of the year. Q 'Alan Bani 'Odeh was executed by firing squad in Nablus on 13 January, He had been sentenced to death by the Higher State Security Court in December 2000 after an unfair trial which lasted less than three hours. He was convicted of "collaborating" with the Israeli security services in the killing of his cousin, Ibrahim Bani 'Odeh, who was killed by a car bomb on 23 November 2000, 'Alan Bani 'Odeh was not given the opportunity to appeal to a higher court against his conviction and death sentence.
191	Amnesty International Report 2002

PAP
Al country reports/visits
Report
• Israel/Occupied Territories: Broken Lives-ayearof
intifada{MDi 15/083/2001) Visits
Al delegates visited areas under the jurisdiction ofthe Palestinian Authority in January, March, July and September and met President'Arafat and other officials.
