GUYANA
REPUBLICOF GUYANA
Head of state: BharratJagdeo Head of government: Samuel Hinds Capital: Georgetown Population: 0.7 million Official language: English Death penalty: retentionist
There were frequent reports of killings in circumstances suggesting that they were extrajudicial executions. Torture and deaths In custody'were also reported. Prison conditions were poor, with allegations of ill-treatment and overcrowding. President BharratJagdeo announced that the recommendations of a review of the police force, prisons and the justice system would be considered by the government. Death sentences continued to be imposed. No executions were carried out. Approximately 23 people, including two women, remained on death row at the end of the year.
Background
Following general elections in March, the People's Progressive Party/Civic was returned to office for a third consecutive term. The elections were followed by political violence in some areas, including Georgetown and East Coast Demerara. In April President Jagdeo and the leader of the opposition People's National Congress/Reform (PNC/R) committed themselves to working to reduce ethnic tension and unrest.
Institutional reforms
Legislation to establish a parliamentary commission on human rights was presented to the National Assembly. Proposals included the monitoring of Guyana's compliance with international human rights treaties, and initiatives for human rights education.
Police shootings
Frequent reports were received of killings by police in circumstances suggesting that they were extrajudicial executions. In June, members of the PNC/R submitted a parliamentary motion calling on the President to establish an inquiry into the police force. Q Shazad Bacchus, aged 15, Azad Bacchus and Faddil Ally, aged 18, were beaten and shot by members of the Berbice Anti-Smuggling Squad (BASS) in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial execution. According to relatives, Shazad Bacchus was arrested and beaten by BASS officials at his uncle's home before being taken to hospital with injuries to his face and body. BASS officials are alleged to have opened fire on a minibus the three were travelling in as they left the hospital. Witnesses alleged that the three were subsequently dragged from the bus and killed. The Minister for Home Affairs stated that an investigation into the killings would be forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions. The findings had not been released by the end of the year.
In August Saif Ghani and Steven Angel were shot dead and four others were injured after police opened fire on an estimated 400 people who were protesting against the killings at the BASS headquarters.
Torture and deaths in custody
Reports continued of torture and ill-treatment by the police.
Q In May Anthony Brumesh died in Aurora police lock-up in disputed circumstances. Witnesses alleged that he had been beaten and slammed against the wall by a police officer and had been denied medical attention. An autopsy was said to have revealed the cause of death as a fractured skull and haemorraging. No response to AI's request for information on investigations had been received by the end of the year.
Investigation and prosecution of police abuses
Q On 27 November, the High Court quashed a verdict given earlier in the month by a coroner's inquest that the police should be held criminally responsible for the death of Mohammed Shafeek, who died in Brickdam police lock-up in September 2000. Two police officers had allegedly held Mohammed Shafeek by his hands and feet, thrown him against a concrete wall and refused him medical attention. One witness was allegedly intimidated by being arrested, held in incommunicado detention, beaten around the head and tortured, including by mock executions. Q In September the Chief Justice ordered the Commissioner of Police and Chief Magistrate to ensure that an inquest be held by 2 October into the fatal shootings in July of Antoine Houston, Steve Grant and John Bruce by members of the police Special Target
Amnesty International Report 2002
117
HAI
Squad, in circumstances suggesting that they were extrajudicial executions. The inquest had not started by the end of the year. An autopsy report on Antoine Houston revealed that he had been shot seven times, including once in the back of the head at close range.
Prisons
Conditions and overcrowding in prisons remained severe, amounting in some cases to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
In July, prisoners at Camp Street prison staged a protest, alleging that they had been beaten by members of the police specifically brought in for this purpose. In a further protest in August, 22 inmates complained about the inadequate provision of food and hygiene facilities, lack of medical treatment and ill-treatment.
Internattonal organizations
In October, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that a petition in connection with the alleged "disappearance" of Franz Britton in January 1999 was admissible.
