GHANA
REPUBLIC OF GHANA
Head of state and government: John Kufuor Capital: Accra Population: 19.7 million Official language: English Death penalty: retentionist
Five political prisoners held since 1994 were released. Legislative provisions on criminal libel and sedition were repealed. Proposals for a Reconciliation Commission were debated. There were prosecutions in continuing cases of female genital mutilation.
Background
In January John Kufuor, leader of the New Patriotic Party (NPP), took office as President, ending the 19-year rule of jerry John Rawlings, initially at the head of a military government and from 1993 a civilian one.
Treason trials
In March court proceedings were discontinued in the case of four men sentenced to death for treason in 1999. Sylvester Addai-Dwomoh, Kwame Alexander Ofei, Kwame Ofori-Appiah and John Kwadwo Owusu-Boakye, imprisoned since September 1994, had been convicted of plotting to overthrow the government. They were reported to have suffered ill-treatment in custody following their arrest.
Karim Salifu Adam, an NPP member and former army officer imprisoned since May 1994 and awaiting retrial on treason charges, was released in July after the government filed to discontinue the prosecution at the High Court in Accra. Following his arrest, he had reportedly been tortured after he refused to implicate leading opposition politicians in an alleged coup plot.
Criminal libel and sedition laws
In July, Pariiament repealed the laws of criminal libel and sedition. The widely acclaimed decision removed a legacy of colonial rule used particularly in the last decade to arrest, try and imprison journalists and other members of civil society for alleged defamation of members of the government, officials and their associates.
Reconciliation Commission
Soon after the change of government, public and parliamentary debate started about the terms of reference, powers and composition of a Reconciliation Commission. Although its composition and powers had not been finalized by the end of 2001, there was broad agreement with the government proposal, in a bill introduced in Parliament in July, that the Commission should receive complaints and make recommendations about human rights violations committed between independence from British colonial rule in 1957 and the end of military rule in 1993.
Women's rights
Although female genital mutilation has been a criminal offence in Ghana since 1994, it is still practised on girls and young women in some parts of the country. There were prosecutions in a few cases. Q In November a 70-year-old woman from western Ghana was charged with carrying out female genital mutilation on four girls, aged between 14 and 16 years, who had reportedly sought protection in a local church. Other elders in the community were briefly detained on suspicion of abetting the offence. No trial had taken place by the end of the year.
A proposal for a bill on domestic violence was publicly discussed but not put before Pariiament.
Amnesty International Report 2002
109
