HAIT
REPUBLIC OF HAITI
Head of state: Jean-Bertrand Aristide
Head of government: Yvon Neptune (replaced Jean
Marie Chérestal in January)
Death penalty: abolitionist forali crimes
International Criminal Court: signed
Armed supportersofthe ruling FanmiLavalas{fl) party were accused of numerous human rights abuses. With the forcible release in August of popular activist Am iot "Cubain" Métayer from prison by a group of his supporters, the police force and judiciary appeared to give up serious attempts to confront FL supporters accused of abuses. There were some accounts of violence by individuals linked to opposition parties against pro-government activists. On 25 Decemberunidentified armed men attacked Michèle Montas, the widow of prominent radio journalistJean Dominique, and killed her bodyguard, in an apparent attemptto dissuade the judge investigating Jean Dominique's death from issuing a full and thorough report of his findings. This, combined with numerous other threats and violence against journalists, highlighted ongoing impunity and attacks on free speech. In another worrying development, a number of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions were reported in 2002.
Relations with the international community
After two years of trying to brother negotiations between the Haitian government and opposition, in early September the General Assembly of the Organization of American States (OAS) passed Resolution 822. This laid the groundwork for elections in 2003. However, the initial deadline for setting up a new provisional electoral council by November was missed, sparking widespread violence between supporters of different parties. The resolution also called for normalization of relations between Haiti and international donors, who had blocked aid following disputed elections in 2000. Nonetheless, aid remained frozen.
Resolution 822 also urged Haiti to implement a disarmament program as well as the recommendations made by the OAS-sponsored commission of inquiry into the events around the 17 December 2001 attack on the
National Palace, The inquiry had concluded that 17 December 2001 was not a coup attempt but that some law enforcement officers had been complicit in the attack and the subsequent, apparently premeditated, reprisal attacks by government supporters. The government published the first part of its own report in September and announced that it had begun making reparation payments to some of those affected.
In April the OAS fielded a Special Mission to Strengthen Democracy in Haiti. In addition, a delegation from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, including the Commission's Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression, visited Haiti in August in response to an invitation from the government- In September, the new UN Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in Haiti visited the country.
Political violence
An unprecedented wave of violent clashes in November and December, involving supporters of opposing parties and at times the police, was sparked by the failure of political leaders to move towards long-demanded elections. At least five people were reportedly killed and many more wounded in the confrontations. On 17 November in Cap Haïtien, the largest ever march in protest against the government of Jean-Bertrand Aristide was held. It was peaceful. However, subsequent demonstrations in other parts of the country were marred by violence by supporters and, at times, opponents of the government. The Haitian National Police (HNP) were accused of repressing anti-government protests while failing to intervene to control violent pro-government crowds. Tensions were exacerbated by the emergence onto the political scene of military and paramilitary leaders from Haiti's repressive past. In addition, authorities denounced what they claimed were armed attacks by former soldiers near the border with the Dominican Republic.
Q Christophe Lozama, a justice of the peace who supported the FL, was shot and killed during a clash between pro- and anti-government demonstrators in the Quimpe 8 area of Lascahobas, Central Plateau, on 28 November. A wave of searches and arrests, mainly of opposition supporters, followed. Two people were arrested but were reportedly freed by armed men who attacked the Lascahobas police station on 10 December, A passer-by was killed outside the police station during the attack, and three other people were killed by gunfire in the area that night, Q Numerous people were reportedly injured when government supporters wielding whips and throwing rocks violently broke up an opposition march in Port-au-Prince on 3 December, Police were reportedly present but did not intervene.
On 20 December the authorities announced that political demonstrations were banned until 8 January 2003.
Jailbreak of Amiot Métayer and its aftermath
Amiot "Cubain" Métayer, a former activist whose attempted arrest was believed to have sparked the 1994
120
Amnesty International Report 2003
HAI
Raboteau massacre (see Amnesty international Report 1995), was arrested in Gonaives, department of the Artibonite on 3 July, reportedly in connection with the killing of the guard of an opposition party headquarters in the aftermath of the 17 December 2001 National Palace attack. He was transferred to Port-au-Prince, but after days of rioting by his supporters, he was returned to Gonaives prison on 10 July.
On 2 August his supporters broke him out of Gonaives prison. Over 150 prisoners were believed to have escaped, including the notorious jean Pierre Baptiste, alias "Jean Tatoune", a former paramilitary leader sentenced to forced labour for life for participation in the 1994 Raboteau massacre. During the clashes between pro- and anti-government supporters at the end of the year, Amiot Métayer and Jean Tatoune led opposing armed gangs, both of which were accused of human rights abuses.
Crave violations by the police
In a worrying development, several "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions by police were reported. In addition, there were numerous complaints of police brutality.
'Disappearances' and extrajudicial executions
Q On 17 September, FL activist Félix Bien-Aimé, from the Martissant zone of Port-au-Prince, was reportedly arrested by the police along with two colleagues, Paul Muzac Jean and Djal Normil. His supporters claimed that no one had seen the men since, although Félix Bien-Aimé's burned-out car was said to have been found near Titanyen, a notorious dumping ground for the bodies of "disappeared" people during the military dictatorship. Large demonstrations were held to demand news of his whereabouts, but the HNP denied that he had been taken into custody. Q Jean Lewis Bourgouin, a former police commissioner, was reportedly taken into custody by men in black police uniforms on a street in Pétionville, near Port-au-Prince, on the night of 13 November. The men were said to have forced him into a vehicle with official police licence tags. Despite numerous inquiries by family members, there was no further news of him.
Q On the night of 7 December, three brothers - Andy Philippe, Angélo Philippe and Vladimir Sanon - were reportedly taken from their home in the Waney 89 area of the Carrefour neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince by area police officers. Their bodies were found in the morgue the next day with bullet wounds in the head. Their parents filed a formal complaint with the public prosecutor. Following an internal investigation, the municipal police commissioner was sacked and three police officers and several others were reportedly taken into custody; another officer implicated in the incident reportedly went into hiding to avoid arrest. Some reports indicated that a potential witness was killed by hooded men on 17 December in Carrefour. Police brutality
Q In February a policeman who was reportedly chasing a thief through a crowded market in Port-au-Prince, fired indiscriminately and killed a 21-year-old
woman, Sherline Coriolan. A pregnant woman and a child were said to have been wounded. Q Fleury Lysias, a member of the national Justice and Peace Commission, was reportedly tortured by police officers following his arrest in Bon Repos on 24 June (see below).
Q In Petit Goâve on 20 November, at least seven demonstrators were reportedly wounded when the HNP fired at students protesting against a rumoured increase in exam fees.
Jean Dominique investigation
The investigation into the killing of jean Dominique and Radio Haïti Inter station guard Jean Claude Louissaint continued to be a key test for the rule of law in Haiti. Investigating judge Claudy Gassant, widely praised for his tenacious work on the case despite threats, fled the country in January after President Aristide did not extend his expired mandate. On the second anniversary of the killings in April, President Aristide announced that the mandate had been renewed; however, the judge maintained that he was not formally notified of this and that the government's failure to do so indicated that he would still face a precarious security situation should he return.
In July responsibility for the case was given to investigating judge Bernard Saint Vil, He interviewed numerous people, including Senator Dany Toussaint who had resisted appearing before the previous judge despite an indictment against him. Several arrest warrants issued in the case remained unenforced, and the issue of Senator Toussaint's parliamentary immunity remained unresolved. Judge Saint Vil's final report, which would serve as the basis for any subsequent prosecution, had not been issued by the end of the year.
On 25 December unidentified gunmen attacked the home of Jean Dominique's widow Michèle Montas, herself a journalist and an outspoken advocate for justice in his case. One of her security guards, Maxime Séide, was shot and killed by the assailants before they ned.
Freedom of speech
Throughout the year the authorities repeatedly stated their general commitment to freedom of speech, but increasingly added conditions that raised doubts about the commitment.
Ongoing threats and attacks against journalists
About a dozen journalists were reported to have fled Haiti following the 17 December 2001 attack on the National Palace and the accompanying violence, during which many reporters were intimidated or threatened. Other journalists continued to be at risk throughout the year.
Q Darwin St. Julien of Haïti Progrès newspaper and Allan Deshommes of Radio Atlantiquev/ere among those arrested following a protest by workers at the Guacimal plantation near St. Raphaël, department of the North, on 27 May. Both were said to have been seriously injured, but were reportedly denied urgently needed medical care after being taken into custody.
121	Amnesty International Report 2003

HAI
They were released on 8 June. At the end of the year both men were still suffering the effects of their injuries.
Q In July Radio Caraïbes investigative reporter Jacky Cantave was kidnapped and beaten by armed men. After he was freed the next day, police questioned his version of events and the authorities alleged he had lied.
Q On 20 August Radio Saca director Joseph Claudy Milord was reportedly struck by the local mayor inside the court building of Grand Goâve, department of the West. Reports indicated that the mayor was angered by the station's reporting of his alleged involvement in land deals. The mayor was subsequently arrested by order of the prosecutor's office, but was freed later the same day.
Brignol LIndor investigation
In September the investigating judge gave his final report to the prosecutor about the December 2001 killing of Radio Echo 2000 news director Brignol Lindor, who was hacked to death in Petit Goâve by a mob that included members of a pro-FL organization, several of whom reportedly admitted their involvement in the killing. Ten men, including members of the pro-FL organization, were indicted and arrest warrants were issued for those not already in custody. However, the man who was mayor of Petit Goâve at the time of the killing was not indicted, although he was interviewed by the judge. In the days before the killing, the former mayor had publicly called for "zero tolerance" of Brignol Lindor on the grounds that he supported an opposition party. The Association of Haitian Journalists filed a complaint about the omission before the Court of Appeal on behalf of the victim's family.
Human rights defenders under attack
Human rights defenders continued to face attacks and threats,
Q In March, Patrick Mérisier, a field monitor for the National Coalition for Haitian Rights, was shot as he waited to be served in a restaurant in Port-au-Prince-He was wounded in the chest and left arm. In January he had reportedly received unsigned leaflets warning that he would be ki I led if he did not stop his human rights monitoring and community radio broadcasts on human rights issues. Another of the organization's field monitors, Berthony Philippe, went into hiding after receiving similar death threats. S Fleury Lysias, a member of the national Justice and Peace Commission, was arrested at his home in Bon Repos on 24 June. The arresting officers, who were accompanied by three armed men in civilian clothes, did not have a warrant for his arrest. They took him to the Bon Repos police station where they reportedly kicked him and beat him severely with clubs, breaking one of his arms. They also struck him repeatedly on the ears, damaging his eardrums. He was reportedly released without charge the next day. Q On 16 July the home of human rights defenders Jean Claude and Sylvie Bajeux of the Ecumenical Centre for Human Rights was attacked by unidentified individuals.
Both are long-term human rights defenders who were victims of repression under previous governments-
Repression of trade union activities
Two elderly trade unionists—Francilien Exilien and Ipharès Guerrier—were killed during disturbances on 27 May between demonstrating workers and supporters of the owners of the Guacimal plantation, among whom were local officials. Eleven people were arrested, including six trade unionists, their three drivers and two journalists. The journalists were released on 8 June (see above), and the drivers and four of the trade unionists were freed later. The two remaining trade unionists - Jérémie Dorvil and Urbain Garçon -remained in custody without charge until their release on 2 December. Trade unions called for an investigation into the deaths of Francilien Exilien and Ipharès Guerrier, but no progress had been reported by the end of the year.
Justice developments
In March, Ronald "Cadav" Camille, linked to popular organizations supportive of the FL, was arrested on charges of killing another FL activist outside the parliament building on 10 September 2001. Ronald Camille's supporters staged violent demonstrations in protest, but the authorities resisted pressure to release him.
The Federal Justice Office in Switzerland rejected a Haitian extradition request dating back to 1986 for . former President Jean-Claude Duvalier. His lawyers had argued that Haiti's justice system could not be guaranteed to respect due process and that the 15 years that had elapsed since the events of which he was accused precluded prosecution under Swiss law. Following political unrest in Haiti, in December Jean-Claude Duvalier announced on US television his intention to return to the country.
In April an appeal court ordered the release of former coup leader General Prosper Avril, detained on charges relating to the alleged 1989 torture of political prisoners. He was freed but Immediately rearrested on charges related to the 1990 Piâtre massacre of peasant farmers.
AI country reports/ visits
Reports
•	Haiti; "1 have no weapon but my journalist's trade' -human rights and the Jean Dominique investigation (AI Index: AMR 36/001/2002)
•	Haiti: Update of the Jean Dominique investigation and the situation of journalists (AI Index: AMR 36/013/2002)
122
Amnesty International Report 2003
