ERU
REPUBLICOF PERU
Head of state and government: Alejandro Toledo Death penalty: abolitionistforordinarycrimes International Criminal Court: ratified
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment. Those responsible were not brought to justice. Detainees falsely charged with "terrorism-related" offences in previous years remained held. "Anti-terrorism" legislation which had resulted in unfair trials since its introduction in 1992 remained in force. Members of the security forces accused of human rights violations continued to have their cases transferred to military courts.
Background
Opinion polls throughout the year revealed widespread public discontent with government economic policies. The government's privatization plans encountered strong opposition. In April the government had to halt plans to privatize part of their electrical plants in the town of Arequipa following mass demonstrations. Two demonstrators died in circumstances suggesting that the security forces used excessive force to disperse protesters.
Amnesty international Report 2003
197
PER
In the November local elections for municipal and regional officials President Alejandro Toledo's party suffered electoral defeat in all but one of the regions. Ihe Alianza Popular Revolucionaría Americana, American Revolutionary Popular Alliance, led by former president Alan Garcia, won an overall majority in regional governments in ii of the 25 regions contested.
There were signs of improvement in the human rights situation during President Alejandro Toledo's first year in office. The government earmarked US$15 million to improve the infrastructure of all police stations in line with the recommendations of a Special Commission for the Restructuring of the National Police. The Commission also recommended a complete reform of recruitment, training, refresher training and professionalization of police officers.
Concerns were expressed that the post of Ombudsman had not been permanently filled by the end of the year. An interim Ombudsman has been in place since February 2001. Critics expressed concern at the apparent lack of political will to establish a strong Office of the Ombudsman.
At the end of the year the debate in Congress on the text of a new Constitution to replace the 1993 Constitution was continuing.
Small groups of the armed opposition group Shining Path allegedly continued to operate in isolated river valleys in the Amazon jungle region. Alleged members of this armed group were charged with the killing of nine people near the US embassy in Lima a few days before US President George Bush visited the country in April.
Tambogrande
In June a neighbourhood poll organized by the municipality and the population of the district of Tambogrande, in the northern department of Piura, resulted in an overwhelming rejection of the extraction of minerals in the area by a Canadian mining company. The authorities had given approval for private investment in mining activities in the region in 1999.
The local population expressed fears that the mining activities would result in contamination of the water and soil and so endanger their crops; the area produces over 40 per cent of Peru's mango and citrus crops. The authorities and the company stated that the dispute would be resolved once an environmental impact study had been carried out. However, the local population were concerned that the study was financed by the mining company and that they had no role in the setting up or approval of the study. No decision on whether to allow the company to pursue its plans had been made by the authorities by the end of the year.
Local leaders who have opposed the mining plans have received death threats. In May, an anonymous caller threatened to kidnap the 18-year-old daughter of one of the local leaders. In March 2001 Godofredo Garcia Baca had been killed by an attacker reportedly demanding money, suggesting an immediate criminal motive for the killing. Godofredo Garcia Baca's family and fellow activists believe that his killing may have been linked to his campaigning activities.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission, set up in 2001 to establish the circumstances surrounding human rights violations committed by the state and abuses committed by armed opposition groups between May 1980 and November 2000, held seven public hearings. Three of these hearings were focused on "antiterrorism" legislation and due process, violence against women, and violence within the universities. According to the President of the Commission, the purpose of these hearings was to give a voice to those whose suffering during the 1980s and 1990s had been shrouded in silence.
In November the Commission published a preliminary list of 7,000 cases of forced disappearance. The list launched the campaign, "So that you will not forget", organized by the Commission in conjunction with human rights organizations. The campaign aims to verify the information so far collected in order to propose redress for the relatives of the victims of forced disappearance.
The Commission was scheduled to publish its final report in 2003 and asked the government to establish a special Commission to monitor the implementation of its recommendations after the expiry of the current Commission's mandate.
Mass graves
Throughout the year investigations continued into mass graves discovered since 2000 in several provinces. The graves were believed to date from 1980 to the mid-1990s. The investigations were carried out by national and international forensic anthropologists under the auspices of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the Public Ministry and the Office ofthe Ombudsman to ensure that the investigations were carried out effectively and that crucial evidence was not destroyed. Since 2000, four mass graves have been investigated and 73 bodies have been identified. Human rights organizations called on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to ensure that at the end of its mandate all the evidence gathered in these investigations was passed to the judicial authorities so that those responsible for these crimes could be brought to justice.
Torture and ill-treatment
Torture and ill-treatment remained a concern. There were continuing reports of abuses against young military personnel in military barracks. In addition, there continued to be serious concern that victims, their relatives and witnesses were intimidated and harassed and that some complaints of torture or ill-treatment were dropped as a result. There have been only three cases in which members of the security forces have been tried under 1998 legislation criminalizing torture.
Prison conditions
Challapalca prison remained operational despite repeated calls for it to be closed. Since 1997 the human rights community, including the Inter-American
198
Amnesty International Report 2003
PER
Commission on Human Rights, have called for the closure of the prison on the grounds that conditions are so harsh that they amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The prison, in Puno department, is located more than 4.600m above sea level. The inaccessibility of the prison seriously limits prisoners' right to maintain contact with the outside world, including relatives, lawyers and doctors. Prisoners convicted of political and criminal offences are held in the prison.
Political prisoners in several high-security prisons throughout the country staged several protests, including hunger strikes, during the year for an improvement in prison conditions. The protests also called for political prisoners not to be transferred to Challapalca prison. More than 60 political prisoners were transferred to Challapalca prison in March. Since President Alejandro Toledo took office in July 2001, at least 90 political prisoners have been transferred to this prison. The authorities have said that this is a temporary measure. However, they had not been transferred by the end of the year.
Prisoners of conscience
Scores of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience falsely charged with "terrorism-related" offences remained incarcerated. A special commission within the Ministry of Justice which reviews these cases continued to make very slow progress and there were concerns that there was no political will to speed up the process and release all those women and men who have spent more than five years in prison on false charges of "terrorism".
Political prisoners and the 'anti-terrorism' legislation
The "ami-terrorism" legislation, which has resulted in thousands of unfair trials since its introduction in 1992, remained in force, despite repeated appeals by the human rights community, including the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, for the legislation to be reviewed. The legislation provides for those charged with treason to be tried before military courts which are neither independent nor impartial. Iri a handful of cases those tried by military courts have had their sentences annulled and their cases transferred to the civilian courts.
Q Lori Berenson, a US citizen, had been sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 2001 by a civilian court following a second trial under the "anti-terrorism" legislation. However, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in reviewing the case concluded that Lori Berenson's trial in 2001 was unfair, in particular because she was tried under the 1992 "anti-terrorism" legislation and because the evidence used at this trial was the same as that used at her earlier trial in 1996 by a military court; her conviction by that court had been annulled. The case was before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights at the end of the year.
Hundreds of political prisoners who were tried in the 1990s in summary trials by military courts filed writs of habeas corpus in order to have their sentences
annulled and to be given a fair trial. Courts, including the Constitutional Tribunal, ruled in favour of some of these habeas corpus petitions and some political prisoners were being retried in civilian courts at the end of the year.
Impunity
The request prepared by the authorities for the extradition of former President Alberto Fujimori from Japan for trial in Peru on charges of crimes against humanity did not reach the Japanese authorities before the end of the year as a result of delays in translation.
In 2001 the Peruvian Attorney General had formally charged Alberto Fujimori with the murder of 15 people in 1991 at Barrios Altos, Lima, and with the forced disappearance and murder of nine students and a professor at La Cantuta University in Lima in 1992.
Seven members of the Grupo Colina "death squad" attached to Peru's Intelligence Service, and believed to be responsible for these crimes, were detained during the year. In November the leader of Grupo Colina was detained. He had been in hiding since 1995 when he and others were given an amnesty. They had been sentenced in 1994 to 20 years' imprisonment for the "disappearance" of the nine students and the professor at La Cantuta University. At the end of the year members of Grupo Colina were awaiting trial on charges of crimes against humanity committed under Alberto Fujimori's government.
The trial of Vladimiro Montesinos, intelligence adviser to Alberto Fujimori, on charges including human rights violations was continuing at the end of the year.
Update
In August the Supreme Court of Justice ruled that the case of 15 military officers charged with extrajudicially executing members of the Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru (HKTA), an armed opposition group, should be heard by the military justice system. The MRTA members had broken into the residence of the Japanese Ambassador in December 1996 and taken a number of people hostage. The hostage crisis ended in April 1997 when the then President, Alberto Fujimori, ordered a military assault. All 14 MRTA hostage-takers were killed, leading to allegations that some may have been extrajudicially executed.
Al country reports/visits
Report
• Peru: Torture and ill-treatment - time to put words
into practice (Al Index: AMR 46/005/2002) Visit
Amnesty International delegates visited the country in April and May.
Amnesty international Report 2003
199
