GUINEA-BISSAU
REPUBLIC OFCUINEA-BISSAU
Head of state: Kumba lala
Head of government: Mario Pi res (replaced Aiamara
Nhasse in November)
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
International Criminal Court: signed
Politically motivated arrests of human rights activists and others occurred during the year. Soldiers arrested in 2000 and accused of plotting againstthe government were tried and sentenced to varying terms of imprisonment Othersoldiers arrested in 2001 were held incommunicado until their release from prison in June. Political instability continued with frequent changes of government personnel and unsubstantiated allegations of coup attempts. Political interference undermined the judiciary and affected the operation of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). There were restraintson press freedom.
Background
Political tensions remained high. Numerous government changes throughout the year added to the friction between the government, the ruling party and other political forces. The government was accused of corruption and of mismanaging the economy and there were frequent calls for its resignation. In November, President Kumba lala dismissed the National Assembly and the government. A caretaker government was appointed pending elections, which were scheduled for February 2003 and then rescheduled for April 2003.
Political instability was exacerbated by the failure to promulgate the revised Constitution, which had been approved by the National Assembly in 2001. Civil servants who had not been paid for several months, including teachers and national television employees, went on strike on several occasions to demand payment of their salaries.
There were unsubstantiated allegations of coup attempts. In June, President Kumba lala accused the Gambian government of involvement in a plot to overthrow him in May and threatened to invade the Gambia. Several people were reportedly arrested but no details were made public. The Gambian authorities denied the allegations.
Government pledges to promote human rights and the independence of the judiciary did not always materialize. In February a human rights unit was set up within the Ministry of Justice and given the task of reforming the Judicial system. However, interference with the Judiciary continued. For example, in July, President Kumba lala reportedly ordered the arrest and, 24 hours later, the release of former Prime Minister Faustino Fadut Embali whom he accused of embezzlement of funds during his term in office from May to December 2001. In June, President Kumba lala
117	Amnesty International Report 2003

CUI
bypassed parliament and granted an amnesty to soldiers who had allegedly plotted a coup in December 2001.
Participants in seminars organized by the UN Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) In April and May called on the National Assembly to establish a truth and reconciliation commission, and to ensure respect for human rights and the independence of the judiciary. A new Representative of the UN Secretary-General took office in February and in August the mandate of the UNOGBIS was extended until the end of December 2003.
Arrests of human rights activists
The authorities harassed civil society groups and activists. There was government interference In the internal affairs of the Liga Guineense dosDireitos Humanos (ICDH), Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League, leading to the arrest of several of its members and to its temporary closure. An internal dispute arose when a document related to the LGDH finances was leaked to the authorities in January. In March the authorities refused permission for a demonstration called by the LGDH to protest against interference in its Internal affairs and the arrest of its members. The authorities said that they could not guarantee the security of the demonstration. In April, the government also demanded proof from the long-established National Trade Union Confederation that it had been legally constituted.
Q LGDH Vice-President Joao Vaz Mané and Fernando Gomes, a founder and first president of the LGDH, were arrested in late January and early February respectively, after an internal LGDH document was leaked to the government. They were accused of embezzlement of funds donated by a foreign NGO in 1999, although neither the LGDH nor the foreign NGO had lodged a complaint against them. The two were released on bail after several days in detention. They had to report to the Bissau Regional Court weekly and were not allowed to leave the country. Their trials took place between October and December, Although charges were not proved, in December Fernando Gomes was given a two-month prison sentence which was suspended, while Joao Vaz Mané was sentenced to pay a fine of approximately US$240. Appeals by both men against their convictions and sentences were pending at the end of the year. Q Two members of the LGDH, Mário Sá Gomes and Formozinho da Costa, were arrested in March and charged with disobedience, after they changed the locks of the LGDH office following the expulsion of the President and a Vice-President of the organization during an extraordinary meeting. The authorities refused to acknowledge the new LGDH board and temporarily closed its premises, Mário Sá Gomes and Formozinho da Costa were summarily tried a week after their arrest and sentenced to prison terms of two and one and a half years respectively; the sentences were subsequently converted into fines. In October the Court of Appeal overturned the conviction of Mário Sá Gomes but upheld that of Formozinho da Costa.
Attacks on freedom of expression
There were further attempts to stifle the media and restrict freedom of expression. Media workers were harassed and Journalists were briefly detained for criticizing the government. In April the then Procurator General issued an order to all media outlets forbidding them from broadcasting or publishing any information from or about the LGDH.
Q Two independent newspapers which had been closed down in October 2001, Cazeta de Noticias and Diàrio de Bissau, resumed publication in January, the latter under the new name, Correio de Bissau. A weekly radio program on human rights broadcast by the LGDH was suspended in January. Q In February, the private radio station Ràdio Bomboloni and two community radio stations were threatened with closure for allegedly operating without a licence and failing to pay taxes, despite the fact that community radio stations are tax exempt and that Ràdio Bombolom had reportedly already presented all the documentation required for registration. The three stations were able to continue broadcasting throughout the year.
Q Joao de Barros, director and owner of Correio de Bissau, was arrested in June after an interview he gave to Ràdio Bombolom in which he criticized President Kumba lalá for accusing the Gambian government of involvement in an alleged attempted coup and for threatening to invade the Gambia in retaliation. Joao de Barros was held for two days before being released on bail and had to report to the authorities weekly. He had not been charged or tried by the end of the year. O In August, Carlos Vamain, a lawyer and presenter of a weekly current affairs program on a private radio station, was fined the equivalent of US$4,500 for remarks he made in broadcasts which the authorities said endangered national unity and considered defamatory. Apparently, he accused President Kumba lalá of "tribalising" the administration by filling government and senior military posts with members of the Balanta ethnic group. Earlier, he had accused the President of interference in the judiciary by ordering the release of certain detainee's without regard for legal procedures. After he was fined, a warrant for Carlos Vamain's arrest was issued and subsequently rescinded, reportedly following the intervention of the UN Secretary-General's Representative in Bissau-
Updates
Q About eight high-ranking military officers, who had been arrested in November 2000 and released on bail seven months later, were tried in May and July. They were convicted of attempting to overthrow the government and sentenced to prison terms ranging from three to 10 years. The authorities dropped charges against about 100 other military officers suspected of involvement in the same plot. Those convicted included former Chief of Staff of the Navy Commodore Mohamed Laminé Sanhá and General Augusto Sá Gomes, known as "Patchanga". At least four others had their sentences suspended for four years.
118
Amnesty International Report 2003
GUY
Q About 40 soldiers arrested in December 2001 on suspicion of attempting to overthrow the government were held without charge, incommunicado and in harsh conditions until June when they were released on the basis of a presidential pardon. They had not been convicted of any crime.
Q The former president and vice-president of the Supreme Court, respectively Emiliano Nosolini dos Reis and Venancio Martins, were charged with misappropriation of funds; the charges appeared to be politically motivated. They were released on bail in February and were still awaiting trial at the end of the year.
