TAIWAN
Five prisoners of conscience sentenced to prison terms in previous years were held throughout the year but two others were released. Two prisoners of conscience were newly imprisoned in 1989. Four other people, some of them possible prisoners of conscience, were put on trial but their trials had not been completed by the end of the year. Three police officers were prosecuted for torturing a criminal suspect. Sixty-nine people convicted of criminal offences were executed, over three times the number executed in 1988.
The Civic Organizations Law was amended in January, formally lifting a 40-year ban on the formation of political parties. However, the law requires that such parties should not violate the Constitution, or advocate communism or the division of the national territory. Taiwan is officially considered a province of China by the governments of both Taiwan and mainland China. By the end of the year there were some 40 political parties. Other new legislation provided for electoral reforms and for deputies elected on mainland China before 1949 to voluntarily retire.
Five prisoners of conscience continued to serve prison sentences imposed in previous years. Shih Ming-teh was imprisoned in 1980 and Tsai Yu-chuan and Hsu Tsao-teh in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Chuang Kuo-ming and Dr Huang Kuang-hsiung were convicted in 1988 of having joined an organization advocating Taiwanese independence when they were living abroad.
Two prisoners of conscience were released. In April Cheung Ki-lok's 40-month sentence (see Amnesty International Report 1989] was quashed when the High Comt acquitted him of sedition after his case was heard again. In September the Supreme Court ordered a further hearing of his case, but this had not started by the end of the year. Tsai Keh-tang was released in November on expiry of his reduced sentence (see Amnesty International Report 1988].
Chen Nan-jung, publisher and editor-in-chief of the opposition magazine Freedom Era Weekly, committed suicide by setting fire to himself on 7 April as police were forcing entry into his office to arrest him. He was facing charges of sedition for reproducing in his magazine the text of a constitution for an independent Taiwan.
There were several political trials. In June Chen Sheng-nan, a street vendor in Kaohsiung, was sentenced to seven years and two months' imprisonment for sedition. He was alleged to have spread propaganda for the People's Republic of China by showing and selling video films which apparently showed Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping calling for the reunification of Taiwan with mainland China. He was considered a prisoner of conscience.
Other trials involved dissidents who sought to return to Taiwan from abroad although the authorities had banned them
TAIWAN/TANZANIA
from doing so on national security grounds. Some who entered Taiwan undetected were subsequently expelled, but three were tried under the National Security Law for entering the coimtry without permission.
Chen Wan-chen, a joiunalist who retiuned secretly in May after spending 10 years in the United States of America (usa), was sentenced to five months' imprisonment in July. However, she was not imprisoned because the prosecution appealed against the sentence. Luo Yi-shih, the General Secretary of the World Federation of Taiwanese Associations, was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment in December. Normally resident in Canada, he had returned to Taiwan to help the opposition's electoral campaign after previously being deported when he entered Taiwan legally in August. He was considered a prisoner of conscience.
Hsu Hsin-liang, a former commissioner of Taoyuan county, was arrested in September. He had twice previously been prevented from entering Taiwan, although he was wanted by the authorities on sedition charges. At his trial he was accused of planning to overthrow the government in 1979 together with others connected with the opposition Formosa magazine (see Amnesty International Report 1980] and of having made a number of statements opposing the Taiwanese authorities when he was in exile in the usa. He was sentenced in December to 10 years' imprisonment, reduced to six years and eight months imder a 1988 presidential amnesty for offences committed before 1988. His trial was completed in one hearing and his conviction was in part based on confessions made by former Formosa magazine colleagues almost 10 years earlier which, they said, had been extracted under duress.
The trials of Hsieh Chang-ting, an opposition member of Taipei City Council, and Hong Chi-chang, an opposition member of the National Assembly, concluded in June and September respectively. They were both convicted on accoimt of violence by others at a demonstration they had organized in June 1987 to oppose the National Security Law (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Hsieh Chang-ting was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. Hong Chi-chang was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment and then in October to a further 18 months in connection with another protest demonstration in May 1988. Both
men — who were not detained — lodged appeals which had not been concluded by the end of 1989.
In October three police ofiicers fi'om Hoping West Road police station in Taipei were arrested and prosecuted for torturing a criminal suspect. One week earlier they had allegedly hit him on the head with a pistol, beaten him on the soles of his feet, dripped water into his nose and subjected him to other abuses. The result of the prosecution was not known.
According to the authorities. 69 prisoners were executed for crimes that included robbery, rape, murder and kidnapping — more than three times the number known to have been executed in 1988. According to press reports, district courts imposed over 75 death sentences for criminal offences.
Amnesty International continued to call for the release of prisoners of conscience and to investigate the cases of possible prisoners of conscience. Before his suicide. Amnesty International had urged the government not to arrest Chen Nan-jung but to respect his right to freedom of expression.
Amnesty International also expressed concern to the authorities about the rise in executions and called for the death penalty to be abolished. In May the Government Information Office replied that the death penalty was supported by the public and that it was necessary because of an increase in serious crimes.
