IRAQ
Thousands of political prisoners, among them prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without charge or trial or imprisoned after trials which reportedly did not satisfy international fair trial standards. Torture of political prisoners remained widespread. "Disappearances" were reported and the government did not clarify the fate and whereabouts of thousands who "disappeared" in previous years. Many of the "disappeared" were believed to have been killed. Executions
IRAQ/IRELAND (REPUBLIC OF)
were also reported. Some of those executed apparently had sought from the authorities benefits announced under official amnesties. In most cases it was unclear whether they had received any form of trial.
In February the government of President Saddam Hussein announced plans to draft a new constitution and to promulgate laws authorizing new political parties and introducing press freedoms. The government also stated that the possibility of holding Iraq's first presidential elections was under discussion. Elections were held in April for the National Assembly and in September for the Kurdistan Autonomous Region's Legislative Council. By the end of the year the planned political reforms had not been infroduced and reports of widespread abuses continued to be received.
In February a general amnesty was declared for Iraqis abroad accused or convicted of political offences, provided they returned to Iraq between 1 and 30 April. Under the terms of the amnesty, all legal proceedings against them would be dropped. Those considered "agents of the Iranian regime" were excluded from the amnesty. In April the terms of the amnesty were amended, allowing Iraqis to postpone their return if they informed the authorities of their wish to benefit from the amnesty. Some 60 Iraqi Kurds reportedly returned from Turkey in April. They were among tens of thousands of Kurds who fled Iraq following chemical weapon attacks by government forces in the northern Kurdish region in August 1988 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989). Some of the Kurds may have been returned to Iraq involuntarily, according to reports.
A number of people who returned to fraq following amnesty announcements in 1988 were reportedly arrested, tortured or executed in 1988 and early 1989. Some returnees "disappeared". It was not possible to confirm government claims that 92,000 people had returned to Iraq by March as a result of the amnesties.
Thousands of political prisoners, including people who may have been prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without charge or trial, or after summary trials. They included suspected members of prohibited political parties such as the Kurdistan Popular Democratic Party (kpdp), the Kiurdistan Democratic Party (kdp), the Patriotic Union of
Kurdistan (puk); the Kurdistan Socialist Party-Iraq (ksp-i), the fraqi Communist Party (icp) and al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya, Islamic Call. Relatives of such suspects, including children, remained imprisoned while the authorities sought the suspects.
Political detainees held during the year included Mulla Muhammad Dalgayi, the Imam of the town of Qal'a Diza in Sulaimaniya Province. He was arrested in April soon after he and other Kurds met officials to appeal against government plans for forcibly resettling hundreds of thousands of Kurds and destroying Kurdish towns. There was no word of his fate or whereabouts until he was released without charge in August.
In September a British-based Iranian journalist, Farzad Bazoft, and a British nurse, Daphne Parish, were arrested in Baghdad on espionage charges. The arrests took place after Farzad Bazoft began investigating reports that hundreds of people had been killed in August in an explosion at a military plant south of Baghdad. The two detainees ware held incommunicado for over six weeks and denied access to both consular representatives and legal counsel, giving rise to fears that they might be tortured. In October Farzad Bazoft appeared on Iraqi television and "confessed" to being an Israeli spy. Neither he nor Daphne Parish, who was said to be his accomplice, had been formally charged or tried by the end of the year.
Eight suspected members of the icp, most of them engineers or students from Baghdad and Mosul, were reportedly arrested in late 1988 and in January. They included Athir Korkis, a graduate of al-Mustansariyya University, and Kifah Muhammad Kadhim, a social worker. Their fate and whereabouts remained unknown. The fate of some 200 military personnel and Ba'th Party officials arrested in December 1988 also remained unknown. They were arrested in Baghdad and Mosul on suspicion of plotting a coup. According to unconfirmed reports, 18 of them had been executed. There was no news of other former Ba'th Party officials reportedly arrested in the same period in Samarra'. 'Abdallah Sallum al-Samarra'i, a former government minister, was among these detainees.
Routine torture and ill-treatment of prisoners reportedly continued. Information was received during the year about the
IF?AQ
alleged torture of children and others arrested in previous years for political reasons. For example, eight school students aged between 13 and 16 were arrested in Sulaimaniya Province in May 1987 and reportedly tortured. They were detained without charge or trial for over 15 months, most of that time in Sulaimaniya Security Directorate. They allegedly suffered falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet), beatings with metal cables while naked and suspended by the wrists from the ceihng, burnings with cigarettes, extraction of their finger-nails and electric shocks. In August
1988	they were brought before the Revolutionary Court and accused of anti-govemment activities, then released without conviction in September 1988. Unconfirmed reports said that four of them had been rearrested in April.
Among those reportedly tortured in
1989	was a member of the ksp-i's Pesh Merga forces or armed Kurdish units. He was arrested in February after giving himself up to the authorities in order to benefit from the 30 November 1988 amnesty (see Amnesty International Report 1989). He alleged after his release that he was held without charge or trial for 37 days, initially in the Military Intelligence Directorate in Baghdad and then in Prison No. 1 in the al-Harithiyya District of the city. He and 22 others shared a cell in Prison No. 1 measuring 12 metres by 12 metres. They were repeatedly beaten by their guards, who denied one prisoner medical treatment when he suffered a broken wrist from the beatings.
"Disappearances" were reported during the year and thousands of prisoners who "disappeared" in previous years, including 178 members of Shi'a families and some 8.000 Barzani Kurds (see Amnesty International Report 1989), remained unaccounted for. In October Amnesty International received information that 353 Kiuds arrested in August 1988 subsequently "disappeared" in custody. They were arrested in 'Amadiyya, Duhok Province, following chemical weapons attacks in the area by Iraqi government forces. Among them were 33 members of the kdp's Pesh Merga forces. The others were civilians, most of them farmers. They also included 52 children aged 11 to 17. They were initially held at the Qal'a, the "castle", in Duhok and apparently "disappeared" in early September 1988.
Thirty-three Assyrians who returned from Turkey and Iran in late 1988 and early 1989 to benefit from government amnesties also reportedly "disappeared". They included whole families from Duhok Province. A number of Kurds from Bahark resettlement camp outside Arbil city, who had been among some 2,000 Kurds who returned to Iraq from Turkey in 1988 following the 6 September 1988 amnesty, were said to have "disappeared" in custody. They included Arjan Mari Hassan. Mari Mari Hassan and Khalid Khudaida, all alleged kpdp supporters.
Hundreds of people were reportedly executed; in most cases it was difficult to ascertain whether they had received any form of trial. Reports received in March stated that at least 11 army deserters had been executed in the town of al-'Amara in July 1988 and that 83 deserters had been executed in December 1988. In January, 14 army personnel and Ba'th Party officials arrested in December 1988 on suspicion of plotting a coup were reportedly executed. They included two brigadier-generals, 'Ala'uddin Hussain and 'Abd al-Ghani Shahin, and one general, Taleb 'Ali al-Sa'dun. Four others from this group were reportedly executed in July in Baghdad, among them Brigadier-General 'Abd al-Qader al-Shalawi and Lieutenant-Colonel Samir Sa'dallah.
Information received in February indicated that four members of an Assyrian family from 'Ain Kawa village in Arbil province had been killed between early September and mid-October 1988. The victims were Polous 'Aziz Sheba and Meska Wardina, husband and wife, and their two daughters, Hamama and Sabiha. They had lived in hiding after the execution of another member of their family, according to reports, but surrendered to the authorities shortly after the 6 September 1988 amnesty was announced. They were allegedly beheaded and their bodies, bearing marks of torture, were found in October 1988 on the Arbil-Mosul road.
Seven Kurds who sought to benefit fi?om government amnesties were also executed in April in Dibs garrison near Kirkuk, apparently because of their past links with the Pesh Merga forces. They included Saber and Qader Sa'di. two brothers from the Qaradagh region in Sulaimaniya Province. Four other suspected Kurdish opponents of the government arrested in
IRAQ/IRELAND (REPUBLIC OF)
1988 were executed in either March or April, three of them in Abu Ghraib Prison near Baghdad and one in Kirkuk following his trial by a military court. In January the government confirmed the execution in 1988 of two doctors. Isma'il Hassan al-Tatar and Hisham Maher al-Salman. It said they had been sentenced to death under Article 393/2/d of the Penal Code for "the crime of raping patients inside their clinics while practising their medical profession". They were allegedly arrested after they made remarks regarding President Hussain at a private gathering in Baghdad. Their comments apparently had been tape recorded.
Amnesty International continued to express its concern throughout the year about use of the death penalty and about allegations that some of those executed had been tortured.
Amnesty International also expressed its concern about mass political killing in previous years, including the killing of minors. In February it appealed to the government to halt the politically motivated brutal treatment of children and young people. The organization published in February the names of 396 minors, both Arabs and Kurds, who had been detained without trial, imprisoned following summary trials, tortured, executed or had been the victims of extrajudicial executions since 1980. Among those cited in the publication, Children: Innocent Victims of Political Repression, were the cases of 21 youths who were aged between 14 and 17 when executed and at least 351 youths who "disappeared" while in detention. In March the government denied allegations of these abuses, including the execution in 1987 of 16-year-old Ribwar Muhammad Karim Aziz. The government had previously confirmed his execution (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The government also denied in March reports that some 200 army personnel and Ba'th Party officials had been arrested in 1988 and that 14 of them had been executed in January.
In September and November Amnesty International appealed to the government to grant Farzad Bazoft and Daphne Parish legal and consular access and to ensure that they were protected from ill-treatment. It urged their immediate release unless they received a fair and prompt trial on recognizably criminal charges. By the end of the year no response had been received.
In an oral statement delivered to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in March, Amnesty International drew attention to continuing human rights abuses, including deliberate killings and the torture and execution of political opponents and minors. An Iraqi Government representative said Amnesty International had launched a "premeditated endeavour...to deviate...world public opinion against Iraq". Amnesty International said in March that it was "deeply disturbed at the decision of the [Commission]...to take no action on the systematic and wide-ranging abuses in Iraq".
In an oral statement delivered in August to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International expressed concern about the continued detention of Mulla Muhammad Dalgayi and the execution of Kurdish political opponents who had sought from the government benefits announced under official amnesties. An Iraqi Government representative responded by saying that Mulla Muhammad Dalgayi had been released and by denying that anyone had been executed after seeking benefits from an amnesty. Mulla Muhammad Dalgayi's release, which took place a few days before the government's response, was subsequently confirmed.
