BOLIVIA
About 200 people were arrested in November añer the government declared a state of siege. Most were members of striking teachers' unions. Other groups of detainees were reportedly tortured and ill-treated by intelligence officials and the police. Inmates of police-run reformatories were reported to have been tortured and ill-treated: one reformatory was closed pending an investigation into alleged torture, extrajudicial executions and secret burials.
In August President Victor Paz Estenssoro of the Movimiento Nacional Revolucionario (mnr), National Revolutionary Movement, was succeeded by Jaime Paz Zamora of the Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR), Revolutionary Left Movement. The new President headed a coalition government — Unidad Nacional, National Unity — which included the party led by General Hugo Banzer, the Acción Democrática Nacionalista (adn), Nationalist Democratic Action. The mnr government had reduced inflation by cutting the health and education budgets and by dismissing 23,000 miners from the state mining company, COMibol. The austerity measures led to numerous trade union protest actions, including public hunger-strikes and symbolic "crucifixions".
In September President Paz Zamora said he would try to accelerate proceedings against General Luis Garcia Meza, the former president, who had been on trial with 54 co-defendants since 1984. They faced charges of violating the Constitution, sedition, and killing and torturing opponents between 1980 and 1982 (see Amnesty
BOLIVIA
International Reports 1981 to 1983).
On 15 November about 200 people were arrested after the government declared a 90-day state of siege. Most were members of the urban and rural teachers' unions, who had been on hunger-strike for three weeks in support of a salary increase. Many of those detained were sent briefly into internal exile. By the end of the year, all those detained had been released.
In May two Mormon missionaries from the United States of America (USA) were killed in La Paz. Shortly afterwards officials from the Ministry of the Interior detained dozens of people, mainly students. Most were released after a few days, but four people were kept in detention and charged with the killings: Nelson and Felix Encinas Laguna, and Constantino Yurja, three students from the Universidad Mayor de San Andrés, and Gabriel Rojas, a medical doctor. They were accused of belonging to a little-known organization, Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Zarate WiUka (FAL-ZW), the Zarate Willka Armed Liberation Forces, which had claimed responsibility for the killings and other assaults. The four were reportedly held incommunicado for 10 days after their arrest. Three of them later alleged that intelligence agents had tortured them at a secret interrogation centre in La Paz. All denied involvement in the killings. Their defence lawyers complained of undue government pressure on the trial. They noted that after the investigating magistrate dismissed the charges for lack of evidence and ordered the case closed, the public prosecutor's office successfully petitioned La Paz District Court to remove the judge from the case. The succeeding judge was also removed, allegedly for expressing a premature opinion on the case by supporting the previous judge's ruling. No official investigation appeared to have been opened into the detainees' allegations of ill-treatment.
Tortx^e and ill-treatment of detainees at remote police-run reformatories were frequently reported. Inmates were held under the vagrancy provisions of the Police Law of 1886, which permit detention vrithout charge or trial for up to one year of those considered a "potential danger to society", such as drug addicts or suspected petty criminals. Although minors are specifically excluded from the provisions of this law, they were regularly interned at these reformatories.
In recent years former inmates have repeatedly claimed that some inmates have died as a result of beatings and that police have deliberately killed others. Evidence substantiating some of these allegations emerged in October during a judicial investigation into alleged secret burials at the Granja de Espejos reformatory in Santa Cruz de la Sierra. Forensic pathologists from Argentina and the USA assisting in the investigation estimated that one burial site held over 40 bodies. The Police Governor of the Granja de Espejos claimed that the inmates had died of natural causes or had been shot while trying to escape. The forensic scientists exhumed the remains of four people who had died in the past five years and found that three had met violent deaths: one had apparently been beaten to death. The fourth body was that of a 14 or 15-year-old youth. The Granja de Espejos was closed in late October and its governor and three police officers were arrested and charged in connection with the killing and torture of inmates. The three police officers immediately escaped in unexplained circumstances; two had been rearrested by December.
Although the Constitution prohibits detention without charge for more than 48 hours, numerous detentions exceeded this limit, Placido Mamani, aged 18, was arrested in May during a police raid on a poor district of La Paz. He was held incom-mxmicado for 32 days in the Criminal Investigations Department, where police allegedly beat him. He was then transferred to a hospital. He discharged himself after two days but collapsed and died on his way home. Although the official cause of death was pulmonary infection, evidence indicated that the alleged ill-treatment may have contributed to Placido Mamani's death.
An Amnesty International delegate visited the Granja de Espejos reformatory in early October and observed the judicial inspection of the secret graves. The organization informed the government of its concerns about reported human rights violations at reformatories. Ministry of the Interior officials told Amnesty International that the government was seeking to improve conditions in the prison system.
In November Amnesty International called on the new President to ensure the humane treatment of detainees held under the state of siege, urging that they be
B0LIV1A/BIRA2IL
released immediately, or charged with a recognizably criminal offence.
Amnesty International called on the government to investigate the alleged torture of the detainees accused of killing two Mormon missionaries. The organization expressed concern about reports that judges had been improperly dismissed from the case and called for assurances that the defendeints would receive a fair trial conforming to international standards.
Amnesty International also urged the government to take steps to prevent torture, ill-treatment and extrajudicial killings by ensuring that all detainees are under judicial supervision and have access to legal counsel and their relatives.
In December Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the continual delays in the investigation into gross human rights violations committed during the Garcia Meza administration. In particular, it noted that the government had impeded the trial's progress by removing from the jurisdiction of the Bolivian coiuls one of the principal defendants in the trial, Luis Arce Gómez, the former Minister of the Interior. Charges against him included the murder of eight political leaders in 1981. He had remained in hiding until December, when he was arrested and irmnediately handed over to the USA authorities for trial on a drugs offence.
