KUWAIT
At least 20 suspected opponents of the government, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested. Of these, five were still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. TWenty-two other suspected government opponents were sentenced to prison terms by the State Security Court after an imfair trial. Some of these political detainees were report* edly tortured. Seven other political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years were still held. The death sentence was imposed on at least one person and there was one known execution.
At least 20 suspected opponents of the government, all Shi'a Muslims, were arrested following the execution of 16 Kuwaiti Shi'a pilgrims in Saudi Arabia on 21 September (see Saudi Arabia). Saleh Jawhar, Imam of the Imam al-Hussain mosque in al-Kuwait, was arrested on 21 September, apparently to prevent him from delivering a sermon the next day. He was released uncharged several days later. On 23 September, four sisters of Hani al-Misri, one of those executed in Saudi Arabia, were detained briefly for demonstrating against the executions outside the Saudi Arabian embassy. Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Musawi, a prominent religious scholar and Imam of the Imam 'Ali Mosque in al-Kuwait, was arrested the same day. He was detained by Mabahith Amn al-DawIa, State Security Intelligence, reportedly in connection with bomb attacks in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, but no charges had been brought against him by the end of the year. He was permitted one family visit shortly after his arrest, but was then held incommunicado at Amn al-Dawla Prison in al-Kuwait. His mother was assaulted by a prison ofRcial when she inquired about him and there were reports in November that he had been tortured and threatened with extradition to Saudi Arabia, where he might face execution.
Fourteen other Shi'a were arrested by Mabahith Amn al-Dawla in November, also apparently in connection with the September executions in Saudi Arabia. They included Faisal 'Abd al-Hadi al-Mahmid, an entrepreneur, who had delivered sermons in the Imam al-Hussein mosque after al-Haj Saleh Jawhar was arrested. He was reported to have been kicked and beaten during interrogation, as were several of the other detainees. Khalil Musa al-Musa, a teacher and former director of fam'iyyat al-Thaqafa al-Ijtima'iyya, Social Culture Society, the only official Shi'a charitable society in Kuwait, was also arrested, Another detainee, 'Abd al-Hamid al-Saffar, was also reportedly tortured and told that his daughter would be assaulted in his presence if he refused to "confess". Four of those arrested were still held without charge or trial at the end of 1989.
In May, 33 people, all Shi'a, were tried by the State Security Court on various charges, including "belonging to banned groups aiming to destroy the basic structures of Kuwait by illegal means, and publicly defaming the Amir". Thirteen were tried in their absence. The 20 who appeared in court, who included Iraqi, Iranian and Lebanese nationals as well as Kuwaitis, had all apparently been detained by Mabahith Amn al-Dawla at the end of 1988. Twenty-two of the defendants, including nine of those tried in their absence, were convicted and sentenced to between five and 15 years' imprisonment; the 11 others were acquitted. The trial was conducted almost entirely in camera, despite a request by some defence lawyers that it be conducted in open court. The defendants also had no right of appeal to a higher tribunal, contrary to international fair trial standards. Those tried in their absence had no legal representation. In view of the secrecy of much of the proceedings, it was not clear on what evidence the defendants were convicted or whether any of them were prisoners of conscience.
In October four actors appeared before the Court of Misdemeanours charged with staging a play allegedly offensive to Islam. They reportedly faced between three months and seven years' imprisonment if convicted. The play, entitled Hadha Saifu, This is Saifu, had opened in May 1988 but was stopped after 36 performances following complaints to the state prosecutor that it insulted Islam. In November Sa'ad Faraj,
KUWAITAAOS
Khalid al-Nafisi and Muhammad al-Sari' were acquitted. No sentence was passed on the fourth defendant, 'Abd al-Hussain 'Abd al-Ridha, on condition that he pledge to pay bail of 500 Kuwaiti dinars and pledge "good behaviour" for one year.
Seven Shi'a political prisoners tried between 1985 and 1987 continued to serve prison sentences ranging from three to 10 years. The seven, among them possible prisoners of conscience, had been convicted by the State Security Court on charges including the distribution of leaflets inciting violence, and membership of illegal groups. They had been tried almost entirely in camera and had no right of appeal (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
One person was sentenced to death for murder in December, but the sentence had not been carried out by the end of the year. There was at least one execution: an Indian national convicted of murder in 1988 was hanged in August. It was not known whether three other prisoners sentenced to death for murder in 1988 were executed (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Amnesty International continued to seek information about the cases of the seven Shi'a prisoners tried by the State Security Court between 1985 and 1987 in order to establish whether any were prisoners of conscience. During the year the government told Amnesty International that four of them had been imprisoned for distributing leaflets "inciting the overthrow of the government... by using force, violence and terrorism (and which] contained a clear sign to murder", but copies of the leaflets were not made available.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the detention without charge or trial and the reported torture of Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Musawi and other Shi'a detainees. In response, the authorities said he was being held for investigation in accordance with Kuwaiti law and was permitted family visits. Other reports received by Amnesty International, however, indicated that he continued to be held incommunicado.
In September the government also told Amnesty International that the 22 people convicted by the State Security Coiut in June included some who were found to be "members of extremist terrorist organizations", and convicted on the basis of "conclusive evidence as to their involvement in the crimes .. . including the confes-
sions made against each other and against themselves . . . and the seizure of leaflets". The authorities said the trial had been held in camera for reasons of state security.
Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death sentence passed in December, and expressed regret about the execution carried out in August.
