PARAGUAY
An improvement in human rights protection followed a change of government in February. Two long-term political prisoners were released. Judicial investigations were initiated to establish criminal liability for some past human rights violations, including the torture and deaths in custody of prisoners of conscience. However, the short-term arrest and ill-treatment of detainees who may have been prisoners of conscience continued to be reported, particularly in the context of land disputes and labour conñicts.
In February General Andrés Rodríguez led a military coup in which at least 30 people, including two civilians, reportedly died. General Alfredo Sfroessner, who had ruled Paraguay for 34 years, resigned and sought asylum in Brazil, The provisional government headed by General Rodriguez immediately undertook a purge of the armed forces, and at least 10 civilian members of the previous administration were
PARAGUAY
arrested and charged with economic crimes.
The new and largely civilian government pledged to respect human rights and took important steps for their protection. Restrictions on trade unions, political parties and news media were lifted and political exiles were allowed to return. In May presidential and congressional elections were held with the participation of the principal opposition parties. The Asociación Nacional Republicana, Partido Colorado, National Republican Association, Colorado Party, won the election amid claims by opposition parties and international observers of viddespread irregularities. General Rodriguez was elected president by a large majority.
In August the government ratified the American Convention on Human Rights. In October it signed the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture, but it had not ratified these by the end of the year.
In August Congress repealed two penal code laws against subversion. The previous government had frequently used Law 209, "Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons", and Law 294, "Defence of Democracy", to detain prisoners of conscience. Legislators also created a Congressional Human Rights Commission mandated to oversee judicial investigations into alleged abuses and considered a draft bill which would penalize those responsible for illegal detentions and for torturing or ill-treating detainees.
Two long-term political prisoners were released. Alejandro Mella Latorre, a Chilean national convicted of participating in the assassination of former Nicaraguan president Anastasio Somoza. was released in February and expelled to Chile in March. Remigio Gímenez Gamarra was released in August (see Amnesty International Report 1986 and 1987).
Judicial authorities opened over 30 criminal investigations into cases of arbitrary arrest, torture, death in custody and "disappearance" which allegedly occurred under the previous government. In several of these cases victims or their relatives lodged criminal complaints against senior members of the former administration, including President Alfredo Stroessner, chief of police General Francisco Britez Borges, Minister of the Interior Sabino
Augusto Montanaro and Pastor Milciades Coronel, who directed the Departamento de Investigaciones de la Policía (DIPC), Police Investigations Department.
In April the widow of Mario Raul Schaerer Prono formally accused Pastor Coronel and three of his subordinates of direct responsibility for her husband's death. Mario Schaerer, a student, died in the dipc headquarters in April 1976, allegedly as a result of torture. Police authorities had claimed that he died from injuries sustained while resisting arrest. Witnesses, including a Catholic priest and a police officer, testified before judicial authorities in 1989 that Mario Schaerer was slightly wounded in one foot but otherwise in good physical condition when arrested and handed over to dipc officials. Other students arrested at the time, in a police operation against an alleged fledgling armed opposition movement, testified that Mario Schaerer was severely tortured in the dipc headquarters over a two-day period and was killed by a blow to the back of his neck with an iron bar. In April judicial authorities ordered the pre-trial detention of Pastor Coronel and his subordinates implicated in the case.
Prolonged delays or obstruction by the authorities marked some judicial inquiries into past human rights violations. In April the Comité de Iglesias, Interchurch Committee, presented a formal complaint to judicial authorities on behalf of a former political prisoner who alleged that during the 1970s at least six political prisoners had been executed and secretly buried in a police barracks on the outskirts of Asunción. The Agrupación Especializada, formerly known as Guardia de Seguridad, had been used as a high-security detention centre. Ignacio Duarte, detained in the Agrupación Especializada between 1972 and 1976, stated that he had been ordered on several occasions to spray water on newly dug graves in the grounds of the barracks to ensure that the earth settled. A criminal court judge's inspection of the site was suspended when the Agrupación Especializada's commander refused to allow Ignacio Duarte access to the barracks. By the end of the year no inspection had been carried out and the investigation had not progressed.
The majority of reported arbitrary arrests and short-term detentions targeting people who may have been prisoners of
PARAGUAY/PERU
conscience took place in the context of land conflicts, Leaders and members of peasant organizations attempting to establish peasants' land claims were reportedly detained arbitrarily and, in some cases, subjected to ill-treatment by the security forces.
In early November soldiers from the 3rd Cavalry Division reportedly arrested, without judicial authorization, more than 150 peasant farmers. The military operation was an attempt to expel farmers from land they had recently occupied in Co'eti and Siete Monte-i localities in Curuguaty, San Pedro department, which was owned by a leading member of the ruling Colorado Party. Soldiers allegedly beat 10 peasants at the time of the arrests and released the majority of those detained only after holding them incommunicado for three days in the Curuguaty army base. Two of the peasant leaders reportedly beaten, Vidal Quintana and Erigido Paredes, were transferred to the 1st Army Corps in Asunción. They were held incommunicado for a further three days before being released without charge. Several peasants alleged after their release that soldiers in Curuguaty had denied them food. Some peasants said they had been beaten in custody.
Trade union leaders were reportedly arrested amid increasing numbers of labour disputes. Carlos Fillizola and Silvio Ferreira, leaders of the newly created labour confederation Central Unica de Trabajadores (cur), and Pedro Salcedo, General-Secretary of the Sindicato de Obreros de Capsa, Capsa workers' imion, were detained in October. Police allegedly beat and arrested the three union leaders after they delivered a petition to the presidential palace in Asunción. The petition called for the reinstatement of factory workers thought to have been dismissed for attempting to organize trade unions. The three men were released, without charge, the day after their arrest.
In December two workers at the Itaipú hydroelectric dam project on the Paraguayan/Brazilian border were killed and several others were injured when soldiers opened fire on striking workers. Soldiers from the border battalion based in Ciudad del Este, Alto Paraná department, were apparently attempting to break a picket line at the dam entrance. The circumstances of the shootings remain unclear. Army spokesmen claimed that the
strikers had fired on soldiers who had then responded in self-defence. Independent witnesses to the incident alleged that although some workers threw stones at the soldiers, strikers fired no shots. The government ordered a commission of inquiry to investigate the incident.
In February Amnesty International wrote to General Rodriguez welcoming the new government's stated commitment to uphold human rights. The organization also urged in its letter a judicial review of the two remaining political prisoner cases; investigation of "disappearance" cases attributed to the previous government; repeal of "subversion" Laws 209 and 294; and the adherence to international human rights instruments.
