EQUATORIAL GUINEA
At least one prisoner of conscience and about a dozen other political prisoners continued to serve sentences imposed after unfair trials by military courts in 1983, 1986 and 1988. One prisoner of conscience was released in January. Fifteen political prisoners were released after the sentences of all political
prisoners were reduced in a clemency measure in August. Details emerged of the torture of prisoners arrested in August 1988.
President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, leader of the only legal political party — Partido Democrático de Guinea Ecuatorial, Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea — was returned to office in June in the first election since the country's independence in 1969. No information was available to indicate that the government had made progress in drafting new penal and procedxiral codes containing adequate human rights safeguards. Such reforms had been proposed under a plan of action drawn up in 1980 by an expert appointed by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.
Primo José Esono Miká, a prisoner of conscience, remained in prison throughout the year. He was sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment in September 1988 after being convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1989). However, his arrest appeared to have been due to his opposition to one-party rule and his membership of a Spanish-based opposition party. Partido del Progreso, Progress Party. His sentence was reduced to 15 years' imprisonment in August, the 10th anniversary of the overthrow of the former head of state. Another defendant at the same trial, José Luis Jones Dougan, Secretary-General of the Progress Party, who was serving a 16-year prison sentence, was released in January shortly before President Obiang Nguema visited Spain: José Luis Jones Dougan has Spanish as well as Equatorial Guinean nationality. Neither he nor Primo José Esono Miká had used or advocated violence.
EQUATORIAL GUINEA/ETHIORA
In the clemency measm'e announced in August, over 25 other political prisoners serving sentences imposed by military coin*ts after unfair trials in 1983, 1986 and
1988	(see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989] had their sentences reduced, Fifteen prisoners who had been convicted in 1983 of participating in a coup attempt were released while another. Sergeant Venancio Mikó, whose death sentence had previously been commuted to life imprisonment, had his sentence reduced to six years' imprisonment. Two other prisoners, whose death sentences had been commuted to life imprisonment after they were convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989], had their sentences reduced to 20 years' imprisonment. The sentences of six others convicted at the same trial were halved and one of them, Metódio Esono Andong Mba, was released in September, apparently on humanitarian grounds.
There were reports that detainees suspected of criminal offences were tortured on at least two occasions. The methods used included severe beatings and electric shocks. In October two police officers were convicted of torturing prisoners and sentenced to several months' imprisonment.
Further information was received in
1989	about the torture and ill-treatment of those people arrested prior to the September 1988 trial. A total of about 40 people were arrested in August 1988 on suspicion of plotting to overthrow the government; all but nine were released before the trial. Most of those arrested were interrogated at Bata, the capital of the mainland province of Rio Muni. They were said to have been tortured by Equatorial Guinean soldiers acting imder the supervision of Moroccan security personnel seconded to Equatorial Guinea under the terms of a bilateral military cooperation agreement. The detainees were apparently taken from prison at night for interrogation and severely tortured and ill-treated. Primo José Esono Mikà was said to have had his arms and legs tied together behind him, causing his back to arch painfully, and then to have been suspended by a rope. As a result he temporarily lost the use of his limbs. Other prisoners were subjected to similar forms of torture, sometimes with a heavy stone placed on the arched back of the
suspended victim. Prisoners were also said to have been hung by the feet and to have had their heads immersed in a bucket of dirty water, partially suffocating them, and to have been tortured with electric shocks.
During their trial in September 1988, two of the nine defendants told the court that statements they had made in pre-trial custody had been extracted under torture. However, the court apparently took no steps to investigate the allegations. All nine were said to have been convicted largely on the basis of confessions.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the alleged torture of detainees in late 1988 and continued to urge a review of the cases of prisoners convicted in September 1988. It called for the immediate and imconditional release of Primo José Esono Mikà and expressed concern that his seven co-defend-ants who continued to be held might be prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International welcomed the releases and reductions in prison sentences announced in August, The government did^not acknowledge or respond to a memorandum which Amnesty International had submitted in November 1988. This detailed the organization's concerns about a series of imfair military trials and called for procedural safeguards to ensure that prisoners' human rights are respected and that Equatorial Guinea fulfils its obligations under the various international human rights instruments it has ratified.
