SINGAPORE
Six prisoners of conscience were granted conditional release, one after almost 23 years in untried detention under the Internal Security Act (ISA). IWo remained in detention without charge or trial under the act. A mandatory punishment of caning was introduced for further criminal offences and the death penalty was extended to cover certain drugs offences. Two people were sentenced to death and five executions were carried out.
In January the government amended the isa and the Constitution to restrict habeas corpus in cases involving administrative
SINGAPORE
detention. The ISA permits the President and the Minister of Home Affairs to order detention of indefinite duration without charge or trial. Following the amendment detainees held xmder such orders can no longer submit their case for judicial review and court powers are limited to verifying that procedural requirements have been complied with. The amendment also abolished the right of appeal to the Privy Council in the United Kingdom, Singapore's highest appellate court for ISA detainees. An amendment to the Constitution validated the ISA changes.
Chia Thye Poh, a former opposition member of parliament detained since October 1966 under the ISA, was released conditionally in May into internal exile. His freedom of movement and association remained severely restricted. Previously, the government had insisted that he publicly renounce his alleged membership of the proscribed Commxmist Party of Malaya (cpm) as a condition of his release. He maintained that such a renunciation would imply that he was a CPM member, an allegation he has consistently denied, and that his arrest was justified. At the time of his conditional release, the government said that the Cpm had been sufficiently weakened and disrupted to prevent him from posing a "seciuity problem".
Teo Soh Lung, a lawyer, and Vincent Cheng, the former secretary of Singapore's Catholic Archdiocesan Justice and Peace Commission, remained in detention without charge or trial under the ISA and in solitary confinement throughout the year. Vincent Cheng, held continuously since May 1987, was served in June with an order for a ftirther year's detention. He and Teo Soh Lung were among 22 people arrested in connection with an alleged "Marxist conspiracy to subvert the existing
social and political system". Except for Vincent Cheng, all of the other detainees had been released before the end of 1987, although 20 of them were placed under restriction orders. Diuing April and May 1988, Teo Soh Lung and eight others were rearrested after they alleged publicly that they had been ill-treated in detention (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Teo Soh Lung and three others brought habeas corpus actions to contest their detentions. The courts ruled in their favour and ordered their release in December 1988. However, all four were immediately rearrested and served with new detention orders. Teo Soh Lung's detention order was renewed in June for a further year. The three others — Kevin Desmond de Souza, Chng Suan Tze and Wong Souk Yee — were released under restriction in March. Their restriction orders limited their freedom of movement and association. Both Teo Soh Lung and Vincent Cheng brought habeas corpus actions in the High Court challenging their most recent detention orders. Teo Soh Lung's action was dismissed in April and a Court of Appeal had not ruled on her case at the end of the year. Vincent Cheng's application was heard in September, although the presiding judge barred his appearance in court. Vincent Cheng alleged in written testimony that he had been struck repeatedly by security officers and forced to sign under duress prepared statements admitting the existence of a Marxist conspiracy. He also claimed that he had been threatened with prolonged incommunicado detention. No judgment had been delivered by the end of the year.
Caning has been a mandatory punishment for about 30 offences since 1973. Amendments to the immigration law took effect on 31 March and 31 August, under which illegal immigrant workers and people who knowingly hire more than five of them face mandatory caning and imprisonment upon conviction, Before the end of the year more than 20 immigrant workers had reportedly been caned for overstaying their visas.
In November Parliament passed an amendment to the Misuse of Drugs Act (1973), which made the death penalty mandatory for those convicted of possessing specified quantities of cocaine, cannabis and opium. Since 1975 the death penalty has been mandatory only for possession of and unauthorized trafficking in
SINGAPORE/SOMALIA
specified amounts of heroin and morphine.
Two people were sentenced to death following conviction for drug-trafficking. Five people convicted of drug-trafficking were executed, four in May and one in November, bringing the number of people hanged for drugs offences since 1975 to 25. The appeals of nine others against death sentences were pending. No death sentences or executions for offences not related to drugs were reported.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the unconditional release of Teo Soh Lung and Vincent Cheng, and for the lifting of restrictions imposed on Chia Thye Poh and other former isa detainees. It also urged commutation of all death sentences and an end to further executions.
