EL SALVADOR
IVade union leaders and prominent academics were among scores of civilians who allegedly "disappeared" or were killed by military personnel often acting in the guise of "death squads". Many were killed in bomb attacks and raids by the security forces on trade union and university premises. The authorities said they would investigate these abuses, but in most cases little action was taken to bring those responsible to justice. Throughout the year there were large-scale arrests of suspected government opponents, including church workers, students and trade unionists. Torture and ill-treatment were routinely used to extract "confessions" from political detainees.
Following the victory of the right-wing Alianza Republicana Nacionalista (arena), the Nationalist Republican Alliance, in the general elections in March 1989, the government of President Alfredo Cristiani took office on 1 June. The elections took place amid a renewed wave of guerrilla activity by the Frente Farabundo Marti de Liberación Nacional (FMLn), the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.
EL SALVADOR
The government's refusal to postpone the elections to allow the FMLN's participation as a political party was followed by a spate of killings of high-level government and military officials attributed to the fmln.
On 11 November, after the breakdown of talks between the government and the FMLN initiated in September under the terms of the 1987 Central American Peace Agreement, the rebels launched a major military offensive. The following day the government declared a state of siege and launched a counter-attack which included heavy aerial bombardment of densely populated areas of San Salvador and San Miguel, leaving thousands of civilians dead, injured or displaced. The state of siege, which was extended in December, suspended certain constitutional guarantees. In November the National Assembly approved reforms to the Penal Code which would criminalize certain forms of peaceful opposition activity. At the end of the year President Cristiani returned the proposed legislation to the National Assembly for further discussion.
A renewed clampdown on members of pressure groups and suspected government opponents followed the coming-to-power of the new government in March. There were numerous incidents involving the mass arrest, short-term detention and torture of members of trade unions and humanitarian organizations. On 19 April riot police arrested 85 people during raids on the offices of the Comité Cristiano Pro-Desplazados de El Salvador (CRIPDES), the Christian Committee for the Displaced of El Salvador, and of two trade union organizations. Although most of those arrested were released within three days, eight were held in prison until 8 and 9 August, when they were released owing to lack of evidence. All eight alleged they were subjected to severe beatings and near-asphyxiation with the capucha, a rubber hood impregnated with lime, during detention at Ti-easury Police headquarters.
The National Police detained 64 trade unionists on 18 September during a demonstration organized by the Federación Nacional Sindical de TYabajadores Salvadoreños (penastras) , the National TVade Union Federation of Salvadorian Workers. Many of those detained were reportedly tortured with the capucha and electric shocks; seven women and one man said they had been raped. Although most
were released within 72 hours, 18 were still in prison in December.
The number of politically related arrests escalated following the imposition of the state of siege in November. Members of trade unions, political parties, church and humanitarian aid organizations were persistently accused of supporting the FMLN offensive in the government-controlled media. Among the scores arrested were more than 50 Salvadorian and foreign church workers, detained after the police and army raided and ransacked some 60 church buildings and refuges. Although most were released shortly after arrest, at least 12 were still detained without charge at the end of the year. Under state of siege legislation, the period for which detainees could be held in police custody before being taken before a judge was increased from 72 hours to 15 days, during which time they were frequently denied access to family or lawyers. Reports of torture increased following the state of siege.
At the end of the year around 500 political prisoners were facing charges involving alleged links with the armed opposition. In many cases it was alleged that the charges were based on confessions obtained under tortiue. One detainee allegedly signed five statements saying that she was a member of the FMLN after being raped and repeatedly beaten. In some cases trial proceedings appeared not to have been completed within the time limits specified by Salvadorian law. There was no progress in proceedings against Jorge Alberto Miranda Ar^valo, detained in December 1987 and accused of involvement in the murder of Herbert Anaya Sanabria (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Fresh evidence emerged that his confession had been obtained under torture. Other political detainees were repeatedly transferred from one prison to another, often to remote parts of the country, making access difficult for families and lawyers.
The security forces, acting in uniform or in the guise of "death squads", were allegedly responsible for dozens of "disappearances" throughout the year. Among the few to have survived "disappearance" and denounced their treatment were five students and staff from the University of El Salvador, abducted in July and August by armed men in civilian clothing. They were allegedly tortured in clandestine detention centres believed to be private houses. The
EL SALVADOR
five were released in September. All reportedly recognized their captors as members of the Segunda Brigada de Infantería, the Second Infantry Brigade. They said that during interrogation they were accused of involvement in guerrilla activity and tortured with electric shocks and cigarette bums.
Juan Francisco Massi Chávez, a union member at the Lido factory in Soyapango, San Salvador, and Sara Cristina Chan Chan, a photographer for fenastras, "disappeared" following their alleged detention on 19 August by uniformed members of the air force. No unit of the security forces acknowledged holding them and they remained "disappeared".
Amnesty International documented over 60 killings, allegedly carried out by government forces or "death squads" closely linked to them. Those killed included trade unionists, academics, members of political parties, and others apparently targeted on account of their opposition to government policies. The authorities claimed that some of the dead had been killed in armed confrontations with military personnel but in many of these cases the evidence suggested that the victims were unarmed civilians summarily executed by members of the armed forces.
Ten people were killed and 36 others injured in a bomb attack on the offices of fenastras on 31 October. Febe Elisabeth Velásquez, former general secretary of fenastras, was one of several prominent trade union leaders killed in the blast. The fenastras offices had suffered three bomb attacks and repeated raids by the security forces earlier in the year. Hours before the fenastras bombing, four people were injured in a bomb explosion at the offices of comadres, the organization of relatives of the "disappeared".
Human rights workers in El Salvador claimed that the bombings were carried out by members of the military in retaliation for a mortar attack by the fmln on 30 October on the Armed Forces' Joint Chiefs of Staff, in which one person was killed and 15 injured. Whereas nine church workers were being held at the end of the year accused of involvement in the fmln attack, no arrests had been made in connection with the fenastras and comadres bombings despite government assxuances of an exhaustive investigation.
Witnesses reported the abduction on
6 November of Cecilio Rivera Rodriguez and Apolinario Miranda, both members of the Movimiento Popular Social Cristiano (mpsc), the Popular Social Christian Movement, by armed men in plain clothes recognized as members of the Destacamento Militar No. 6, Military Detachment No. 6. Their bodies were found on wasteland the next morning.
On 16 November six Jesuit priests, their cook and her 15-year-old daughter were murdered at the Universidad Centroamericana "fosé Simeón Cañas" (uca), the Jesuit-run Central American University in San Salvador. The six priests were prominent academics and included the rector of the university, Ignacio Ellacuría, and Segundo Montes, director of the university's human rights institute. The attack took place while a curfew was in force, in an area patrolled by troops. The priests' residence had been raided two days earlier by members of the Atlacatl battalion, an élite counter-insurgency unit. Death threats had been broadcast against Ignacio Ellacuría on the army-controlled radio days before the killings.
The government announced that it would investigate the killings and bring to justice those responsible, even if they were found to be members of the military. President Cristiani invited detectives from the Spanish, British, Canadian and United States (us) police forces to assist the governmental special investigative commission.
A report on these killings published by Thtela Legal del Arzobispado, the Legal Aid Office of the Archdiocese, concluded that members of the military had been responsible, basing its conclusions on the testimony of the housekeeper, who witnessed the killings, and on other circumstantial evidence. By the end of the year the government investigation had not yet resulted in arrests.
The majority of extrajudicial killings and other human rights abuses allegedly committed by the military in the past remained uninvestigated. Only in isolated cases were military personnel prosecuted. The investigation into the killing of 10 peasants in San Francisco in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1969] was resumed following statements by the us Government that military aid would be reduced if no progress was made in the case. Within a month of these statements nine members of the Fifth Infantry Brigade
EL SALVADOR/EQUATORIAL GUINEA
were arrested, including the head of military intelligence of the brigade. Major Mamicio Beltran Granados.
The suspects testified they had been ordered by Major Beltràn to execute the captured peasants by detonating several mines seized from a guerrilla store. Those still alive after the explosions were shot at point-blank range. Tibial proceedings against the nine had not been concluded by the end of the year.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the government to investigate the numerous reports of extrajudicial killing and "disappearance". The organization sent repeated appeals urging that detainees in the custody of the seciu'ity forces be treated in accordance with international standards. In September Amnesty International representatives met President Alfredo Cristiani and Dr José Manuel Pacas Castro, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, in London. Amnesty International expressed its concern about the continuing pattern of human rights violations. President Cristiani stated that the human rights situation would only improve with the termination of the armed conflict and that the abuses that had occurred were isolated cases which did not reflect government policy. Amnesty International urged President Cristiani to implement recommendations made by the organization to previous Salvadorian governments.
In an oral statement delivered in March to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, Amnesty International drew attention to abductions, "disappearances" and politically motivated killings in El Salvador by "death squads" composed of police and military personnel.
