UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Sixteen prisoners were executed in 1989. At the end of the year more than 2,300 people were under sentence of death in 34 states and under US military law. The Supreme Court ruled that juvenile offenders as young as 16 and the mentally retarded could be executed. However, one state prohibited the execution of the mentally retarded. Federal legislation to reintroduce the death penalty and extend it to crimes to which it did not previously apply was pending before Congress at the end of the year. Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate a number of criminal cases in which it was alleged that the prosecutions were politically motivated. There were concerns relating to the trial of a member of the Puerto Rican independence movement.
President George Bush called on Congress to introduce the death penalty under federal law for murder and dmg-trafficking. Legislation pending before Congress at the end of 1989 sought to reintroduce the death penalty under federal law for a broad range of crimes including espionage, treason, assassination of the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAAJRUGUAY
president and other offences involving murder. It would also extend the death penalty to offences to which it did not previously apply, such as attempted assassination of the president. Amnesty International appealed to members of Congress to oppose the reintroduction of the death penalty at federal level and its extension to new crimes. International human rights standards, including the American Convention on Human Rights (which the usa has signed but not ratified), state that the use of the death penalty should not be extended.
At least eight states passed legislation increasing the number of crimes punishable by death. However, proposals to reintroduce the death penalty in 11 abolitionist states failed.
In September a committee of federal judges recommended strict new limits on judicial review of capital cases, with the aim of reducing delay in carrying out the death penalty. The legislation was pending before Congress at the end of 1989. Amnesty International was concerned that the proposed changes would reduce the judicial scrutiny of capital cases, which could result in an increased niunber of executions, possibly based on miscarriages of justice. In a letter to the majority and minority leaders of the us Senate in November, it urged Congress to recognize current problems surrounding the death penalty's use, including race discrimination and the severe strain it places on the criminal justice system.
Death sentences continued to be imposed and carried out, especially in southern states. Sixteen prisoners were executed in 1989, bringing the number of executions since 1977 to 120. Four executions each were carried out in Alabama and in Texas; two in both Florida and Nevada and the others in Georgia, Mississippi, Missoiui and Virginia. An estimated 300 new death sentences were imposed. Amnesty International appealed for clemency whenever it learned that an execution was imminent.
Despite judicial safeguards, evidence suggested that the death penalty continued to be applied in a racially discriminatory manner (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Although blacks and whites were the victims of homicide in almost equal numbers, death sentences were more often passed when the victim was white.
Between 1976 (when the death penalty was reinstated by the courts) and the end of 1989, 120 defendants were executed. They had been sentenced to death for the murder of 121 victims. Of these, 101 were white and 20 were black or from another ethnic minority" group. No white offender was executed during this period for the murder of just one black victim.
State governments have maintained that these disparities are due to differences in the types of crime committed by or against members of different racial groups. However, research studies have isolated race as a key factor in death sentencing, after allovring for differences in the types of homicide.
Leo Edwards, convicted of murder in 1980, was executed in Mississippi on 21 June. Leo Edwards and the victim were black, as was about 30 per cent of the population in the county where the trial took place. But the case was heard by an all-white jiuy, after the prosecution excluded all seven black potential jurors. The Supreme Court had prohibited the exclusion of members of a defendant's own race from a trial jury solely on account of their race in 1986. However, this ruling was announced after Leo Edwards' conviction had been affirmed on direct appeal and was not applied retroactively to such cases.
On 26 June the Supreme Court ruled by five votes to four that the execution of juvenile offenders as young as 16 did not constitute "cruel and unusual" punishment (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The court said it had looked to the usa's standards, not the sentencing practices of other countries, in determining what constituted "evolving standards of decency". Amnesty International had submitted an amicus curiae (friend of the court) brief in September 1988 presenting evidence on international practice and standards prohibiting the execution of minors.
On 13 July the Indiana Supreme Court set aside the death sentence imposed on Paula Cooper, a 15-year-old offender. It held her death sentence to be "unique and disproportionate" in light of Indiana's 1987 law establishing 16 as the minimum age for the imposition of the death penalty. At the end of the year 28 juvenile offenders were imder sentence of death in 12 states.
On 26 June the Supreme Court ruled by five votes to four that the execution of mentally retarded prisoners was not
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAAJRUGUAY
categorically prohibited, provided those responsible for passing sentence took this factor into consideration. The appeal had been brought by John Paul Penry in Texas, who was found to have an intelligence quotient (iq) of between 50 and 63 and a mental age of seven. He was sentenced to death for the rape and minder of a woman in 1979. The Supreme Court set aside his death sentence because the sentencing jury had not been instructed that it could consider his mental retardation as mitigating evidence (see Amnesty International Report 1989].
In May Maryland became the second state to enact legislation prohibiting the death penalty for defendants found to be mentally retarded. At least 10 per cent of prisoners under sentence of death nationwide are thought to be mentally retarded.
Horace Dunkins, a black, mentally retarded prisoner, was executed in Alabama on 14 July. He was sentenced to death by an all-white, all-female jury for the murder of a white woman in 1980. According to lawyers, Horace Dunkins had unknowingly waived his right to a lawyer before being interrogated by police after his arrest. They argued that the jury at his trial had not been told that he had an IQ of only 65 to 69. Despite its June ruling that mental retardation was a factor jm:ies should consider in deciding whether to impose the death penalty, the us Supreme Court declined to stay the execution.
Horace Dunkins' execution by electrocution was protracted. The first jolt of electricity failed to kill him, apparently because the electric chair had been wired incorrectly. Doctors found he was unconscious but had a strong heartbeat, A second electric shock was administered nine minutes later after the chair had been reconnected. Amnesty International wrote to the Governor of Alabama expressing its deep concern with what had happened.
Two weeks before Ronald Monroe was to have been executed in August, the Governor of Louisiana commuted the death sentence. Ronald Monroe had been convicted in 1980 of murdering a neighbour. His lawyers presented evidence casting doubt on his guilt and pointing to a more likely suspect.
On 7 July the European Court of Human Rights ruled unanimously against the extradition of Jens Soering from the United Kingdom to Virginia to face trial for capital
murder. The court held that if Jens Soering was extradited to Virginia he ran a considerable risk of being sentenced to death and that exposure to the "death row phenomenon" in Virginia would violate the European Convention's prohibition of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, The court took into account the six to eight-year period between sentence and execution in Virginia, Jens Soering's youth (he was 18 at the time of the offence) and the severity of conditions on death row.
On 30 March a federal court of appeal upheld the convictions of eight members of the church-based "Sanctuary Movement". The eight were convicted in May 1986 of violating us immigration laws by helping Salvadorians and Guatemalans to enter and obtain refuge in the usa. They were sentenced to probationary terms. Amnesty International believes the people assisted by the church risked human rights violations if returned to their countries of origin. It considers that the eight would be prisoners of conscience if imprisoned for the offences of which they were convicted (see Amnesty International Report 1987 and 1988].
Leonard Peltier, a leading member of the American Indian Movement, was denied leave to appeal against his extradition from Canada to the usa in 1976. The Supreme Court of Canada gave no reasons for its lune decision not to hear the appeal. Leonard Peltier's lawyers had asked the court to rule the extradition invalid and to order his return for a new hearing. Following a gunfight in 1975, during which two Federal Bureau of Investigation (fbi) agents were killed, Leonard Peltier fled to Canada. He was extradited to the usa and convicted of murder in 1977. The fbi later admitted fabricating evidence in order to secure Leonard Peltier's extradition from Canada to stand trial in the usa. (This evidence was not used at the trial itself.) Amnesty International believes that the interests of justice would best be served by granting Leonard Peltier a new trial (see Amnesty /níemaíjona/ Report 1985, 1986 and 1987].
In July and August Filiberto Ojeda Ríos, a member of a Puerto Rican independence organization, was tried by a court in San Juan, Puerto Rico. He was charged with assaulting fbi agents and resisting arrest when being arrested for alleged armed robbery in August 1985 in San Juan. At the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAAJRUGUAY
trial he maintained that he had acted in self-defence in view of previous threats to his life made by fbi agents and the large number of heavily armed agents surrounding his house. On 26 August he was found not guilty and was released after 12 months' detention. Following his original arrest in August 1985, he had been held in pre-trial detention in Connecticut for 32 months on charges of armed robbery. A federal court ordered his release on bail in May 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989], but he was rearrested in August 1988 on the assault charges. The trial on charges of armed robbery remained pending. Amnesty International sent a delegate to observe the trial in San Juan: his findings sustained the organization's concerns about the length of pre-trial detention and the delay in bringing charges relating to the 1985 arrest.
In December the Louisiana Pardons Board recommended to the state governor that Gary Tyler, convicted of murder in 1975, should have his sentence reduced from life to 60 years' imprisonment. Gary lyier, who is black, had been sentenced to death as a 16-year-old student for the murder of a white youth during a racial incident in Louisiana in October 1974. His sentence was subsequently commuted to life imprisonment. A court of appeal found in 1980 that Gary Tyler's trial had been "fundamentally unfair", but upheld the conviction on technical grounds. Amnesty International's investigations since the trial led it to conclude that there were grounds to doubt the validity of the conviction (see Amnesty International Report 2980). In letters to the Louisiana Pardons Board and to the governor supporting Gary Tyler's petition, it expressed its belief that a miscarriage of justice had occurred and that racial prejudice had played a major part in the case. The governor's decision had not been announced by the end of the year.
In September a Federal Court of Appeal ruled that two women convicted of politically motivated criminal offences had not been placed in a maximum security unit because of their political beliefs. This reversed a lower court's ruling in 1988 that their transfer to a High Security Unit (hsu) in Lexington Federal Prison, Kentucky, had been unconstitutional. The conditions under which the women were held in the hsu, which closed in 1988, had at times "skirted elemental standards of human
decency", according to the Federal District Court (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989). In December Amnesty International wrote to the Federal Bureau of Prisons to reiterate its concern at the Bureau's rationale for placement in, and removal from, a maximum security unit such as the hsu. It urged that the conditions under which the women had been held in the hsu should not be replicated in other maximum security institutions.
