ALGERIA
Fifteen politicai prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained in prison pending a retrial after the original verdict was quashed. They had been sentenced in 1987 after an unfair triai. Hundreds of demonstrators were arrested during the year and scores were allegedly ill-treated. Most were released within a few days. At least two people were executed.
The government of President Chadli Benjedid introduced a number of reforms after widespread civil unrest which occurred in October 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In January a national referendum approved a new constitution which guarantees fundamental human rights, including the rights to freedom of conscience, opinion, expression, association and assembly. The Constitution also reinforces safeguards relating to garde à vue detention, during which detainees are held incommunicado in police custody, and prohibits all forms of physical and mental ill-treatment. In April the Assemblée populaire nationale, National Assembly, abolished the Cour de sûreté de l'Etat, State Security Court. This court had previously tried political prisoners under procedures that did not satisfy international standards for fair trial. Legislation introduced in July by the ruling Front de libération national (FLN), National Liberation Front, permits the creation of new political parties, at least 12 of which were officially recognized by the end of 1989.
In September Algeria either ratified or acceded to major human rights treaties: the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol; the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; and the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Fifteen Islamic activists, who were among 188 people convicted in July 1987 after an unfair trial before the State Security Court, had their convictions and sentences quashed early in the year on technical grounds. However, all remained in prison awaiting retrial at the end of the year. The charges against them included plotting to overthrow the government, miur-der, sabotage, armed robbery and membership of armed gangs (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. Twelve of them had been serving sentences of up to life imprisonment. The three others — Mansouri Milyani, Abdelkader Chbouti and Mohamed A'mamrah — had received death sentences. The case of the 15 was referred in October to the Coiut of Assizes in Blida. However, it was ruled that this court was not competent to hear the case, which was then returned to the State Prosecutor.
Some of the 188 had been arrested in 1985 in connection with violent incidents and clashes with security forces resulting in deaths. Others may have been prisoners of conscience, arrested for their non-violent political activity. Most of the 188 defendants alleged that police or military security agents had tortured them. Fourteen of those convicted at the July 1987 trial were freed by presidential decree in July and 51 others in November. The remaining prisoners had completed their sentences before the year began and had been released, leaving only the 15 political prisoners in custody pending retrial.
Two alleged members of the Mouvement pour la démocratie en Algérie (mda), the Movement for Democracy in Algeria, were released after completing their prison sentences. They were among 22 people convicted in June 1987 on charges including distributing subversive leaflets and violating currency regulations after an unfair trial before the State Security Court (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The 20 others convicted in this trial had been released previously.
Hundreds of people were detained in 1989 in connection with strikes and demonstrations, mostly about alleged imfair distribution of housing. Some detainees were reportedly assaulted in police custody; all were apparently released within 48 hours of their arrest,
The government took no known steps to initiate investigations into the widespread
ALGERIA/ANGOLA
torture following detentions in October 1988, or to bring those responsible to justice. However, press reports suggested that some police and army personnel had been disciplined. In late November 1988 the President had publicly acknowledged the use of torture and stated that those responsible would be punished.
In December two men were reportedly executed after having exhausted all legal appeals. Criminal courts had sentenced them to death in March 1986. One was convicted of murder, the other of murder and gross indecency with violence.
In May Amnesty International wrote to President Chadli Benjedid welcoming Algeria's ratification of international human rights treaties and its adoption of new constitutional guarantees of fundamental human rights. The organization expressed concern, however, at the continued imprisonment of a number of political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials before the State Secimty Court. Amnesty International recommended that they be retried in accordance with international standards, or released.
