POLAND
One prisoner of conscience was sentenced to a suspended term of imprisonment for evading military service. In the first half of 1989 many people were detained for short periods for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. There were continued reports of ill-treatment of people in police custody. Three people under sentence of death had their sentences commuted to 25 years' imprisonment.
A framework for political reform, including legislative changes, was put together during the Round Table talks between the government and opposition
POLAND/PORTUGAL
groups in February, March and April. As a result of decisions made during the negotiations, partially free elections were held in June. The formerly banned trade union Solidarnosc, Solidarity, won 99 per cent of the seats in the newly formed Senate and all 35 per cent of the seats allocated to it in the Sejm, the Polish Parliament, under the terms of the Round Table Accord. In September a new govemment was formed under Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a member of Solidarity. The Penal Code and Petty Offences Code were under review throughout the year. In July Poland ratified the Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Prisoner of conscience Jan Tomasiewicz, detained in December 1988 for conscientious objection to military service, was released on 25 January after a military court in Warsaw imposed a two-year suspended prison sentence for evading military service. He was ordered to do altemative service (see Amnesty International Report 1989].
Reports continued of ill-treatment of people in police custody - often involving those detained for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. Grzegorz Hajdarowicz was reportedly beaten severely in a police station in Kielce on 1 May after collecting signatures in support of the parliamentary election of candidates representing Konfederacja Polski Niepodleglej, the Confederation of Polish Independence. In a further incident on 1 May, Krzysztof Szpak was reportedly beaten at a police station in Szczecin after participating in a Solidarity demonstration. Zygmunt Miszczak was one of 11 people reportedly beaten by plainclothes police officers on 4 luly after being arrested at a peaceful picket outside the parliament building in Warsaw,
On 29 May the Sejm passed legislation abolishing Article 282a of the Penal Code and amending Article 52a of the Petty Offences Code. The articles had been introduced in 1982 and 1986 respectively (see Amnesty International Report 1983, 1984 and 1987] and many prisoners of conscience had been imprisoned under their provisions. Article 282a carried a sentence of up to three years' imprisonment for inciting public unrest or organizing a protest meeting. Article 52a of the Petty Offences Code carried a sentence of a
heavy fine or three months' imprisonment for actions designed to foster public disquiet, unauthorized publishing activity or membership of unauthorized organizations. In future Article 52a will apply only to those who publicly advocate a crime or forcible resistance to obeying a law or lawful order of a state organ.
In August the Sejm set up a special commission to investigate past alleged murders of opposition activists by the authorities. In September the newly formed Senate established the Biuro Interwencji Komisji Praw Czlowieka i Praworzadnosci, the Intervention Office of the Commission on Human Rights and Rule of Law, headed by former prisoner of conscience Zbigniew Romaszewski. Among other activities, the office initiated an investigation into reports of ill-treatment, including torture, in Raciborz prison.
Three people under sentence of death had their sentences commuted to 25 years' imprisonment under the terms of an amnesty in November, which also freed around 17,000 minor offenders.
At the beginning of the year Amnesty International called for the release of Ian Tomasiewicz. An Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Poland in January for discussions about its concerns with officials from the Ministries of Justice and the Interior, and others.
