BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
Seven prisoners of conscience, four of whom have been held continuously for 27 years and one for more than 13 years, remained in detention without charge or trial. Criminal offenders continued to be sentenced to mandatory whippings, which constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment.
Five prisoners of conscience were held at the Jemdong Place of Detention outside the capital, Bandar Seri Bagawan, under Emergency Orders which provide for indefinite detention without charge or trial. Such orders, which can be imposed for an unlimited number of two-year periods, have effect while Brunei remains under a state of emergency. This has been continuously in force since its imposition in 1962 following an abortive rebellion by the Partai Rakyat Rrunei (prb), Brunei People's Party. Sarponin bin Sarpo, Suhaili bin Badas, Tmggal bin Muhammad and Baha bin Mohammed were arrested in December 1962 on account of their links with the prb but have never been charged or brought to trial. Amnesty International considered that they had been kept in detention and denied judicial review of their cases as a deterrent to other political activists. Sheikh Nikman bin Sheikh Mahmud, the brother of the prb President in exile, has also been detained without charge or trial under an Emergency Order since 1975. He was arrested soon after the revolt although he was not a member of the prb. He was later released but redetained in 1975 apparently on account of his family links with the prb.
Abdul Latif Hamid and Abdul Latif
BRUNEI DARUSSALAM/BULGARIA
Chuchu, respectively the President and Secretary-General of the Brunei National Democratic Party (bndp), also remained in detention without charge or trial following their arrest in January 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). They were held imder the Internal Security Enactment of 1982, which permits the Minister of Home Affairs to authorize the indefinite detention without charge or trial of anyone "acting in a manner prejudicial to the security of the state". The two bndp leaders had advocated parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy prior to their arrest.
In May some Hong Kong judges said they might decline to sit in the Brunei High Court as a matter of conscience following a September 1988 amendment to the Brunei Penal Code, which made whipping mandatory for 42 criminal offences (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Hong Kong provides judges for Brunei's High Court and Appeal Court under a 1964 Treaty of Friendship between the United Kingdom and Brunei. However, the Brunei High Court continued to impose whipping in addition to a jail sentence for specified criminal offences. In June, for example, a man was sentenced to 12 lashes and 14 years' imprisonment for a drugs-related offence.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about the prolonged imprisonment without trial of prisoners of conscience in Brunei Darussalam for United Nations review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. It wrote to the government requesting its comments on the submission but received no response.
