TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
At least 24 people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder. This brought the total number of prisoners on death row to 94. There have been no executions for 10 years. Two prisoners under sentence of death were released during the year. A Commission of Inquiry into the effectiveness and status of the death penalty was established in March.
In February the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Qcpc) in London, which acts as the final court of appeal for Trinidad and Tobago, quashed the murder conviction of Shabir Ali. He was released in March. The JCPC considered that inadmissible hearsay evidence presented at his trial may have influenced the jury and that therefore a miscarriage of justice may possibly have occurred. This was the first time since 1981 that the JCPC had allowed an appeal from a prisoner under sentence of death in TYinidad and Tobago.
James Scott, the longest serving death row prisoner, was granted a presidential pardon in August on the country's independence anniversary and was released from prison. He had been convicted of murder in 1974 and had exhausted all legal appeals.
The Commission of Inquiry approved by the Senate in April 1988 to examine the death penalty (see Amnesty International Report 1989] was appointed in March. Its task was to consider whether the penalty,
mandatory for murder and treason, should be retained. The three-member Commission invited the public to submit memoranda on the issue.
In April Amnesty International wrote to the government welcoming the appointment of the Commission and expressing the hope that this would lead to the abolition of the death penalty. In June the organization submitted to the Commission a detailed statement of the reasons why the death penalty should be abolished.
The government did not reply to a letter sent to it by Amnesty International in 1988 about a pending sentence of flogging (see Amnesty International Report 1989], and it was not known whether the sentence had been carried out.
