COLOMBIA/COMOROS
Two witnesses to the killings were themselves killed in March, apparently in reprisal for their cooperation with judicial authorities.
Some attacks on judicial officials were attributed to alleged drug-traffickers. Evidence emerged in other cases that judicial officials were threatened and killed because of their investigations into himian rights violations. The judiciary's National Director of Criminal Investigation stated in February that investigations conducted by the judiciary increasingly uncovered army and police "complacency, toleration and sponsorship" of paramilitary groups. The director cited several cases in which armed forces personnel issued direct threats against judicial officials.
In July Dr Maria Elena Diaz Pérez, a judge, was shot dead by unidentified men in Medellin. Dr Diaz had replaced another civilian judge investigating the March 1988 massacre of 21 banana plantation workers (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989) and had confirmed warrants for the arrest of three arrr^ officers and two alleged drug-traffickers in connection with the killings. Several other judges, including the judge investigating the killings in Segovia, reported receiving warnings to halt their investigations or face the same fate as Dr Diaz.
In August and September the authorities arrested thousands of people under state of siege laws adopted to combat drug-trafficking. In Medellin the armed forces used their increased powers of arrest and incommunicado detention to suppress legal opposition movements and grassroots organizations. Military police in Medellin arrested Pablo Angarita Cañas, Luz Aurelia Puya Vasco, William Balbín Alvarez and Rodrigo Osomo Ospina in September. All were members of the legal educational organization Instituto Popular de Capacitación (ipc), Popular Training Institute. They were held incommunicado for four days in Military Police Battalion No. 4, where army personnel from the IV Brigade allegedly tortured them. In October a civilian court judge acquitted the ipc members of drug-trafficking offences and ordered their unconditional release.
On numerous occasions Amnesty International urged the government to implement independent and eff^ective investigations into himian rights violations and to ensure that those responsible were
brought to justice. In October the organization published a report: Colombia, Human Rights Developments: "Death Squads" on the Defensive? It described the continuing pattern of gross and systematic human rights violations in Colombia and urged the authorities to take effective measures to halt the abuses. No response had been received from the Colombian Government by the end of the year,
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights and the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in March and August respectively, Amnesty International included references to its concerns in Colombia. In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Colombia for un review imder a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of corrununi-cations about human rights violations.
More than 70 people imprisoned for political reasons, including prisoners of conscience, were released in December after the Head of State was assassinated and a group of foreign mercenaries who had exercised considerable power left the country. Those freed included about 40 people who had been arrested in November for campaigning against changes to the Constitution, and others imprisoned since 1985 and 1987. However, up to 25 other people, who were reportedly arrested for political reasons in November 1987, were unaccounted for at the end of 1989.
In November a national referendum
COMOROS/CONGO
approved a proposal that President Ahmed Abdallah should remain in office for a third six-year term although the Constitution provides for the president to retire after serving two terms. Opposition parties disputed the outcome of the referendum and claimed that it had been rigged by the government. On 26 November President Abdallah was assassinated, apparently by one of the foreign mercenaries serving as officers in the Presidential Guard. Said Mohamed Djohar, the President of the Supreme Coint, was named as acting President Abdallah's successor under the terms of the Constitution. After the intervention of foreign governments, the mercenaries left the country in December.
Following the mercenaries' departure, the new authorities released about 40 people who had been arrested at the time of the referendum in November. The government had accused some of them of carrying out arson attacks on polling stations, but most appeared to have been detained for their non-violent criticism of the government. Those freed included Abdou Dakar Boina, a former ambassador to the United Nations.
The new authorities also released more than 30 people imprisoned since 1985 or 1987. They included Moustoifa Said Cheikh, a leader of the opposition Front démocratique des Comores (FDC), Democratic Front of the Comoros, who was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1985 in connection with an alleged conspiracy against the government (see Amnesty International Report 1986]. He had been held in solitary confinement in a dimly lit cell at M'dé barracks before his release and was reported to have become seriously ill as a result of the harsh conditions of imprisonment. He was a prisoner of conscience. Sixteen former members of the Presidential Guard, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment in connection with the same alleged conspiracy, were also released.
Fourteen of those released had been held incommunicado without charge or trial since November 1987, when they and up to 25 others were arrested and accused of offences against state security and trespassing in a prohibited zone with criminal intent. At the time very little was known about these detainees and the authorities did not disclose how many were arrested or their identities. Reports suggested that
three of them had died soon after arrest as a result of torture. By early 1989 only 14 of these detainees were reported to be still held incommunicado, without charge or trial, at Itsundzu Prison in a remote area of Grand Comore island. They included Moissi Moussa, a driver. Said Salim Chaufi, a civil servant, and Ali Boina, a former member of the Presidential Guard. It was not clear at the end of the year what had become of the others said to have been arrested in November 1987.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Abdou Bakar Boina and others detained in November for their peaceful opposition to the government, and called for the release of Moustoifa Said Cheikh, who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience after the organization concluded that he had not been involved in a coup attempt or other acts of violence. Amnesty International also made inquiries about the detainees arrested in November 1987 and called for them to be released if they were not to be charged or tried.
