VENEZUELA
Events surrounding protests and looting in February resulted in arbitrary killings reportedly committed by the security forces as well as the arrest and alleged torture of a group of political, student and community activists. Several other cases of torture or ill-treatment were reported during the year. Most prisoner held for several years for politically motivated offences were released. Investigations into alleged human rights abuses, which generally made little or no progress in the courts, had numerous shortcomings. In a few cases, however, charges were brought against police officers.
Carlos Andrés Pérez of the party Acción Democrática, Democratic Action, took office as President in February. He introduced a series of severe economic mea-
sures almost immediately, sparking off widespread protests, riots and looting on 27 February. The following day the army was deployed to restore order and a curfew was imposed. A wide range of constitutional guarantees, including the right to personal liberty, were suspended, and most were not restored until 22 March.
Official statements reported 276 deaths mostly between 27 February and 8 March, but the real number may have been much higher. Although many died in the context of looting and other violence, or in circumstances difficult to clarify, a number of deaths apparently resulted from the unnecessary use of lethal force by the police and military. Some people were killed in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial execution.
Crisanto Mederos. a poet and political activist, was reportedly shot and killed by soldiers who searched his home during the night of 3 March. In Petare, a Caracas working class neighbourhood, soldiers fired on unarmed civilians, including children, on 1 March. At least five people were killed.
As in previous instances of social dis-tiu-bance, the security forces rounded up student, community and political activists. Thirteen men and women were arrested at the beginning of March and accused of "incitement to rebellion" and "military rebellion". Ten of the 13 said they were tortured during incommunicado detention at the headquarters of the Dirección de Inteligencia Militar (dim), Military Intelligence Directorate. The Venezuelan Constitution prohibits incommunicado detention, even when constitutional guarantees have been suspended.
Beatings, electric shocks, near-asphyxiation with plastic bags placed over the head, and mock executions were among the methods of torture reported by the 10 people held in dim custody. Some said that a man who appeared to be a doctor monitored their physical condition diuing torture and gave medical treatment. The head of the dim denied that tortiue had taken place. However, a member of a presidential commission appointed to investigate the situation of these detainees and which visited them a week after their arrest told the press he believed their allegations. All of the 13 were acquitted by presidential decree, supporting allegations that they had been arbitrarily detained, and released by 22 March.
venezuela
Some of approximately 80 students held for up to a week by the Dirección de ¡os Senicios de Inteligencia y Prevención (disip), Directorate of Intelligence and Prevention Services, also said they were beaten or threatened. Security forces also raided the premises of a group of Jesuit priests working in a poor neighbourhood. They accused the priests of "subversion" and detained them for several hoin-s. Several other activists, including a former political detainee, had their homes raided but were not arrested.
In the wake of the February protests, the Catholic Archbishop of Caracas announced the formation of a special vicariate, the first of its kind in Venezuela, to work for human rights protection. A second human rights vicariate was established in the diocese of Cumaná.
In January outgoing President Jaime Lusinchi ordered the release of nine of the remaining 10 political detainees. They had been accused of politically motivated offences and imprisoned for several years without conviction. Four of them had been held since 1980 or earlier (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Long delays and other irregularities in their trials had been reported. Amnesty International was seeking clarification of the legal status of the one political detainee who remained in custody. Poet and former prisoner of conscience Carlos Baez, released in 1988 after 10 years' imprisonment, was detained for short periods at least three times in early 1989. Although some reports indicated that he had been arrested because his name had not yet been removed from a computerized government list of "wanted" prisoners, he may have been harassed deliberately.
Attorney General Ramón Escovar Salom stated shortly after his appointment to the post in June that he was committed to defending human rights, which he acknowledged "are frequently violated" in Venezuela. The Attorney General's Office had often been criticized for failing to protect human rights and to ensure that those responsible for abuses were brought to justice.
In an important development in November, a judge and a state attorney visited six detainees accused of taking part in a bank robbery and who were held incommunicado by the Policía Técnica Judicial (ptj), criminal investigations police. The detainees were in poor physical condition
and given immediate medical examinations. Investigations into allegations that they had been tortured were also initiated. The judicial officials reportedly found instruments in the police station which had been used for torture, including batons and electrical cables. Four of the detainees were released a few days after their arrest and the remaining two were transferred to prison pending possible charges. The ptj said that five of its agents had been suspended in connection with the case. Several other detainees suspected of common crimes were also reportedly tortured or ill-treated.
Numerous shortcomings, in particular long delays, were reported in investigations into complaints of arbitrary killings during previous years by police and military personnel. In January a military court closed the case of 16-year-old cadet José Palomares, despite strong evidence suggesting that he died in September 1987 as a result of severe beatings. Officials told the youth's relatives that the case was still under investigation and the family learned only several months later via a third party that the case had been closed (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Some progress was made in a few investigations. A Metropolitan Police officer was arrested in connection with José Méndez Astudillo's death in custody. In August a judge sentenced four Metropolitan Police officers to 12 years' imprisonment for the murder of Elias Avila Bogado (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
In April a military court of appeal revoked charges of homicide and ordered the release of 19 members of a military and police patrol allegedly responsible for killing 14 fishermen in El Amparo in October 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The court based its decision on a technical irregularity, and doubts that the military courts offer sufficient guarantees of impartiality continued. The Supreme Court finally ruled in December that the military court of appeal should reverse its decision. However, by the end of the year the 19 men had not been rearrested. (In August the Supreme Court had rejected a request by lawyers representing two survivors of the attack for avocamiento, a procedure by which the Supreme Court takes jurisdiction of a case, The lawyers had hoped to prevent protracted delays through this procedure.)
VENEZUELA/VIET NAM
Most complaints of abuses committed during the February protests were before military coiMs and little or no progress was reported. However, civilian judges charged two police officers with the murder of two students, one killed in Caracas and the other in Maracay, and two other police agents with causing serious injuries to two people wrongly accused of violating the curfew. In November a civilian judge charged another police officer with firing buckshot in the face of a young man and blinding him dming the period of suspended constitutional guarantees, Also in November a civilian judge rejected a request to exhume bodies buried in a common grave, among them those of several people believed to have been unlawfully killed by the security forces. The judge ruled on grounds of jurisdiction that the request should be handed over to the military coiurts. A state attorney contested the ruling and the Supreme Court had not ruled on the case by the end of the year.
Amnesty International informed President Carlos Andrés Pérez in March and April of its concerns about alleged abuses committed during the February protests. The President denied the allegations in his response, but offered the organization full facilities to do research into reported abuses. In May an Amnesty International delegation visited Caracas to interview relatives of people who died during the period of suspended constitutional guarantees. A medical doctor among the delegates examined individuals who said they had been tortured or ill-treated. The delegates also met the President, members of the Commission for Internal Political Affairs of the Chamber of Deputies, state attorneys and members of the judiciary.
An Amnesty International delegation met Dr Ramón Escovar Salom in luly, before he assumed the post of Attorney General, to discuss the organization's concerns regarding the role of the Attorney General's Office in protecting human rights and in investigating human rights abuses.
In August Amnesty International published Venezuela: Arbitrary Killings by Police and Military Personnel, which described a pattern of killings and detailed 16 between 1983 and 1989. The authorities had failed to clarify the circumstances of most of these 16 killings. The report also reiterated Amnesty International's recommendations for better training of police.
strict disciplinary measures to show that such killings will not be tolerated, and legal steps to ensure that cases are properly investigated.
