MALAWI
Dozens of people from the Northern Region, including at least 16 prisoners of conscience, were arrested between February and May after the Head of State publicly accused northerners of undermining the state. Most were still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. At least 12 other prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years were also still held: two were sentenced after a grossly unfair trial and others were detained without charge or trial. In addi-
tion, there were said to be hundreds of other political prisoners whose identities were not known. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and one political detainee was alleged to have died as a result of torture. An exiled government opponent and nine of his relatives were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed.
In February Life-President Dr Hastings Kamuzu Banda publicly alleged that people from the Northern Region were seeking to undermine the economy and secede from the country. He said that northerners who were civil servants had acted irresponsibly and that those who were teachers deliberately taught badly when posted to the Central and Southern Regions. Dr George Mtafu, Malawi's only neurosurgeon, challenged the Life-President's claims and was arrested in February when he refused to apologize. No charges were brought against him and the authorities did not give reasons for his arrest or clarify the legal basis for his detention. However, he was believed to be held under the Public Security Regulations of 1965, which permit indefinite detention without charge or trial. He was held in Blantyre Central Prison at first but by the end of the year had been transferred to Mikuyu Prison near Zomba,
Thoza Khonje, a northerner working for the Sugar Company of Malawi, was also arrested in February. He had apparently been overheard criticizing an order by Life-President Banda that teachers should be transferred to their areas of origin. He and two others arrested with him were still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year and were considered to be prisoners of conscience.
Other northerners were arrested during
MALAWI
the first half of 1989 and also remained in detention without charge at the end of the year. They included civil servants and employees of state-owned companies, a teacher and a student. They were all held incommunicado in Mikuyu Prison and had no effective means to challenge the reasons or legal basis for their imprisonment.
At least 10 prisoners of conscience remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1989. They included L.E. Chalodewa, held since 1977 apparently because of his friendship with a relative of Life-President Banda who was regarded as an opponent of the government. Kalusa Chimombo had been held since March 1978, apparently because of a speech in which he referred to Life-President Banda by name but not by official title, which was interpreted as indicating opposition to the Head of State.
Other prisoners of conscience in detention without charge or trial throughout 1989 included Jack Mapanje, an internationally renowned poet, held since September 1987; Goodluck Mhango, a veterinary surgeon detained in September 1987 after his brother, Mkwapatira Mhango (see below), published an article critical of the government in a foreign magazine; and John Malesa, held since December 1987 as a suspected supporter of Orton Chirwa, the imprisoned former cabinet minister and founder of the opposition Malawi Freedom Movement (MAFREMO).
Orton and Vera Chirwa, two prisoners of conscience serving life sentences imposed after a grossly imfair trial in 1983 (see Amnesty International Reports 1983 to 1989], were held at Zomba Central Prison, where the conditions were reported to be harsh.
Some prisoners of conscience were reported to be in poor health as a result of harsh prison conditions and deliberate medical neglect. Blaise Machira, a university lecturer detained without charge or trial since April 1988, was said to have been held in chains in Mikuyu Prison and to be suffering from schizophrenia. Margaret Banda, a leading member of a women's organization who had been detained without charge or trial since mid-1988, was reportedly denied medical treatment for hypertension and diabetes.
New information was received in 1989 about the torture of both political and criminal detainees. Prisoners were reported to
have been beaten with hosepipes, wooden sticks and fists. At least one prisoner, Fred Sikwese, an employee of the Ministry of External Affairs, died reportedly as a result of torture in Lilongwe Prison. He had been arrested in February on suspicion of passing confidential government information to foreigners. There was no inquest or official investigation into his death and the government did not clarify the circumstances. Fred Sikwese was buried in the prison grounds after the authorities reportedly refused to release his body for burial by his relatives.
An exiled government opponent and nine of his relatives were killed in October, apparently the victims of extrajudicial executions. Mkwapatira Mhango and his relatives died when his home in Lusaka, Zambia, was attacked with a fire-bomb. Subsequently, the Zambian authorities detained four men who they alleged were security and intelligence agents employed by the Malawian Government to assassinate government opponents both inside Malawi and abroad. One of the four subsequently died in custody (see Zambia).
Amnesty International continued throughout 1989 to appeal for the release of Orton and Vera Chirwa, Jack Mapanje and all other prisoners of conscience. It also called for the prompt, fair trial, or release, of other political detainees. In November Amnesty International publicized its concerns in a report, Malawi: Human Rights Violations 25 Years After Independence, which also criticized harsh prison conditions and called for impartial investigations into allegations of torture and into the death in custody of Fred Sikwese. The government responded to the report by denying that torture had occxirred but made no other comment. Amnesty International also expressed concern about the alleged extrajudicial executions of Mkwapatira Mhango and nine others. It called for an impartial inquiry to establish the extent of official accountability for these and other possible killings, and for those involved in such human rights violations to be brought to justice.
