EGYPT
More than 8,000 political prisoners, including many prisoners of conscience, were detained for periods of one to three months without charge or trial, some repeatedly. At least 14 prisoners of conscience were imprisoned following the enforcement of a 1986 emergency court verdict. Five people were apparently imprisoned because of their religious beliefs. Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees, particularly supporters of Islamic groups opposing the government, were widely reported. At least five people, including for the first time a convicted drug-trafficker, were executed. At least 56 other people, including 40 convicted drug-traffickers, were sentenced to death.
A state of emergency, declared in 1981, remained in force. Under Article 3 of the Emergency Law, the Minister of the Interior has the power to "arrest and detain suspected persons or those who endanger public order or security". After 30 days in custody, detainees may petition the (Emergency] Supreme State Security Court, which can order their release, However, the Minister of the Interior can contest the Court's decision to release a detainee and the case then passes to a second court for a binding decision. The process permits administrative detention of up to 90 days without approval by any judicial authority. In security-related criminal cases, detainees may be held for up to 60 days before their first court appearance. The Minister of the Interior may prolong
detention even if the court orders release.
The authorities used their wide-ranging powers under state of emergency legislation to quell opposition from left-wing groups, trade unionists and, especially. Islamic groups. There were a number of clashes between the seciuity forces and Islamic opponents of the government of President Husni Mubarak. Some government opponents were involved in political violence, including the unsuccessful attempt in December to assassinate the Minister of the Interior.
At least 8,000 supporters or alleged supporters of the Islamic opposition were reportedly detained during the year. Several hundred trade unionists and other critics and opponents of the government were also detained. A great majority of detainees were apparently held under state of emergency provisions and released without charge or trial after periods of imprisonment ranging from a few days to three months. A few people were repeatedly imprisoned under consecutive detention orders. Consequently, they spent long periods in detention with only short intervals, or even no interval at all, between detention orders. Many detainees appeared to be victims of arbitrary arrest and some were prisoners of conscience.
Mass arrests occurred, particularly at times of political tension. For example, at the beginning of the year more than 300 suspected supporters of Islamic groups were in detention following violent clashes with the security forces in December 1988 in the Ain Shams district of Cairo (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
In April the newspaper Al Ahram reported that the Minister of the Interior had said that 1,500 "religious extremists" had been arrested in the previous two weeks. Nearly all were released within two to three months. These arrests followed protests against the imprisonment of Sheikh Omar Abdul Rahman, a leading figure in the Islamic opposition. He had been detained in April, at the beginning of the fasting month of Ramadan, after a clash between the secxuity forces and supporters of Islamic groups in Fayoum, He was released, pending trial, in August.
During the weeks leading up to parliamentary elections in June, hundreds of opposition political activists were detained without charge for periods ranging from several days to several weeks.
EGYPT
In early August armed police broke up a steelworkers' sit-in protest at the Helwan Iron and Steelworks southwest of Cairo. More than 600 workers were detained. In late August about 60 people who had been active on behalf of the jailed steelworkers were arrested and accused of forming an illegal commimist organization. Among those arrested were lawyers, human rights activists, journalists and others, including two leading members of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights. The detainees were released without charge during September.
About 500 people were detained without charge in December after clashes took place between the security forces and student supporters of Islamic groups at Asyut University. The students had reportedly been involved in violent protests against a university outing planned to include both male and female students. Many were still held at the end of the year.
Only a small proportion of those detained during the year were charged with an offence. Thirteen defendants were brought to trial in September on charges connected with the Ain Shams disturbances in December 1988. The trial had not concluded by the end of the year. Fifty-five defendants, including Sheikh Omar Abdul Rahman, were charged in cormection with the Fayoum disturbances. Their trial also had not concluded by the end of 1989. None of the 600 steelworkers arrested in August was brought to trial. Three of them remained in administrative detention at the end of the year, despite repeated court decisions that they should be released. Eight textile workers arrested in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989) were released without charge in early 1989, after more than three months in detention.
A number of people who had converted to Christianity from Islam were detained without charge or trial under emergency legislation. Dr Ibrahim As-Saj^eh was detained between July and November, apparently because of his religious activities. At least four other Christians reportedly suffered months of detention because of their religious beliefs.
At least 14 prisoners of conscience were imprisoned after the government decided in September to enforce their sentences. An (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court had passed the sentences in 1986, Seven others were evading arrest at the end of the
year and another had died in the intervening period. Proceedings against the 22 began in 1981. They were prosecuted for membership of the banned Egyptian Communist Party and acquitted of this charge, although they were convicted of producing and possessing publications said to undermine basic constitutional and political principles (see Amnesty International Report 1987). They had no right to appeal against their sentences, which ranged between one and three years' imprisonment.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees held under emergency provisions were reportedly widespread. People caught in waves of mass arrests were routinely beaten. Many others were systematically tortured in efforts to extract confessions of illegal activity or to obtain information. Defendants in the Egypt Revolution Organization trial (see Amnesty International Report 1988], which continued throughout the year, were held in solitary confinement between court appearances.
Police reportedly beat Sheikh Omar Abdul Rahman, who is blind and diabetic, and dragged him along the ground soon after they detained him in Fayoum. The authorities allegedly prevented him from receiving necessary medication during his detention.
Some steelworkers arrested in August were reportedly tortured. Muhammad Mustafa and Mustafa Nayed were said to have been beaten and tortured with electric shocks in order to force them to state that an illegal communist organization had orchestrated the steelworkers' protest. Sixty people apparently detained for protesting against the treatment of the steelworkers were themselves detained and beaten in August, before being released without charge.
While investigating the activities of suspected opposition groups. State Security Intelligence Police reportedly subjected dozens of detainees to systematic torture. Many of the victims were subsequently released without charge in the absence of evidence against them to warrant charges. For example, Dr Muhammad Abdul Latif, a physician, was held for six weeks beginning in late June, apparently because the authorities suspected him of belonging to an illegal Muslim Brotherhood cell. He claimed after he was released without charge that he had been beaten with sticks
EGYPT/EL SALVADOR
and that electric shocks had been applied to his nipples and genitals.
Dr Fahmy Shinnawi, a 67-year-old urologist, was reportedly forced to stand continuously for 14 hours, beaten and tortured with electric shocks, because he was suspected of belonging to an illegal Shi'a organization. Forty people were arrested in August and held in connection with the investigation into this alleged organization. All were subsequently released and dozens submitted official complaints of torture and ill-treatment to the procuracy for investigation. Reports from official forensic medical doctors substantiated complaints in this and dozens of other cases. Little progress was apparent in investigations of these complaints or of torture alleged in previous years.
Anwar Hossein Kassar Hossein, a Pakistani national, was hanged in July for drug-trafficking. At least four other people, all convicted of murder, were also executed. At least 56 people were sentenced to death, six in absentia. Forty of these death sentences were imposed for drug-traffick-ing, including 19 death sentences handed down in June in a single court case. The other 16 death sentences were imposed for murder.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the government to bring its detention laws into line with internationally recognized human rights standards. The organization also appealed to the authorities to discontinue practices facilitating arbitrary detention and torture and called for the release of all prisoners of conscience,
Amnesty International urged the government on numerous occasions to take effective action against the widespread torture of political detainees. It called for allegations of torture to be thoroughly investigated, the findings to be made public and the perpetrators to be brought to justice. The organization called on the government to permit detainees held under emergency laws to challenge the legality of their detention before a judicial authority within a few days of detention, as required by international standards, rather than after weeks or months.
In May Amnesty International published Egypt: Arbitrary Detention and Torture Under Emergency Powers, a report detailing human rights concerns under the state of emergency and containing the
text of a memorandum submitted to the government in June 1988.
Amnesty International also expressed concern about the rapidly increasing number of death sentences. The organization appealed against the execution in July of a convicted drug-trafficker, the first execution for this offence, and urged commutation of all death sentences.
In an oral statement delivered in August to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International included reference to the torture and ill-treatment of detainees held in Egypt under emergency legislation.
