GABON
At least 20 people arrested in connection with an alleged plot against the government were still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. Two others died in detention. Another government opponent was held for a few days in February and seven others were arrested in December. At least three people were sentenced to death, two of them in their absence, but no executions were reported.
At least 20 government employees and members of the security forces, together with two French nationals, were arrested in September and October and publicly accused by the government of conspiring to assassinate President Omar Bongo and overthrow the government. They included Commander Mathias Boussougou, head of the presidential guard, and Lieutenant-Colonel Georges Moubandjo. A government spokesperson claimed in November that the conspiracy had been planned by a government opponent living in France, who had contacted members of the security forces in Libreville and sent the two French nationals to Gabon to examine ways of carrying out a coup. The spokesperson said that the basic rights of those in custody were being respected and that they would be brought to trial. However, no trial had started by the end of the year and it appeared that those arrested had not been formally charged. Furthermore, they had been denied access to visits by their relatives and legal counsel, and no information was available about their health or conditions of detention.
Two prisoners arrested in connection with the conspiracy died in custody. Both
GABOK/GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
deaths were attributed to natural causes, but there was concern that the two may have been ill-treated or denied adequate medical treatment. Richard Anton, a French national, reportedly died from malaria in October. His relatives objected to an autopsy and independent confirmation of the cause of death was not available. Doukakas Nziengui, a director of a state-owned energy and water company, reportedly died from high blood pressure. His family was not represented at the autopsy: they subsequently challenged its findings, claiming that death had not been due to natural causes.
Antoine Meyo-Mendoutoume, an Air Gabon pilot, was arrested in February and held for six days by the national security service, Centre de documentation (cedoc), Documentation Centre, apparently for being a member of the opposition Mouvement de redressement national (morena). Movement for National Recovery. He had been detained in 1987 for a similar reason, morena is an illegal organization: under the Constitution, Gabon is a one-party state ruled by the Parti démocratique gabonais (pdg), Gabonese Democratic Party. In November Louis Obame Biyoghe was detained for two days, apparently on suspicion of having links with morena. He was released uncharged but redetained in early December. At the end of December six other people suspected of distributing morena leaflets were arrested. All seven were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Two Nigerian nationals were sentenced to death in their absence in June on charges of attempted minder. In addition, Théophile Mba-Ntem, a leading member of the religious cult Alane Mvo'Ening, was sentenced to death in November by Libreville High Court. He was convicted of murdering and eating the corpse of one of the cult's members and practising sorcery. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International called on the government to allow the prisoners held in connection with the conspiracy to receive visits by their relatives and legal counsel. The organization also appealed for the death sentence imposed in November to be commuted.
