TOGO
Three suspected government opponents were held incommunicado throughout the year. Fifteen political prisoners were held in harsh conditions and one case of torture was reported.
The National Commission for Human Rights in Togo, established by the government in 1987, continued to investigate alleged miscarriages of justice and human rights abuses: few of these cases involved political prisoners.
Three government opponents were held incommunicado throughout 1989 at Akodessewa police station in Lomé. They had been tried in absentia in December 1986 and convicted of plotting to overthrow the government of President Gnassingbé Eyadéma. Lawoé Folly Sossou and Kubah Otsiguey, who received eight-year prison sentences, were abducted from Ghana by Togolese security agents in 1987 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1969). Aballo Célestin Zekpa, sentenced to death in absentia, was abducted in February 1988 from Benin. The cases of Lawoé Folly Sossou and Kubah Otsiguey were referred
to the judicial authorities in October 1988, after they had been detained in secret for over a year. They were told they could accept their sentences or seek a retrial. Neither had been retried by the end of the year. Kubah Otsiguey reportedly requested a retrial. Aballo Célestin Zekpa's case was rèferred to the judicial authorities in October but the outcome was unclear at the end of the year. It was also unclear whether the President had commuted his death sentence, as other death sentences imposed at the same trial had been commuted. All three prisoners were said to have been tortured after abduction and detention.
Fifteen other defendants at the December 1986 trial, who were present in court at the December 1986 trial and convicted of plotting the violent overthrow of the government, were still serving prison sentences in military custody at the beginning of 1989. They were subject to particularly harsh conditions at Tokoin barracks in Lomé, where they remained handcuffed and were denied all visits. One of them, known as "Ali Baba", died in July, apparently as a result of illness. In September the prisoners were transferred to a civil prison in Lama-Kara, in northern Togo, and told they could receive visits. In October the President informed Amnesty International that he had ordered removal of their handcuffs.
Kwasikuma Kluga, a farmer from Akata Agame village in the Kpalime region, was reportedly tortured. Members of the Gendarmerie, the police force in nu-al areas, detained him for four days in mid-June in connection with inquiries about a missing farmer. He was allegedly subjected to severe beatings and other abuses while in custody, then released without charge. The National Commission for Human Rights' investigation into his reported torture had not been concluded by the end of the year.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Togo in October and met President Eyadéma, government ministers and other officials. The delegates were permitted access to the remaining 14 prisoners sentenced in December 1986 and the three held at Akodessewa police station. The President assured the delegation that the prisoners' conditions would be improved. He also told the delegates of his personal opposition to the death penalty and said the government would consider
TOGOARINIDAD AND TOBAGO/TUNISIA
steps to abolish it.
Amnesty International drew several cases to the attention of the National Commission for Human Rights, including the reported torture of Kwasikuma Kluga, and received replies to most of its inquiries.
