SENEGAL
A journalist arrested in October appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. Five sup-porters of independence for Casamance region who had been arrested in 1988 were detained without trial throughout the year. Other suspected Casamance activists were arrested, one of whom reportedly died as a result of torture.
SENEGAL
Intercommunal disturbances broke out in April, when mobs in several towns attacked people of Mauritanian origin. Most of those attacked were from Mauritania's Beïdane (Moors) and Haratine (former slaves speaking the same language as the Beïdanes) commimities, including many who were bom in Senegal or were long-term residents in the country, Several dozen people were deliberately killed. Mob violence also occurred in Mauritania, where Senegalese and black Mauritanians from southern Mauritania were attacked. Relations between Senegal and Mauritania deteriorated rapidly, leading to the repatriation of Beïdanes and Haratines to Mauritania. Thousands of Senegalese living in Mauritania were also repatriated. After abuses committed by the Mauritanian security forces received international publicity, the Maiuitanian Government claimed that thousands of Mauritanians were imprisoned unlawfully in Senegal. There was, however, no evidence that this was so.
The government continued to face opposition in Casamance region, where separatists called for greater autonomy or independence. Most reports of torture in past years were received from this region.
The authorities brought criminal charges against several joiunalists associated with a leading opposition party, the Parti démocratique sénégalais (PDS), Senegalese Democratic Party. Cheikh Koureyssi Bâ, editor of the PDS-owned newspaper Sopi, was tried and convicted in November in connection with the newspaper's claims that the PDS presidential candidate had received more votes in 1988 than President Abdou Diouf. The editor was sentenced to six months' imprisoment but remained free after filing an appeal.
Madior Sokhna N'Diaye, a journalist working for Sopi, was arrested in October on a charge of complicity in "spreading false news". He had dealt with a reader's letter which, after publication, timied out to be a forgery. The letter had apparently been designed to damage the reputation of the person whose name had been forged, although it was not clear whether Madior Sokhna N'Diaye was aware of the forgery. He was released in December to await trial.
Throughout the year the authorities banned several meetings and demonstrations planned by opposition parties. Members of And-fëf, an opposition party, were convicted in December of conducting a "banned demonstration which caused damage" and were sentenced to prison terms. Three people received one-month sentences. Ousmane Sané. a student whose arm was broken during arrest, was among these three. Awa Diop Fall, a teacher, was sentenced to 15 days' imprisonment. The arrests took place in mid-December as riot police known as the Groupement mobile d'intervention (Gmi). Mobile Intervention Unit, reportedly used tear-gas to disperse a demonstration against the banning of a meeting organized by And-Jëf.
Mamadou Sané, "N'Krumah", an advocate of Casamance independence, and four others arrested with him remained in custody. They were awaiting trial on charges of plotting against the internal and external security of the state and of forming an unlaw^l association. They had been arrested in February 1988 in Guinea-Bissau and then handed over to the Senegalese authorities. Their trial before the State Security Court, which has jiuisdiction over all alleged offences against the secxnity of the state, had not begun by the end of 1989, Mamadou Sané was imprisoned from 1982 to 1987 on charges relating to political activism in Casamance (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
In April Jean-Pascal Badji, a religious songwriter for a group of singers in Balandine, in Casamance's Bignona district, was arrested by the army near the Guinea-Bissau border. He was apparently suspected of being a member of the Casamance independence movement. He died soon after his arrest, allegedly as a result of torture during detention. Although there appeared to be no judicial investigation at the end of year into the circumstances of his death, the Minister of Justice
senegal/sierra leone
told Amnesty International that an inquiry would be initiated into its causes.
Two leading pds members, Cheikh Touré and Papa Samba M'Boup, and fom former police officers were arrested in December 1988 in connection with a car bombing in Dakar. They were all released in lanuary to await trial [liberté provisoire) following the arrest at the end of December 1988 of three other suspects, These three were charged in January: Amadou Clédor Sène was charged with threatening the internal security of the state and destroying vehicles, the other two with complicity. They remained in custody and had not been tried by the end of the year.
Ansoumane Bodian, a teacher and former political prisoner from Casamance who was released in 1985 after serving three years' imprisonment, was arrested in Bouloulou in June. The authorities held him at the Gendarmerie station in Ziguinchor before releasing him without charge in luly.
In May Amnesty International sent the government a memorandum detailing evidence of torture in Casamance between 1983 and 1987. It included testimonies from former prisoners, observations by people who had examined prisoners and an extract from an official document from the prison service complaining about ill-treatment of prisoners in police custody. All of the victims had been held incommimicado at the time of their alleged torture. Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate the allegations and to take steps to prevent torture. The organization recommended, in particular, reducing the eight-day period during which political detainees may be held legally in police custody.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Senegal in October and met President Abdou Diouf, government ministers and judicial officials, as well as security officials in Ziguinchor, the capital of Casamance. The President and other authorities reaffirmed the government's opposition to torture and conunitment to its prevention. However, the authorities said that no official investigation into allegations of torture in Casamance had taken place because no formal complaints had been received. They rejected Amnesty International's call for an official inquiry, referring to the June 1988 amnesty which led to the release of prisoners from
Casamance. Those freed had been convicted of offences committed before July 1987. The authorities said that the amnesty also covered offences possibly committed by security forces, such as torture. They said, however, that in the future representatives of the procuracy would check regularly on the well-being of individuals in detention.
Amnesty International expressed concern that a journalist imprisoned in October might be a prisoner of conscience. The organization also sought details about Jean-Pascal Badji's death in detention and luged an official investigation. The government replied that an inquiry would be initiated into his death.
