GUINEA-BISSAU
Eight political prisoners sentenced after an unfair trial in July 1986 were released in November but 24 others convicted in the same trial were still held at the end of the year. Some reports suggested that 11 other political prisoners might still be held despite completing their sentences.
Thirty-two prisoners convicted of plotting against the government were still held at the beginning of the year, serving sentences of between six and 15 years'
GUINEA-BISSAU/GUYANA
imprisonment. They had been sentenced after an unfair trial before the Higher Military Court in July 1986: the court reportedly admitted as evidence statements vihich had been made under duress w^hile the defendants w^ere held in pre-trial custody, The defendants were also denied proper access to defence counsel (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In November, eight of these prisoners were released and 11 others had their sentences halved by the Higher Military Court. Those freed included Tué Nam Bagna, an army officer, who had been serving an eight-year sentence. He was reported to have been severely tortured following his arrest in October 1985 and forced to make a confession which was broadcast over the national radio a few weeks later, before he and his co-defendants were brought to trial.
The 11 whose sentences were reduced were all serving 12 or 13-year prison terms. They included Raul Tcham Namâ, a military doctor, sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in connection with an alleged plot to free detainees arrested in 1985 after he learned that one had died in custody. In all, six of those arrested as suspects in the alleged plot against the government died in custody between November 1985 and July
1986	(see Amnesty International Reports
1987	to 1989].
Reports received in 1989 suggested that 11 of the defendants at the July 1986 trial were still being held although they had been due for release: some had completed their sentences and the release of four of them had been announced by the government in December 1988 to mark the 40th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Amnesty International sought clarification of these reports from the government of President Joao Bernardo Vieira but had not received a response by the end of the year.
The 24 prisoners still known to be held at the end of the year were restricted to islands in the Bijagos Archipelago, where they were required to undertake agricultural work. Although their families were permitted to live with them or visit them, transport difficulties and the scarcity of food and medical supplies made this difficult in practice.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of some of those sentenced as a result of the July 1986 trial as they appeared possibly to have been
imprisoned because of their association with leaders of the alleged conspiracy against the government rather than because of any real involvement in a plot.
