UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
A new parliament began reforms which brought some laws closer to international standards on human rights. About 50 pris-oners of conscience benefited from early release, but others were arrested during the year, particularly conscientious objectors to military service and critics of official policy on nationality issues. The authorities made wide use of administrative measures to restrict human rights: more than 2,000 people seeking to exercise their human rights were put in prison or psychiatric hospitals under administrative procedures for short periods; 20 people were killed and many others injured when armed security troops broke up peaceful public meetings. At the end of the year at least 60 people prosecuted under criminal law were still imprisoned, or forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals, for exercising their human rights. Proposals to restrict the death penalty were deferred. Thirty-one death sentences came to light and at least five people were executed.
In May Mikhail Gorbachov became President of a new parliament, the Congress of People's Deputies. Intense interest in the elections — which offered voters a choice of candidates for the first time — forced constitutional issues to the fi'ont of the political picture throughout the year. Mass rallies in some parts of the ussr called for alternatives to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union or increased sovereignty for certain republics or ethnic groups. Violence erupted between some national and ethnic groups in the southern republics; in some cases troops were deployed to restore order.
UGANDA/UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
The ussr maintained a pubhc commitment to international human rights standards. In February it recognized the role of the International Court of Justice in disputes arising from the interpretation or application of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel. Inhxnnan or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and five other conventions. The new parliament began to implement reforms promised since 1987 which were apparently intended to give Soviet citizens more of the human rights guaranteed by international standards. In July it abolished the laws against "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and "circulating anti-Soviet slander". These had penalized free expression and had been used to imprison hundreds of people since the 1960s. They were replaced by a law which prohibits public incitement to violent overthrow of the state. There was no change in the legal status of religious believers; they are still required to register their congregations with the authorities, thereby giving up rights such as evangelizing and teaching religion to children. However, the authorities lifted an administrative ban on Jehovah's Witnesses and Ukrainian Greek Catholics and allowed them to seek official registration for the first time.
Legal changes introduced at the end of the year offered the prospect of fairer trials. Suspects now have the right to contact a lawyer from the moment they are detained, arrested or charged. Previously they could be held incommunicado for up to nine months and were allowed to contact a lawyer only when the investigation had been completed, shortly before trial. Reports of ill-treatment during incommunicado detention had been common, lïial by jury was also introduced for capital offences and other grave crimes. Formerly, defendants were convicted and sentenced to death by a panel of three judges, only one of whom was professionally trained. A new Law on the Status of Courts set up a "judicial collegium" which appeared to strengthen the independence of judges. Previously, they were elected by local officials and were vulnerable to their influence. Now judges cannot be appointed or dismissed without the consent of fellow judges.
The policy of granting early releases to political prisoners continued, but more slowly than before. At least 49 were freed,
bringing to 465 the total known to have been so released since the authorities announced in February 1987 that they were reviewing prisoner cases. The 49 included 16 people who had been confined against their will in psychiatric hospitals for up to 21 years. At the end of the year at least 60 people were believed still imprisoned, or forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals, for exercising their human rights. One was Eduard Kritsky, a trawler worker imprisoned since 1980, when he was arrested for carrying a placard saying "meat for the workers and non-party unions!".
In a statement to the United Nations (un) Human Rights Committee in October, the ussr Minister of Justice acknowledged that "in the past people had been imprisoned for rightly criticizing negative aspects of Soviet society". He was reporting on Soviet compliance with the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Nevertheless, the authorities did not restore full civil rights to released prisoners of conscience so that many still found it impossible to get jobs, housing and medical help.
Most prisoners of conscience imprisoned during the year were conscientious objectors to military service. Fifteen, mostly Jehovah's Witnesses, were sentenced to up to three years' imprisonment for "evading regular call-up to active military service". Reports also emerged of another 10 men serving sentences imposed before 1989: this suggested that the real number of conscientious objectors held at the end of 1989 was higher than the 32 known to Amnesty International. In November constitutional provision for a civilian alternative to military service for conscientious objectors was introduced in Latvia but no such provision was made in the other 14 republics.
As in 1988, no one was reported imprisoned under laws that restricted religious activity. However, Pavel Solovyov, a Pentecostalist who held an outdoor service, was sentenced in March to three years' imprisonment for "hooliganism" in the Ukrainian city of Slavyansk. Other prosecutions ran counter to the spirit of the legal reforms. In November a court in Sverdlovsk in the Russian Republic sentenced a journalist, Sergey Kuznetsov, to three years' imprisonment for "defamation", after he had criticized local officials. The conduct of his case aroused the public concern of
UGANDA/UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
Soviet journalists and members of parliament as well as human rights organizations in the ussr and abroad. In March Oleg Pletnyov was given 18 months' imprisonment for "illegal exit abroad" by a court in the Ukrainian city of Simferopol, although shortly afterwards parliament approved proposals recognizing the right to leave the country. He had not been released by the end of the year.
Many arrests were reported in areas of ethnic conflict in the southern republics of the ussr. However, martial law, curfews and, in Azerbaidzhán, a state of emergency made it difficult to obtain corroborative information. While most of the arrests were apparently for violent crimes, it seemed that some people were imprisoned for questioning official policy on nationality issues. At least 40 people may have been arrested on these grounds and charged with inciting racial hatred, disturbing the peace or holding illegal meetings. After several months' imprisonment, most were given suspended sentences or released pending trial. They included several Moldavians, some supporters of the Popular Front of Azerbaidzhán and 14 members of an unofficial Armenian Karabakh Committee.
The authorities made wide use of administrative measures to restrict human rights. More than 2,000 people seeking to exercise their hiunan rights were put into "preventive detention" or under "administrative arrest", sometimes repeatedly. "Preventive detention" could be imposed by the militia or riot troops, without the sanction of a court or procurator, for up to three hours. In areas where a curfew was in force, it could last for up to 30 days. "Administrative arrest" of up to 15 days could be imposed by a single judge without the right of appeal.
During the election campaign these measures were used widely against people supporting unofficial candidates or advocating electoral boycotts. Other victims included those demonstrating against the June massacre of students in the Chinese capital of Beijing; people displaying national symbols in the Ukraine; Jews staging vigils for the right to emigrate; and members of unofficial information agencies concerned with politics and human rights. Often detainees were beaten. At least one was reportedly sent to Chernobyl, the radioactive site of a nuclear reactor which exploded in 1986. He was Petro ZelenjTikh,
a priest of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church.
Eight people were believed to have been forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals on political grounds during the year despite appeal provisions introduced in 1988 ostensibly to reduce the risk of such wrongful confinement. Four of them had contested official candidates for the elections: Vladimir Chebanu, Mikhail Mikhailov, Andrey Sharonov and Fyodor Yadamenko. All eight were confined under administrative procedures and released shortly afterwards. Another eight people who were put in psychiatric hospitals on political grounds before 1989 were believed still to be confined at the end of the year. In June a leading Soviet newspaper acknowledged for the first time that Soviet psychiatry had been systematically perverted for political reasons. Uteraturnaya gazeta (The Literary Gazette) condemned the 1988 appeal provisions as inadequate amd joined numerous Soviet legal scholars in recommending the adoption of a comprehensive law to safeguard the rights of people confined in psychiatric hospitals, which would be enforceable by the procuracy and comls.
In several parts of the ussr security forces armed with truncheons and shields broke up meetings which appeared to be peaceful. In the Georgian capital of Tbilisi in April, 20 people were killed and up to 3,000 were said to have been injured when soldiers and riot troops dispersed a crowd demonstrating for Georgian independence. The troops allegedly used firearms, shovels and poisonous gas. In his statement to the un Human Rights Committee in October, the Minister of Justice said that the procedures for holding public meetings and deploying riot troops needed prompt review. The procedures were regulated by statutes adopted without any public discussion (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In some reported cases officials used force to disperse people who were imaware that they were attending unauthorized meetings.
Throughout the year prisoners kept in pre-trial custody alleged that they had been ill-treated. They included prisoners of conscience such as Sergey Kuznetsov and members of the Armenian Karabakh Committee, who said they had been systematically beaten in the Butyrka investigation prison in Moscow. People awaiting
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS/UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
trial for capital crimes also alleged ill-treatment. Dmitry Herman, convicted of murder in March by a court in the Ukrainian city of Nikolayev on the basis of a confession, told the court that his confession had been extracted through beatings. He had spent seven months in incommunicado detention. People at his trial said one of his arms appeared to be dislocated. No independent investigation of his allegations was known to have been carried out. All the allegations referred to beatings before November, when suspects were given the right to more prompt access to a defence lawyer.
The new parliament deferred discussion of the draft Principles of Criminal Law, which would significantly restrict the scope of the death penalty (see Amnesty International Report 1989], and in the meantime ordered no stay on death sentences or executions. At least 31 death sentences were reported, four of them on people who would have been exempt if the proposed changes to criminal law had been adopted. They were a woman, two men aged over 60, and a man convicted of embezzlement. Unusually, a death sentence for murder and rape was passed before a crowd of 5,000 in a stadium in Naberezhnye Chelny in the Tatar autonomous republic, which raised doubts about the fairness of the trial. Five people were known to have been executed, and the execution of four others was thought probable after their clemency petitions were rejected in August. Death penalty statistics remained secret and the real number of people sentenced to death and executed was probably much higher.
One death sentence was reported commuted. Amnesty International welcomed this and urged the authorities to commute every death sentence of which it learned. It also appealed for the immediate release of all prisoners of conscience and the restoration of their full civil rights. In March a delegation went to Moscow as guests of the ussr Academy of Sciences and met government officials and legal scholars, as well as former prisoners of conscience and unofficial advocates of human rights. The delegation explained Amnesty International's concerns and explored the aims and progress of the current legislative review. A report published by Amnesty International in October, USSR: Human Rights in a Time of Change, made 12 recommendations to the ussr Government. These included the
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the introduction of a civilian alternative to military service and a fair procedme for applying it; and the requirement that any compulsory psychiatric confinement be judicially approved.
Following the killings in Tbilisi in April, Amnesty International urged the Procurator General to investigate all the alleged incidents resulting in death or injury and to make public the instructions given to the security troops and the precautionary measures they allegedly took. It also asked him to investigate whether any of those who died were deliberately killed, and to ensure the release of any individuals imprisoned for non-violent political activity. At the end of the year it was trying to obtain the report completed in December by the ussr parliamentary cormnission that investigated the killings.
