LESOTHO
TWo people who criticized the government were detained without trial for two weeks. The circumstances in which two prisoners died in custody and another reportedly "disappeared" in 1988 remained unclari-fied. An inquest into the killings in 1986
lesotho/liberia
of two former government ministers and their wives began on 15 November, but was adjourned until January 1990.
The state of emergency declared in 1988 continued throughout 1989. Under emergency regulations, the police are empowered to arrest without a warrant people suspected of certain criminal offences and to detain them incommunicado for up to 14 days. Police have immimity against prosecution for any acts committed during the exercise of emergency powers. In September the head of the ruling Military Council, Major-General Justin Lekhanya, admitted at an inquest that he had shot dead a student in December 1988. On 5 October the inquest ruled that the killing constituted justifiable homicide.
Two people were briefly imprisoned and appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Joel Moitse, a university lecturer, was detained under the Internal Security Act in May, apparently on account of a letter he had written to a newspaper criticizing the Military Council. A former Cabinet minister in the government of Chief Leabua Jonathan, overthrown in a military coup in January 1986, he was released without charge after 14 days. Majara Jonathan Molapo, a nephew of the late Chief Jonathan and a leader of the Basutoland National Party, forbidden to operate owing to the ban on political activities, was also detained under the act for the same two weeks. Joel Moitse complained of "rough treatment" in the initial days of detention, when he was also denied access to a lawyer and doctor. Police were said to have threatened to deport him to South Africa although he is a Lesotho citizen, and to have harassed his relatives. Both Joel Moitse and Majara Molapo were issued with restriction orders at the time of their release in June, but these were rescinded within a week.
No inquests had been held by the end of the year into two deaths in custody in 1988: those of Samuel HIapo, a bus hijacker who died in suspicious circumstances, and Mazizi Maqekeza, a wounded South African member of the banned African National Congress {anc] who was shot dead while in hospital under police guard. No further information was received about Mbulelo Ngono, an anc member who was reported to have "disappeared" from police custody in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). An inquest
began in November into the cases of two former government ministers and their wives who were killed in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1987 and 1988), but it was adjourned until January 1990.
In July the death sentences imposed on Tseliso Mona and Khopiso Mona in 1987 after they were convicted of murder were commuted to 20 years' imprisonment by King Moshoeshoe II. No new death sentences were imposed in 1989. One prisoner, Naso Letaso, convicted of murder, was reportedly awaiting execution.
In June Amnesty International urged the government to release Joel Moitse and Majara Molapo.
