GRENADA
The Grenada Court of Appeal continued hearing the case of 17 former members of the People's Revolutionary Government (PRG), convicted in 1986 for the 1983 murders of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and others. Fourteen of the defendants had been sentenced to death (see Am/iesfy International Report 1987). A total of 22 people were under sentence of death at the end of the year, but no executions had been carried out since 1978.
Prime Minister Herbert Blaize died on 19 December The Governor General appointed Deputy Prime Minister Ben Jones in his place and a general election was due to take place by March 1990.
An inquiry by the Prison Department into allegations that prisoners had been ill-treated in 1988 found that "the degree of restraint by prison staff was consistent with the defiance and resistance offered by the prisoners". Some of the imprisoned former PRC members alleged that guards had severely beaten them at Richmond Hill Prison in November 1988. The incident occurred after one of the prisoners. Leon Cornwall, protested that he had been denied a bath and change of clothes for several weeks (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989]. According to the inquiry findings, guards had restrained prisoners who wilfully disobeyed an order, defied prison staff and struggled with officers. The inquiry found no evidence to support Leon Cornwall's claims, and stated that the injury he suffered was "minimal" and consistent with the inquiry's conclusion that there had been a struggle.
GRENADA/GUATEMALA
The officers accused of ill-treatment belonged to the same agency that conducted the inquiry. The report of the inquiry did not indicate the composition, terms of reference or procedures of the investigating body, It also failed to indicate who had been interviewed and whether evidence was obtained from both prisoners and prison officers. It gave no details of the circumstances in which force was used, the number of officers involved, the nature of force used, the injuries found or the treatment given for injuries.
In November and December an Amnesty Intemational delegate observed part of the appeal proceedings in the Maurice Bishop murder case.
