AFGHANISTAN
Thousands of political prisoners were believed to be imprisoned, including some possible prisoners of conscience. Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly during interrogation, continued to be reported, although on a lesser scale than in previous years.
Despite the completion of the withdrawal of Soviet troops in February, the conflict between government forces and armed opposition groups — the Mujahideen — continued; arms were supplied to the government by the USSR, and to the Mujahideen by the USA and Pakistan. It was difficult to obtain and corroborate information about human rights violations due to the war and social dislocation. However, there were several reports of Mujahideen forces carrying out extrajudicial executions of prisoners and civilians.
In February the authorities at Kabul's Pul-e-Charkhi Prison said they were holding 2,165 political prisoners; definite information about prisoners of conscience was available in only a few cases. Maulavi Abdul Rauf Logari, the Imam of the Wazir Akbar Khan Mosque in Kabul, was detained in March after preaching at the mosque in the presence of President Najibullah. He reportedly recited a Persian verse which seemed to be directed at the President: "You have done nothing for your Creator, so you cannot do anything for His creatures." He did not advocate violence during the sermon and was considered to be a prisoner of conscience. He was released from Pul-e-Charkhi Prison later in the year.
Among possible prisoners of conscience believed still held at the end of the year was Amin Yusufzai. He had been detained
at Kabul airport in January 1986, reportedly because he was found carrying a picture of his brother, a member of the Mujahideen. He was not known to have been charged or tried.
There was no new information about two other possible prisoners of conscience, Syed Abdul Samad and Mohammad Nazar. Both Afghans, they were tried and convicted of spying in January 1988 after they had entered the country illegally with Alain Guillo, a French journalist (see Amnesty International Report 1989). They were sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment and were believed to be held at PuI-e-Charkhi Prison.
Dr Mohammad Yoimis Akbari, a nuclear physicist sentenced to death in 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985), was also believed to be still imprisoned, although his whereabouts were unknown. Information was received in January that seven members of the Afghan Mellat, the Afghan Social Democratic Party, held since 1983, had been released in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly during interrogation, by the security police and the military continued to be reported. In one case, a member of the Mujahideen captured in combat at Deh-e-Sabz village in January was released in May after he had become deranged reportedly as a result of torture. He was still suffering from its effects when he was admitted to a psychiatric clinic in Pakistan in July.
There was no new information about people who had reportedly "disappeared" in detention in previous years, such as Zia-ul-Haq, who had "disappeared" in early 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Mujahideen forces were reported to have carried out extrajudicial executions of captured government soldiers and civilians, including children, in areas which they effectively controlled. In one case, a Mujahideen force which included Wahabi Arab volunteers was reported to have summarily killed an imspecified munber of government soldiers and at least 20 unarmed civilians on 13 and 14 January after taking control of the village of Kuna Deh, in the Khewa district of Nangarhar province. In March and April, journalists reported that Mujahideen groups besieging the city of Jalalabad had shot dead government soldiers after they had surrendered.
AFGHANISTAN/ALBANIA
In March Amnesty International made an appeal jointly to the Afghan Government and the leaders of the seven Mujahideen groups based in Peshawar, Pakistan. It urged them to take all possible measures to ensure full protection of basic human rights for all prisoners and non-combatants on both sides of the Afghan conflict. The organization also appealed to the governments of the USSR, the USA and Pakistan to use their influence with the main parties to the conflict to ensure respect for human rights. Three Mujahideen groups — Mahaz-e Melli-e Islami Afghanistan, led by Sayed Ahmad Gailani; }amiat-e-Islami Afghanistan, led by Burhanuddin Rabbani; and Jebha-e Nejat-e MelU Afghanistan, led by Sibghatullah Mojaddedi — responded to Amnesty International's appeal, saying that their organizations treated prisoners hiunanely and would continue to do so. The Pakistan Foreign Ministry responded to the appeal by referring to the Pakistan Government's role in arranging for the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit prisoners held by Mujahideen groups in Afghanistan and in helping to arrange meetings between the USSR and the Mujahideen for an exchange of prisoners.
During the year, Amnesty International repeatedly wrote to the Afghan authorities asking for the release of Maulavi Abdul Rauf Logari. It also asked for information about Amin Yusufzai, Syed Abdul Samad, Mohammad Nazar. Mohammad Younis Akbari and Zia-ul-Haq. In November the authorities informed Amnesty Intemational that Maulavi Logari had been released.
