TUNISIA
Over 90 political prisoners, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were released in amnesties in March, May and November. At least five people believed to be prisoners of conscience were arrested during the year. Tens of political activists, some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience, were reported to have been detained brieHy, tortured or ill-treated, and then released uncharged. Three people were sentenced to death but there were no executions. In November President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali stated publicly that he would not sign any orders for execution.
The first general elections were held since the change of government in November 1987. President Ben Ali's ruling Rassemblement constitutionnel démocratique (RCD), Constitutional Democratic Rally, was returned to power in April, winning all seats. Several parties which had applied for official registration had not been accorded legal status by the end of the year. They included the Hizb al-Nahda, Party of the Renaissance, (formerly the Mouvement de la tendance islamique, MTi,
TUNISIA
Islamic Tendency Movement).
Following an amnesty in March, 35 supporters of an Islamic movement, some of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience. were released. They had been detained without trial since November 1987. In May the remaining detainees from this group, including Professor Moncef Ben Salem and Sayyed Ben Buxawi Ferjani, were among 52 political prisoners released in an amnesty to mark the end of Ramadan. Some of them, including Sayyed Ferjani, were ill after having allegedly been tortured in detention. Mohamed Chemmam and Ali al-Zraoui, who were imprisoned after an unfair trial in September 1987, were also among those released.
Under a general amnesty signed by the President in July, civil rights were restored to 5,416 former prisoners, including political prisoners. Further political prisoners were released in an amnesty on 7 November to mark the second anniversary of President Ben Ali's accession to power.
Jalloul Azzouna, a lecturer at the University of Tunis and leader of a faction of the Parti de ¡'unité populaire (pup), Popular Unity Party, was arrested in July. In August he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment and a fine by the T\inis Court of First Instance, confirmed by the Court of Appeal in September. He was considered a prisoner of conscience. He was accused of libelling the Head of State and distributing unauthorized communiques. In one communique he claimed that "terror brigades" of plainclothes government security officers had slashed tyres and broken windows of the cars of nine pup executive council members. He was among those released in the November amnesty.
Radhia Nasraoui, one of 20 lawyers defending Jalloul Azzouna, was arrested by plainclothes police immediately after the trial on charges of spreading false information likely to damage public order and defamation of the security forces. The charges arose out of statements she had made at the trial in which she described the police as aggressors and attacked the Press Law. She was released after four days.
Four members of the Parti communiste des ouvriers tunisiens (pcot), Tunisian Workers' Communist Party, were possible prisoners of conscience. Afifa Hizem, Fethia Hizem, Hamdi Laabidi and Mortadha Laabidi were arrested in
September in Gafsa for distributing leaflets. Their houses were searched at night by police without search warrants, although these are required by law. Mortadha Laabidi alleged that he was tortured. The four were convicted of various charges including belonging to an illegal organization and distributing illegal literatme. They were sentenced in October to between eight and 18 months' imprisonment. Two others, Ammar Amroussia and Chafik Aijadi, who were tried in absentia on similar charges, were sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. All those in custody were released on bail pending appeal.
Bechir Essid, a lawyer and founder of the Union démocratique unioniste (UDU). Democratic Unionist Union, was arrested in September. He was charged with defamation and libel of the President in connection with a communique he was said to have distributed. He was allegedly ill-treated and denied medicines while in detention. At the end of the year he was still being held without trial.
During the year tens of political activists, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were arrested and briefly detained. Most were released without charge or trial. They included supporters and members of the national or local leadership of Hizb al-Nahda, the pcot, and other unregistered organizations.
Four prisoners convicted after an unfair trial in September 1987 of participating in bomb explosions in tourist hotels or acid attacks remained in prison at the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1988].
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Many short-term political detainees said that they were ill-treated and beaten while in police custody. Mabrouk Abdeljaouad, Moncef Matalla, Moulidi Abassi, Mohamed al-Tahir Hamouda and Noureddine Brahimi, who were arrested in June and released four days later, claimed to have been severely tortured. They said they had been beaten, subjected to falaqa (beating on the soles of the feet), suspended in contorted positions, and had ether applied to their genitals. Medical certificates appeared to corroborate their allegations.
Three death sentences were passed. At least three sentences passed in 1987 and 1988 remained in force. There were no executions.
TUNISIV/njRKEY
Amnesty International welcomed the amnesties of prisoners but expressed concern about the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials. It also expressed concern about reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Amnesty International urged the Head of State to commute all death sentences and to abolish the death penalty. It had earlier welcomed President Ben Ali's personal opposition to the death penalty expressed publicly on several occasions, including to an Amnesty International delegation in April 1988.
