ZAIRE
At least 100 people, many of them prisoners of conscience, were imprisoned on account of their political activities or religious beliefe. Few were brought to trial and most were freed without even being referred to the judicial authorities. Some were held incommunicado for a few weeks or months by the security forces. Some untried detainees, including two forcibly repatriated from a neighbouring country and held in secret, were still detained at the end of the year. Detainees were reportedly beaten, mostly at the time of arrest. More than 20 death sentences were imposed by the courts and eight executions were reported.
In February the government of President Mobutu Sese Seko announced its ratification of the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, although by the end of the year the un was unable to confirm that Zaire's insfrument of ratification had been deposited, In September the government issued a decree which made the decisions of a government ministry - the Department for the Citizen's Rights and Freedoms - unchallengeable in the courts. In October the Department was empowered to refer any official accused of torture for prosecution,
A special minister, known as the State Commissioner for the Security of the Territory, was appointed to supervise the activities of the country's various police and security services. However, the security services continued to exercise extensive powers to detain political prisoners without following normal legal procedures.
which would entail referring them to the procuracy within a few days of their arrest. The only check on the security forces' imprisonment without charge or frial of political prisoners appeared to be the Department for thé^ Citizen's Rights and Freedoms. The Dep^ment could investigate, but not challenge, cases of long-term detention.
Several students were killed, dozens injm-ed and scores arrested by soldiers using guns and bayonets to disperse demonsfrations in February over price rises. The demonsfrations started in Kinshasa, after the government announced increases in fuel and fransport prices. There were further demonsfrations in Lubumbashi after the body of a student was discovered near a military barracks. The detained students were released in March when the President announced that no proceedings would be taken against them. An army officer in Lubumbashi was subsequently court-martialled and imprisoned for improperly ordering troops to fire on demonsfrators.
Dozens of supporters of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (udps), Union for Democracy and Social Progress, an opposition party which is illegal under Zaire's one-party constitution, were arrested during the year. Most were detained in either Kinshasa, the capital, or in the Kasaï Occidental or Kasaï Oriental regions, and were held for a few weeks or months before being released uncharged. In January soldiers belonging to the Service d'action et de renseignements militaires (sarm). Military Action and Intelligence Service, arrested at least 10 udps supporters, beat them severely and detained them overnight before releasing them. In March Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, a well-known udps leader, was placed under house arrest at his home in Kinshasa's Combe district. The order keeping him under house arrest was apparently issued by the State Commissioner for the Security of the Territory, acting outside the law. In May he was allowed to move to a house in the Limete district of Kinshasa, but he remained under house arrest. In July, after he attempted to attend his brother's consecration as a bishop, he was detained for three days. Two members of his household were also arrested by the sarm: they were still detained without charge or frial at the end of the year. Tshisekedi wa Mulumba was not permitted
zaire
visitors, although Amnesty International delegates visiting Zaire in November were allowed to see him. He was still imder house arrest at the end of the year.
In May Kanana Tshiongo, a udps leader and former member of the National Assembly, was briefly detained and beaten by members of the national security service, the Agence nationale de documentation (and). National Documentation Agency. Several people, including Luc Alingibala and Joseph Bula, were arrested in July for being in possession of a udps magazine, Combat. They were reportedly charged with possessing and distributing propaganda material and were still held in Kinshasa's Makala Prison at the end of the year.
In August seven other people, including udps members, were detained without charge or trial for political reasons. Three were held until October apparently because they were found in possession of a United States of America (usa) congressional resolution reducing military aid to Zaire. The four others were arrested because they had had contact with representatives of the New York-based Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights who were visiting Kinshasa. The four were kept blindfold for about two weeks in an unofficial military detention centre next to the army's Kinsuka firing range, west of Kinshasa. Three were then released. The fourth, Omene Samba, was freed in late October. All seven appeared to have been prisoners of conscience. After his release, one of the four, Mangala Ngolu Ndoki, a teacher, was taken by the government to the usa and France to deny that his detention had been politically motivated or related to his contact with the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights. When he returned to Kinshasa, however, he was reportedly forced to stay in a hotel under guard and not allowed to resiune his normal activities.
General Mukobo Mundende Popolo, a former army chief of staff, who was arrested in July 1987 and then banished, remained in internal exile (see Amnesty /nfernaijona/ Report 1989]. His former Head of Operations Division, Major Kayembe Mbandokulu, who was also arrested in July 1987 and banished, continued to be subjected to similar administrative measures.
In Lubumbashi, the capital of the south-em Shaba region, four people were reportedly imprisoned throughout the year on
account of their alleged membership of the Organisation démocratique katangaise, Katanga Democratic Organization. The organization was not known to have used or advocated violence and its imprisoned members .appeared to be prisoners of conscience. The four were among a group of more than 20 arrested in early 1988 and reportedly convicted during 1989 on charges of inciting tribal and regional hatred. Most were freed by mid-1989.
Arrests of Jehovah's Witnesses, whose religious sect was banned in 1986, continued during 1989. In July six Jehovah's Witnesses were tried in Mbanza Ngungu, a town in Bas-Zaire region, on charges of insulting the national flag by failing to salute it and insulting the nation's emblem by refusing to wear ruling party badges or to chant party slogans. They were acquitted, but were said in court to have been severely ill-treated in pre-trial detention. The coiul apparently took no action in response to their allegations.
Most of the students arrested in February were released in March. However, Fariala and Mwamba, two students who had unsuccessfully sought asylum in the Central African Republic and been forcibly repatriated, were arrested on their return in June. They were still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1989. Also detained after his forcible repatriation from Burundi in April was Kabongo Ntambwe, who had been recognized as a refugee by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. The Zairian authorities did not acknowledge his detention. Although he was released in October, he was reportedly restricted to a hotel in Kinshasa.
Allegations of torture of detainees continued. although on a reduced scale by comparison with several years ago. Detainees were reportedly subjected to severe beatings, mostly at the time of arrest, as in the case of Kanana Tshiongo.
Twenty-one people were sentenced to death in September. They included 10 soldiers, five of whom were convicted in their absence. The 21 were convicted of armed robbery and murder by military and civilian comrts in Kinshasa. The trials were widely publicized, and reports suggested that they might be executed in public if their appeals and petitions for clemency were rejected. Three other death sentences were imposed in October on people apparently convicted of murder. The same
ZAIRE/ZAMBIA
month, eight prisoners sentenced to death in previous years were reported to have heen executed in Likasi's Buluo Prison in Shaba, although the authorities did not confirm this. It was not known how many prisoners were under sentence of death or whether there were other executions.
Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of Tshisekedi wa Mulumba and other prisoners of conscience, sought information about other untried political detainees and urged the govemment to commute all death sentences. In May Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum to the govemment, calling for the powers of detention of the seciuity forces to be greatly reduced and for all detainees to have their cases referred to a judicial authority soon after arrest. In November an Amnesty International delegation visited Zaire and discussed human rights with several government ministers, the President of the ludicial Council, the Prociuator General and officials of the Department for the Citizen's Rights and Freedoms.
