BENIN
At least 80 prisoners of conscience arres* ted in previous years were still held at the beginning of the year and a further 50 were arrested during 1989 in connection with demonstrations and strikes. However, they were all released in an amnesty declared in August. Further arrests of prisoners of conscience took place in November. Two groups of pris* oners accused of plotting to overthrow the government in 1988 remained in detention: some were not brought to trial, others were tried before the State Security Court, whose procedures did not meet international standards for fair trial. Reports that political detainees were tortured included the cases of three people who died as a result. A government order to shoot demonstrators on sight resulted in other deaths. IWelve opponents of the Government of the Central African Republic were arrested in July and forcibly repatriated.
Major demonstrations against the government of President Mathieu Kerekou occurred at the beginning and end of the year. During strikes in Porto Novo in January and February, the security forces were empowered to shoot demonstrators on sight, even those using no violence. TWo people were killed and many were injured in March when troops opened fire on strikers at a sugar factory in Save in the south of the country. The strikers were protesting at not being paid and against threatened redundancies. Some of those injured reportedly died later in hospital.
In December striking workers in various towns demonstrated for democratic free-
doms and payment of their salaries. The security forces shot one demonstrator dead in Lokossa and another in Abomey: it remained unclear whether demonstrators in either town had resorted to violence. There were no official inquiries into any of the killings. The security forces' immunity from prosecution was also evident in the case of Boko Crespin, a neighbour of a suspected opposition activist, Simon Fanou. In what appeared to be a case of mistaken identity, soldiers surrounded Boko Crespin's house in March and shot him dead when he shouted for help. There was no official investigation into his death.
The government took some steps to protect human rights. In February the President instructed the security forces and prosecuting authorities to abide by a Code of Penal Procedure requirement to bring detainees before a magistrate within a few days of their arrest, or release them. However, this requirement was not observed in political cases and political detainees continued to be held for indefinite periods without referral to the procuracy.
In April the National Revolutionary Assembly enacted legislation to establish a National Human Rights Commission. Members of the commission, which is empowered to investigate complaints and propose legislative changes, are to include government appointees and elected representatives of the country's non-govemmen-tal organizations. The commission had not been convened by the end of the year.
More than 50 suspected supporters of the banned Parti communiste du Dahomey (pcd), Communist Party of Dahomey (Benin's former name), and other alleged government opponents were arrested in January and February. The arrests followed strikes and demonstrations by teachers, students and others protesting the government's failure to pay their salaries and grants. The detainees included Tiamiou Adjibade, a former government minister and leading figiu« in the Porto Novo area, who was arrested on suspicion of using his influence to raise support for strike action. He and some of the other detainees were soon released, while at least 50 others were held for periods of up to several months. Those who remained in detention were apparently arrested for opposing the government rather than for participating in demonstrations. Some of them were
BENIN
forcibly conscripted into the army. All of the conscripts and some of the remaining detainees were released in April. The others were released in the August amnesty.
Other suspected government opponents were arrested between February and May. Jonas Gninmagnon, a human rights activist, was held incommunicado and without charge at Abomey-Calavi gendarmerie post until his release in the August amnesty. He chairs the Comité des parents et épouses des détenus d'opinion, Committee of Relatives and Wives of Prisoners of Conscience, which was formed in 1986 to campaign for the release of political prisoners.
About 50 untried political detainees, all prisoners of conscience, were released in April. Most had been detained because of their alleged links with the PCD and some had remained in custody since 1984 or 1985. In 1988 they had appealed to the head of state for clemency in connection with their political activities. Detainees who refused to seek clemency were not freed imtil late August, when the government announced an amnesty for 192 of its political opponents. The amnesty was also intended to allow the return of government opponents living abroad who feared prosecution in Benin. Sixty prisoners of conscience were freed, including Raymond Adékambi, a civil engineer held since October 1985. and Mathias Finoundé, a health technician held since April 1985. Also freed were prisoners convicted of involvement in the 1975 and 1977 coup attempts.
Several former prisoners of conscience were rearrested in November. TWo students, released in the August amnesty after four years' detention without trial, were detained for a few days in Natitingou. Following a public meeting at which they had criticized government policies, they were apparently found in possession of political tracts. Emile Ahossi, a medical doctor, was arrested at a road-block as he returned from a political meeting. He too was apparently carrying documents which the authorities considered to be political tracts. He was released on 8 December.
Two trials took place before the State Security Court. The court, established in April 1988 to try people accused of offences against the security of the state (see Amnesty International Report 1989],
had not previously been used. Both trials failed to meet international standards for fair trial. The first concluded in February with the conviction of four people charged with attempting to assassinate the head of state in June 1988. Some of the judges and other senior court officials were members of the armed forces or of the central committee of Benin's ruling party. Some defence witnesses, such as a presidential adviser, did not appear because the court refused to summon them, Two of the defendants were sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment, one to 10 years and one to five years. At least 11 other people arrested with the four defendants remained in custody without charge or trial at the end of the year. They included Marcellin Atindehou, a military officer, and Michel Bamenou Toko, a former minister of justice. In July the State Secxirity Court announced the conviction in absentia of Moudachirou Dourossimi, who was also charged in connection with the June 1988 coup attempt. His case had not been examined in the February hearings, and he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
A second trial opened before the State Security Court in July. Nineteen people, four of whom were tried in absentia, were charged with attempting to overthrow the government in March 1988. Defence lawyers requested postponement to allow medical treatment for the accused and to obtain medical evidence of torture. The lawyers also protested that the notes of earlier investigations had not been included in their legal dossiers. The hearings, postponed several times, had not taken place by the end of the year.
Political detainees were reportedly tortured at the Camp PLM Aledjo military post in Cotonou and at other locations. Prisoners were severely beaten and some were buried up to their necks, according to reports, then beaten again about the head. One prisoner lost the hearing in one ear as a result of this treatment.
Three untried political detainees reportedly died in custody after they were tortured. Serge Gnimadi, an 18-year-old school student who was detained in January, died in police custody in Porto Novo the following month. Parfait Agbal6, a journalist, was apparently detained in March because of his inquiries into the student's death. Parfait AgbaM was released without charge after about three weeks'
BENIN/BERMUDA
detention. Christophe Hounmenou, an army sergeant held since 1988 for alleged involvement in the March 1988 coup attempt, died in April after transfer from Bemb6r6k6 military camp to hospital in Parakou. He was reportedly seriously ill as a result of harsh conditions and ill-treatment at Bemb6r6k6. Luc Togbadja, a student arrested in April for possessing anti-govemment tracts, died in May after repeated interrogation at the Petit Palais, Small Palace, headquarters of the national security service in Cotonou.
No official investigations into the three deaths were reported, despite a legal requirement of judicial investigation into all deaths in custody. The authorities said that they had investigated the case of R6my G1616 Akpokpo, who died in custody in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). While stating that torture was not the cause of death, they issued no further details.
In July, 12 people from the Central African Republic were arrested and detained incommunicado at Camp PLM Aledjo. All were members of political groups opposed to the Government of the Central African Republic. Although they had lived in Benin for several years, they had not formally sought asylum. Without any court hearing or legal procedures, they were forcibly repatriated in August to the Central African Republic, where they were detained on arrival.
Amnesty International delegates visited Benin in April and met President Kerekou and government ministers. The President said that torture was not used in Benin and that no prisoners of conscience or other political prisoners were in custody, although he acknowledged the detention of about 100 suspected left-wing activists. He said that Amnesty International observers could attend their trial if and when it took place. The authorities said that security officials had written instructions forbidding the use of torture and that the Procurator General had recently visited several places of detention to ensure that all detainees were well treated. However, it was clear that representatives of the procuracy were not allowed to visit detention centres where political detainees were held.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of all prisoners of conscience and called on the authorities either to grant
political detainees fair and prompt trials, or to release them. The organization also urged the authorities to take steps to halt the use of torture and to investigate torture allegations and all deaths in detention, with a view to prosecuting those responsible if torture had occurred. Amnesty International also expressed its concern about the order given to security forces to shoot demonstrators on sight: this order permitted the shooting of people peacefully exercising their rights to assembly and association, as well as demonstrators resorting to life-threatening violence.
In August Amnesty International reported its concerns about administrative detention in a statement circulated to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
a
