SIERRA LEONE
A former deputy head of state and five others were executed in October, the first executions in Sierra Leone since 1975. Two prisoners of conscience were detained for two weeks without charge. Three other political detainees, arrested in 1987 and held without charge or trial, were released. A commission of inquiry set up in 1987 after criticism of high prison mortality rates reported to the government, but no planned improvements in prison conditions were announced.
In June the President, Major-General Joseph Saidu Momoh, aimounced an end to the state of "economic emergency" which had been in force since November 1987. This removed any provision in law for the administrative detention without charge or trial of those suspected of harming public safety.
In September, 12 prisoners sentenced to
SIERRA LEONE/SINGAPORE
death for their involvement in an attempted coup in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989) had their appeals dismissed by the Supreme Court. In early October Francis Mischeck Minah, former First Vice-President and a former Attorney General and Minister of Justice, and Gabriel Mohamed Tennyson Kai Kai, a former Assistant Superintendent of Police, both convicted of treason, were executed. Also hanged were four soldiers convicted of both treason and murder. The six others sentenced to death for treason were granted presidential clemency. Two prisoners sentenced to terms of imprisonment for misprision of treason also had their appeals dismissed. The decision not to grant presidential clemency to six of the prisoners under sentence of death was taken with great haste and their executions were carried out just a week after the Supreme Court decision and without any prior announcement. Practical preparations for the hangings were reportedly made before the Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy had finished its deliberations. Worldwide appeals, including some from foreign governments, were made for clemency for the 12 whose appeals were rejected in September.
No other executions took place although one other death sentence was passed in April following a murder conviction in the High Court.
People continued to be detained without being brought before a court without delay as specified in law. Kalilu Totangay and Emmanuel Moigua were detained for nearly two weeks in September by the security police in the capital, Freetown, before being released without charge. Both were members of the Pan-African Union, an organization opposed to Israeli or South African commercial interests in Sierra Leone. They were arrested in Kenema in eastern Sierra Leone after distributing documents criticizing the presence in Sierra Leone of an Israeli-owned diamond company.
Joseph Coker was released in April after being detained without charge or trial for two years. Reportedly, he was arrested after he accused a senior government official of involvement in a ritual mxu-der. His arrest appeared to have been ordered by the official concerned and therefore to have been an abuse of power.
Two detainees, Mary Amara and Sulley
Kamara, apparently held without charge or trial since the coup attempt in March 1987, were released in November after the High Court granted a writ of habeas corpus on their behalf. It appeared that Mary Amara may have been detained simply because of her family relationship to defendants in the 1987 treason trial.
A commission of inquiry into the administration of prisons, appointed in 1987, reported its findings to the government in December but the report was not made public. The inquiry, chaired by Mr Justice M.E. Tolle Thompson, was established following criticism of the high rate of prison deaths in the mid-1980s (see Amnesty International. Reports 1984 to 1989). Although it ordered 16 former prison officials to repay more than 1,170,000 Leones (about US $19,000) that they had allegedly embezzled, there did not appear to be any recommendation that they be prosecuted. Reports continued to be received of poor prison conditions; however, no reforms of prison administration or planned improvements in prison conditions were announced by the government during the year.
Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of individual death sentences and protested against the executions in October. It requested further information about the detention without charge of Mary Amara. In November an Amnesty International delegate visited Sierra Leone as part of the organization's worldwide campaign against the death penalty and appealed to President Momoh to abolish the death penalty.
