TURKEY
Thousands of people were imprisoned for political reasons, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience. Political trials in military and state security courts did not meet international standards of fair trial. The use of torture continued to be widespread and systematic, in some cases resulting in death. Civilian and military courts passed at least 10 death sentences. At the end of the year 255 people under sentence of death had exhausted all appeals and their sentences awaited ratification by parliament. Iranian asylum-seekers, including some recognized as refugees by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr), were forcibly returned to Iran.
In November Prime Minister Turgut Ozal was elected President. At the end of the year a state of emergency was still in force in eight provinces in southeast TXirkey where the security forces were engaged in counter-insurgency operations against Kurdish secessionist guerrillas. Many human rights
violations by the security forces were alleged to have taken place in the context of this conflict, The guerrillas were also reported to have carried out attacks on the civilian population, taking prisoners and torturing and killing some of them.
Draft amendments to the Penal Code to shorten the maximum detention period and grant lawyers access to detainees in police custody were announced by the cabinet in September. A prime-ministerial decree of the same month gave detainees access to their lawryers in some exceptional cases, but not to their families and doctors. The proposed measures fell short of internationally recognized standards and did not go before the Grand National Assembly during 1989.
The independent Human Rights Association estimated that there were approximately 5,000 political prisoners at the end of 1989. They included hundreds of prisoners of conscience, among them members of political organizations, trade unions and banned Kurdish groups, as well as journalists and religious activists.
Hundreds of people were prosecuted during 1989 for membership of banned non-violent political parties, under Article 141 of the Penal Code. Among them were some 20 people who returned to Turkey after years in exile. In September Huseyin Hasangebi, S. Ekrem ^akiroglu and Tektas Agaoglu were detained on arrival in Istanbul. They were committed to Sagmalcilar Prison and charged with activities on behalf of the Turkish Socialist Workers' Party (TSIP). On 3 November they were released, but at the end of the year their trial continued in Istanbul State Security Court.
Another group of exiles who returned in September included Ahmet Kardam, Seref Yildiz and Mehmet Bozisik, who publicly announced that they were members of the Central Committee of the banned T\irkish United Communist Party (tbkp). They were sent to prison and charged under Articles 141 and 142 ("making communist propaganda"). Their trial was due to start on 19 January 1990 in Istanbul State Security Court.
The trial of Haydar Kutlu and Nihat Sargin, leaders of the TBKP imprisoned since November 1987, which had started in mid-1988 in Ankara State Security Court, was still continuing at the end of 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
TURKEY
The sentences passed under Article 141 on Ali Ugur and six other alleged members of the Turkish Communist Party (TKP) in November 1988 by Izmir State Security Court were confirmed in May by the appeal court. The six, who had been released pending appeal, were reimprisoned (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Ali Ugur had been kept in detention since his arrest.
The Minister of the Interior stated that 4,426 people were detained between January and June in southeast Turkey where most of the population is of Kurdish origin. Of these, 1,558 had been charged. Most of the Kurdish political prisoners known to Amnesty International were charged with violent offences, but some were prisoners of conscience held for nonviolent political or cultural activities.
In February six members of the Kayseri Branch of the legal Socialist Party (SP) were charged imder Article 142 and taken to Kayseri Closed Prison. They had expressed hopes for the freedom and liberties of Kurdish and Turkish citizens and had condemned "state terror" in southeast "Rirkey in a telegram. In May they were convicted by Kayseri State Secimty Court and sentenced to 50 months' imprisonment. However, the verdict was quashed by the appeal comi in October and the prisoners were released.
Trials of religious activists charged under Article 163 for "attempting to change the secular nature of the State" continued. Miinip and Omer Erdem had been imprisoned since mid-1988 on charges of leadership of the brotherhood of the Nurcus, an alleged anti-secular organization. In 1988 they were convicted by Izmir State Security Court but in June the appeal coiurt quashed the sentence. They were retried by Izmir State Security Court in October on a fresh charge and sentenced to 50 months' imprisonment, but released pending further appeal.
Writers, publishers and journalists were imprisoned imder various articles of the Penal Code, including Article 142, Article 159 ("insulting the State authorities") and Article 312 ("incitement to commit a crime"). Some of them were also charged under Article 141.
Celal Giil and Mehmet Bajrrak, co-owners of a political journal, Ozgiir Gelecek, and Bekir Kesen, the editor-in-chief, were detained on 22 July in Ankara. Their joiu--
nal had reported a speech about the situation of Kurdish women, given at a women's congress in June by Nuray Ozkan, a doctor. She was charged with making separatist propaganda. The other three were charged with membership of a banned Kurdish organization. OzgurJuk Yolu, Path of Freedom. Nuray Ozkan was released on 27 September, the others on 6 October, but the trial of all four was still in progress at the end of the year,
Many political prisoners have been sentenced to imprisonment or death after unfair trials. Although martial law was lifted in 1987, trials before military courts continued. Over 60,000 people were sentenced by military courts during the 1980s. Some defendants had been held in pre-trial detention for more than eight years. Since 1984 thousands of political prisoners have been tried before state security courts. Both military and state security courts have failed to investigate allegations of torture and in some cases have permitted statements extracted under torture to be used as evidence. In addition, most defendants have not been granted facilities for an adequate defence.
There were many new allegations of widespread and systematic torture of political and criminal detainees and prisoners. Even children were among the reported victims. The same methods of torture were reported by almost all detainees: blindfolding and being stripped naked, beatings on all parts of the body, particularly the soles of the feet [falaqa), hosing with ice-cold water and applying electric shocks.
In most cases the victims were held incommunicado in police stations, but allegations of torture and ill-treatment also came from high-security prisons for political prisoners, known as E- and L-type prisons.
One case was that of Salih Zeyrek, aged 19. In July he and seven villagers from Simak district were interrogated for over 10 days at the local rmal police station. Salih Zeyrek said that he was confined in a closed barrel for 24 hours. In addition to the July heat, cotton wool was burned on the lid. The others were forced into the barrel in turn. Those not in the barrel were constantly beaten.
Oguz Yaman, a defendant accused of belonging to a banned organization, testified in court that in Mersin Police Headquarters he was stripped naked, his
TURKEY
legs and arms were tied to the ground and he was given electric shocks to his penis and other parts of his body. He said that he was then hosed with ice-cold water. This testimony was typical of hundreds received during the year.
Some prisoners were reported to have died follovring torture and ill-treatment. Mehmet Yalginkaya and Hiiseyin Hiisnii Eroglu, imprisoned for alleged membership of a banned Kurdish organization, died on 2 August. They had been on hunger-strike for 35 days in Eskisehir Prison. On 2 August they and 257 other hungei^striking prisoners were transferred to Aydin Prison in metal vans ventilated only by a small hole in the back, despite the heat. When the 15-hour journey was over, they were reportedly stripped naked, hosed with ice-cold water and beaten. The Public Prosecutor in Aydin announced that an autopsy had established that the two prisoners died of dehydration. However, a second autopsy on Hiiseyin Hiisnii Eroglu reportedly also found bruises on his body.
At least 10 people were sentenced to death by military and civilian courts. Other death sentences were confirmed by appeal courts. By the end of the year the number of people under sentence of death who had exhausted all judicial appeals had reached 255. Draft amendments to the Penal Code announced by the cabinet in September would reduce the 29 offences carrying a mandatory death penalty by 13. However, the changes referred to provisions hardly ever used.
Hundreds of Iranians fleeing from persecution in Iran continued to seek refuge in "Rirkey. Those caught crossing the border without authorization were frequently denied access to the relevant Turkish officials or to the unhcr to have their asylum claims assessed. Many were summarily returned, including some recognized as refugees by the unhcr. It emerged that seven members of a Kurdish opposition group in Iran, two of whom had been recognized by the unhcr, were executed in Iran shortly after being forcibly returned in November 1988.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to call for the release of prisoners of conscience, for fair and prompt trials for all political prisoners, and for an end to torture and the death penalty. In April Amnesty International submitted to the government a revised list of 219
names of prisoners who reportedly had died in custody between December 1979 and March 1989, asking about the cause of death. At the end of the year replies on 174 cases had been received, acknowledging ill-treatment in 41 cases.
The Turkish authorities also responded to a number of specific torture allegations raised by Amnesty International. In some cases they stated that investigations were still in progress, in others that medical reports had shown that torture had not been inflicted.
In January Amnesty International published a report on the systematic abuse of human rights in Hukey, followed in October by a further report on torture and unfair trials of political prisoners.
In June Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister about three Greek Cypriots, missing since 1974 when they were reportedly taken prisoner by the Turkish Armed Forces (see Amnesty International Report 1975, 1976 and 1978). A reply was received in July from the Turkish Cypriot leader, Rauf Denktas (see Cyprus).
Amnesty International sought to prevent the refoulement of Iranian refugees. It appealed to the Hirkish authorities on behalf of a number of individuals and continued to urge that all asylum-seekers be given access to fair procedures for assessing their asylum claims.
Amnesty International delegates observed the trial of 20 alleged members of the Turkish Communist Party/Union (tkp/b) in March in Malatya State Security Court. All 12 defendants present alleged that they had been tortured. In September Amnesty International delegates observed the trial before Izmir Criminal Court of Dr Alpaslan Berktay, President of Izmir Human Rights Association, charged with insulting the authorities for having called torturers "the devil in person". Dr Berktay was acquitted in October.
In February Amnesty International drew attention to its concerns about torture in an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and in May the organization submitted information about its concerns for United Nations review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
