CHINA
At least 1,000 people were killed and thousands more injured in the capital, Beijing, in early June when troops fired into crowds of unarmed protesters and bystanders to suppress pro-democracy protests. An atmosphere of terror made it impossible to determine the true death
CHINA
toll. Thousands of people were arrested throughout China in connection with the protests, including many prisoners of conscience, and held incommunicado. Some were reportedly severely beaten or tortured by soldiers or police. Dozens were publicly reported to have been sentenced to death or to terms of imprisonment after summary and unfair trials, and there were reports of secret executions. Earlier, over 1,000 people, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested after martial law was imposed in Lhasa, capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region (tar), in March; some of them were also reportedly tor-tured, sentenced after unfair trials or summarily executed. Prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years continued to be held and further arrests for religious or political activities unrelated to the pro-democracy movement were also reported throughout the year. Torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects remained common and the death penalty continued to be used extensively. At least 273 people were known to have been executed during the year.
Student protests started in Beijing in mid-April and spread in May to most major cities, evoking wide popular support and developing into a pro-democracy movement. Several himdred students began a hunger-strike to demand political reform on 13 May, following which hundreds of thousands of people congregated to support them in Tiananmen Square in central Beijing. On 18 May an estimated one million people demonstrated in the capital in support of the students. On 20 May martial law was imposed in Beijing to "firmly stop the unrest", to safeguard public order and to "ensure the normal function" of government. On 23 May around one million people again took to the streets to protest the decision.
On the night of 3 to 4 June, hundreds of armoured military vehicles escorted by tens of thousands of troops moved into the centre of Beijing to enforce martial law. At least 1,000 people — mostly unarmed civilians, including children and old people — were killed and thousands were wounded by troops firing both at random and deliberately into the crowds. Further shootings of unarmed civilians occurred in the next few days.
Goverrunent reports said the aim was to "clear" Tiananmen Square of the thousands
of students and workers occupying it, and to "restore order". It justified its use of lethal force by saying that a "counterrevolutionary rebellion" had occurred and that a "tiny handful" of people had exploited the student unrest with the aim of overthrowing the Chinese Communist Party and the socialist system in China.
In the following months at least 6,000 people were officially reported to have been arrested throughout the country in connection with the protests. The true number of those detained was believed to be much higher. Unofficial sources reported that in Beijing alone between 8,000 and 10,000 people had been arrested, and at least twice as many were believed to have been detained elsewhere. Some were held for questioning for a few days or weeks and released without being charged. Others were still detained without trial at the end of 1989 and some had been sentenced to imprisonment or death.
Those arrested included students, peasants, teachers, writers, journalists, artists, academics, military officers and unemployed people. Some charged with "counter-revolutionary" offences were believed to be prisoners of conscience, detained solely for the non-violent exercise of their fundamental rights.
Arbitrary detention or imprisonment is facilitated by provisions in Chinese law and by illegal practices which have become the norm, such as arbitrary detention for weeks or months without charge. There are also laws and regulations providing for various forms of administrative detention without charge or trial by the police, which were invoked to hold protesters. In Liaoning province alone, police said in June that they had imposed "administrative sanctions" on 1,000 people for "minor crimes" of "beating, smashing and looting" in connection with the protests.
People arrested for supporting the pro-democracy movement are believed to have been held incommunicado. Chinese law does not permit access to lawyers until a few days before trial — or in some cases until the trial starts. Eye-witnesses reported seeing detainees being severely beaten by soldiers or police. Some detainees were reported to have died as a result of torture.
Some of those arrested were sentenced to death or imprisonment after unfair trials. In June the authorities called on local courts to "try prisoners quickly and punish
CHINA
[them] severely", using 1983 legislation that provides for swift and summary procedures with little opportimity for defence in the trials of "criminals who gravely endanger public security". There is no presumption of innocence in Chinese law and trials are often a mere formality, with the verdicts decided before the trial. The widespread practice of "verdict first, trial second" was openly criticized in 1988 by Chinese lawyers and acknowledged by senior members of the judiciary.
Xiao Bin, a worker from Dalian in northeast China, was the first person known to have been sentenced in connection with the protests for exercising freedom of speech. He was arrested on 11 June after being shown on Chinese television speaking to an American television crew in Beijing earlier that month. On 13 July the authorities said that he had been found guilty under Article 102 of the Criminal Law of "spreading rumours" and "vilifying the righteous act of the martial law troops". He was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement".
In late August the first student known to have been tried in connection with the demonstrations was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment on the same charge. Zhang Weiping, an art student, was accused of telling Voice of America radio in June that students in Hangzhou had successfully asked provincial government officials to fly the national flag at half-mast to mourn those killed in Beijing.
Other protesters were charged with criminal offences such as blocking traffic, damaging vehicles, attacking soldiers or police, arson or looting. They faced summary trials and executions under the 1983 legislation. On 21 June three workers were shot in Shanghai after a "public sentencing rally" for allegedly setting fire to a train after it had ploughed through demonstrators blocking the track and killed at least six people. The next day seven "rioters" were executed in Beijing after being convicted of wounding troops and burning military vehicles in the capital on 4 June. In all, only a few dozen executions were reported publicly, but unofficial sources estimated that several hundred people were executed secretly in Beijing alone after 4 June. Various sources reported that, between June and August, groups of prisoners had been shot before dawn near the
Marco Polo Bridge in the southwest suburbs of Beijing. One report said that at least eight groups of up to 20 people had been shot there by mid-July. Executions were also said to have been carried out at other locations in Beijing.
In Tibet martial law was imposed in Lhasa on 7 March following two days of violent confrontations after police attempted to stop a peaceful demonstration by a small group of Tibetan monks and nuns calling for Tibet's independence. Eyewitnesses described "ill-organized" police savagely beating Tibetans and "firing indiscriminately". By 9 March the official death toll was 16, but Tibetan sources estimated that over 60 people had died and more than 200 had been injured.
Over 1,000 Tibetans were reportedly arrested although official sources acknowledged only a few hundred arrests. Arrests also continued during the following months. Tseten Norgye, a book-keeper, was reported to have been arrested in Lhasa in April or May after police found a mimeograph machine in his house which they alleged was used to print literature advocating Tibetan independence. He was held in Lhasa's Chakpori detention centre and reportedly suffered a severe eye injury as a result of torture. He is believed to have spent between 15 and 20 years in prison in the 1960s and 1970s. His situation was not clear at the end of 1989. There were fears that he might be at risk of summary execution as the authorities appeared to consider him a leading advocate of Tibetan independence. There were unconfirmed reports of summary executions after the March arrests.
Evidence of persistent human rights violations in Tibet continued to come to light in 1989, including reports of numerous arbitrary arrests, long-term detention without charge or trial, and torture. In January the official New China News Agency announced that 27 Tibetans had been publicly tried for offences related to demonstrations in 1987 and 1988. One of them — Yulo Dawa Tsering, a senior monk from Ganden monastery detained in December 1987 — was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and three years' deprivation of political rights in January on charges of "collaborating with foreign reactionary elements".
At least 16 Tibetan nuns were arrested for demonstrating in September and
CHINA
October. Some were sent to labour camps without charge or trial, others sentenced to imprisonment on "counter-revolutionary" charges. Few details of these trials were given but they were not believed to have satisfied international fair trial standards. In August the People's Daily announced that 10 Tibetans accused of offences related to protests in Lhasa in March 1988 had been sentenced to imprisonment. Others were tried and sentenced during the following months. One, named as Passang, was sentenced to life imprisonment for taking part in the protests.
Evidence of torture and ill-treatment in Tibet included testimonies from detainees released in late 1988 and early 1989. Many detainees were reported to have been subjected to torture, including severe beatings, shocks with electric batons and prolonged suspension by the arms. Some detainees reportedly died as a result.
Many prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years remained in detention throughout 1989, despite an unprecedented appeal in February by 33 leading Chinese intellectuals. They urged the release of all political prisoners to mark the 40th anniversary of the foundation of the People's Republic of China. The authorities responded by criticizing sharply those who had initiated the appeal.
Xu Wenli was one of dozens of supporters of the democracy movement of the late 197gs who remained in prison. He was arrested in 1981 and later sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment for "coimter-revolutionary activities". Since 1986 he has been held in solitary confinement in harsh conditions {see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989). He was reportedly in poor health.
Song Yude was one of several Protestant evangelists who also remained in prison. He was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in 1986 on charges of "counterrevolutionary propaganda and incitement".
Various church groups continued to be harassed and some of their members were arrested for carrying out religious activities without official approval. Among them were several Catholic priests and seminarians not affiliated to the officially recognized Patriotic Catholic Association. Three Catholic seminarians detained in Hebei province in January 1989 were reportedly stripped naked, beaten, forced to lie on cold concrete and burned with cigarettes
while in police custody.
In April several hundred Catholic villagers were severely beaten by police during a police raid on the village of Youtong, Hebei province. Two youths were reported to have died as a result and over 300 villagers, including old people and children, were reportedly injured, 88 seriously. Police took away 32 people.
The death penalty continued to be used extensively. During 1989 Amnesty International recorded 282 death sentences and 273 executions. The true totals were thought to be much higher.
In August Deng Anwei, an accountant, and Song Shunwen, a private businessman, were executed on charges of corruption, fraud and fleeing the country to avoid arrest. They were just two of the many executed in a continuing government "crackdown" on crime. Other executions were carried out in the suppression of the pro-democracy movement,
Throughout the year. Amnesty International sent numerous appeals and inquiries to the government about violations of human rights in China, but received no direct reply.
Following the imposition of martial law in Lhasa, Amnesty International mged the government to disclose the names of all those detained, to release prisoners of conscience and others not charged with a recognizably criminal offence, and to safeguard detainees against torture. After reports of summary executions, it also urged the government to cease executions. Amnesty International made further, urgent and intensive appeals in June after the killings in Beijing and urged the government to take immediate action to halt arbitrary arrests and detentions, torture, unfair trials and executions.
Amnesty International made an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (unchr) in February drawing attention to persistent reports of torture and ill-treatment of Tibetans. The Chinese delegation at the unchr denied that Hbetan detainees had been tortured and said some allegations had been investigated, but gave no details of such investigations.
Amnesty International also sent a report on the June events in Beijing to the un. In August it made an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
CHINA/COLOMBIA
On 31 August the Sub-Commission adopted a resolution expressing concern about the events in China and, for the first time, asked the un Secretary-General to transmit information about the situation in China to the unchr. The Chinese delegation rejected the resolution as "null and void" and with no "binding force on China whatsoever".
In a report published in January, The Death Penalty in China, Amnesty International said it had documented over 1,500 executions between 1983 and 1988 but that a comprehensive figure would be much higher. In April the organization published The Death Penalty Debate, which documented official Chinese views on the death penalty and the criticisms voiced by members of China's legal profession over the deficiencies of the judicial process in death penalty cases.
In February Anmesty International published a report. Torture and Ill-treatment in Detention of Tibetans, and submitted it to the Chinese Government, urging an impartial inquiry into the allegations and measures to allow all detainees and ex-detainees to testify about their treatment without risking reprisals.
In August Amnesty International published Prehminary Findings on Killings of Unarmed Civilians, Arbitrary Arrests and Summary Executions since 3 June 1989. This report concluded that many of the killings in Beijing were extrajudicial executions and the consequence of a deliberate decision to put a stop to peaceful protests even if this meant widespread killing. A government representative said on 31 August that the report constituted "interference" in its internal affairs and was "unreasonable and without foundation".
Before the 40th anniversary of the People's Republic of China on 1 October, Amnesty International again urged the government to release all prisoners of conscience, citing several cases, and to commute all death sentences.
