URUGUAY
In April a national referendum resulted in the retention of the 1986 Expiry Law, which had ended state powers to prosecute military and police personnel for human rights violations committed under the military government. Official investigations into "disappearances" continued but failed to clarify any case. Three people died in disputed circumstances while in police custody or during arrest; official investigations were opened into these cases.
In elections in November, Luis Alberto Lacalle of the main opposition Blanco (National) Party was elected President. He was due to succeed President Julio Maria Sanguinetti on 1 March 1990.
On 16 April the electorate voted in a referendum not to repeal the 1986 Expiry Law which had ended the state's power to prosecute or punish military and police personnel for human rights violations committed during the period of military rule from 1973 to 1985; however, a strong minority (42 per cent) supported repeal. The referendum brought to a close a two-year campaign against the law by human rights
URUGUAY
groups, relatives of victims and opposition politicians (see Amnesty International Report 1989].
Under the Expiry Law the government had responsibility for administrative investigations into "disappearances" during military rule. However, the investigations were entrusted to military prosecutors, leading to serious doubts regarding the impartiality of the investigations. In six cases the military prosecutor had concluded that the "disappeared" had never been detained, despite considerable evidence to the contrary presented to the courts by relatives and human rights groups (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989). In January an official investigation into the fate of Juan Manuel Brieba, who "disappeared" in 1975, was closed. A carpenter and member of the Communist Party, luan Manuel Brieba was detained with his mother in October 1975 at their home in Montevideo. His mother, who was released a few days later, claimed she had seen her son while in detention, but he was never seen again. The Montevideo police authorities failed to supply information about the ownership of a vehicle used in the detention, which was alleged to belong to the Ministry of Defence. The military prosecutor concluded that there was no evidence of the participation of the armed forces or police in the "disappearance". He drew similar conclusions in other cases and continued to investigate at least 10 others.
In June Sara Méndez presented a complaint to a civilian court stating that the adoptive parents of a child living in Montevideo, whom she believed to be her son, were concealing his true identity. Sara Méndez had been detained in 1976 in Buenos Aires during a clandestine operation carried out by Uruguayan and Argentinian security forces. On her detention her tbree-week-old son, Simón Antonio Riquelo, was taken from her and his whereabouts remained unknown. Sara Méndez was subsequently transferred to Uruguay and was released in March 1981. The magistrate investigating the case recommended referral to the Executive under the Expiry Law. However, the Expiry Law refers to the investigation of crimes committed by military or police personnel; lawyers representing Sara Méndez argued that the Simón Riquelo case related to a possible criminal offence, simulation of civil status committed by civilians, and the
investigation of the identity of a minor. No decision had been reached by the end of the year and the adoptive parents continued to refuse blood tests on the child.
Two men died in police custody in disputed circumstances. Guillermo Machado, a construction worker, was arrested with a friend on 16 July while eating lunch in a Montevideo square. The friend was released shortly after arrest, but Guillermo Machado was kept in detention after an altercation with the officer in charge about the return of his personal belongings. That evening he was found unconscious in his cell, and taken to hospital where he died without regaining consciousness on 24 luly. During an inquiry into the death, police officers testified that Guillermo Machado had attempted suicide by hanging himself with a sweater, a version which was denied by his relatives. The judge said he found insufficient evidence to sustain criminal charges in connection with the death, but ordered the police officer responsible to be tried on a charge of illegal arrest. The Machado case provoked questions in parliament and intense public debate. Large demonstrations were held in protest at powers exercised by the police to conduct razzias (sweeps) in poor neighbourhoods and to hold people detained for questioning. As a result of the controversy, the Minister of the Interior, Antonio Marchesano, resigned and police sweeps were suspended.
In August lorge Ricardo Inciarte Castells, a trader, died in similar circumstances. He was arrested outside a bar in Montevideo and was taken to a police station where, according to a police statement, he hanged himself with his trousers from the bars of his cell window. He was taken to hospital but was dead on arrival. The owner of the bar reported that lorge Inciarte was severely beaten on arrest, was bleeding profusely and that the police ignored his requests to be taken to hospital. An inquiry found that he had committed suicide but at the end of the year it was reported that new witnesses had come forward and the family was seeking to reopen the case.
Also in August, Néstor Castillo Romero, who suffered fi'om psychiatric problems, was killed outside his home, a shack in a poor Montevideo neighbourhood. According to a police statement, he was shot in the leg after resisting arrest and firing a pistol at a police officer, and died after
URUGUAY/VENEZUELA
being taken to hospital. Neighbours, however, claimed they heard only one shot and that while Néstor Castillo lay wounded, a police officer had struck two heavy blows on his head with a truncheon. Investigations into the killing were continuing at the end of the year.
In February Amnesty International sent letters to leaders of the three major political parties outlining its concerns with regard to the Expiry Law. In not providing guarantees for ¿11 and impartial investigations of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, relatives of victims had been deprived of legal means to establish the fate and whereabouts of their loved ones. The law thus appeared to conflict with Uruguay's obligations under international human rights treaties.
