BURKINA FASO
TWenty political prisoners detained without charge or trial since 1987 were freed in August. Four people accused of planning to overthrow the government were executed in September without any form of trial. The government denied that prisoners arrested in December, accused of conspiring against the government, had been executed, but some were reported to have been tortured. There were uncon-
firmed reports in January of five other executions. Seven people were sentenced to death for criminal offences in March but had not been executed by the end of the year.
Twenty people associated with the former president, Thomas Sankara, who was killed in the October 1987 military coup which brought President Blaise Compaoré to power, remained in detention without charge or trial until August, when they were freed in an amnesty. Most had been held at the headquarters of the Gendarmerie nationale in the capital, Ouagadougou. One had been held at the Conseil de l'Entente building and two had been held under house arrest (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The amnesty for political prisoners was declared on 3 August by President Compaoré to mark the sixth anniversary of the 1983 coup which had brought President Sankara to power.
Two military officers who had played leading roles in the governments of both President Sankara and President Compaoré were summarily executed together with two other soldiers within hours of their arrest on 18 September. The authorities claimed that Commander Jean-Baptiste Lingani, the Minister of Defence and Security, and Captain Henri Zongo, the Minister for Economic Promotion, had planned to detain President Compaoré at Ouagadougou airport on his return from a visit abroad, and then seize power. They and two others - Captain Koundaba and Warrant Officer Gnignin - were not formally charged or given any form of trial. All four were summarily executed by firing squad. Alleged confessions by Commander Lingani and Captain Zongo were broadcast by the official radio station two days after their execution. President Compaoré told journalists that the executions had taken place without his express authorization. However, his government took no action against those who ordered and carried out the killings.
Several people were reported to have been arrested in connection with the alleged coup attempt. They were said to have included Jean Yado Toé, the Secretary of State for Mines, and Soumaila Keita, a teacher. The government denied the reports and said that others who had been arrested, including Hamidou Ouedraogo, were released uncharged after questioning.
A leading trade unionist, Soumane
05050505060606060664730607071010
BURKINA FASO/BURUNDI
Touré, was arrested on 19 September, This was apparently not related to the alleged coup attempt but to an open letter he addressed to President Compaoré complaining about restrictions on trade union activity since June 1987. He was released uncharged after two days.
At least five of those released in August, including Mousbila Sankara, a close relative of President Sankara, were among some 30 civilians and soldiers arrested in late December after it was announced that a conspiracy against the government had been uncovered. The government denied intemational news reports that seven people had been executed. There were also reports that some of those arrested were tortured and that one person might have died as a result. The government publicly stated that those accused of complicity in the alleged conspiracy would be tried according to the law. Most of those arrested had been closely associated with President Sankara: Raymond Train Poda, a former minister of justice, and Guillaume Sessouma, a university teacher, were members of the Union de lutte communiste-reconstruite (ulc-r), Union of Communist Struggle-Reconstructed, a political group which had participated in the Sankara government.
In January there were unofficial reports that five soldiers had been executed at Kamboinsin military camp, 12 kilometres ftom Ouagadougou. The reports were neither confirmed nor denied by the government. In March seven men were sentenced to death in two separate trials at the Criminal Court in Ouagadougou: four for attacking a group of tourists, one of whom died; and three for aggravated theft. These were the first death sentences known to have been passed by civilian courts for more than five years, although at least 14 people were sentenced to death by military coiuts and executed between August 1983, when President Sankara came to power, and the beginning of 1989. All seven defendants were sentenced under Article 381 of the Penal Code, which provides for the death penalty if one or more of those found guilty of robbery was armed at the time the offence was committed. The seven men lodged appeals to a higher court and had not been executed by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the fair trial or release of those arrested after the coup in 1987 and wel-
comed their release in August. Amnesty International protested to the government about the summary executions of four people in September and urged that no farther executions take place. It also sought information, without response, about others arrested at the same time, urging that they receive a fair trial if accused of committing an offence. Earlier, Amnesty Intemational had expressed concern about the executions of seven soldiers in December 1988 and appealed for commutation of the seven death sentences passed in March.
