TANZANIA
Two prisoners of conscience were released on the mainland. In Zanzibar non-violent critics or opponents of the government were among more than 100 people arrested and detained for short periods. Fifteen people jailed in Zanzibar in connection with a demonstration in 1988 may have been prisoners of conscience. Police on the mainland reportedly ill-treated criminal suspects, causing the death of at least one person. The High Court sentenced at least 18 people to death for murder. Fifteen Burundi refugees arrested in March for their non-violent political activities were still detained at the end of the year.
Opposition in Zanzibar to continued union with mainland Tanzania became
TANZANIA
increasingly vocal. Political opponents of the union called for a referendum on its termination. In March former president Julius Nyerere, who heads the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi, Party of the Revolution, urged government officials in Zanzibar to arrest people who insulted national leaders or incited others to defy the country's sole legal party. He suggested that such people be held under renewable 48-hoiu detention orders, effectively without charge or trial.
In April flogging was added to imprisonment as punishment for a range of offences, including robbery and assault committed with intention to steal. However. no reports of floggings were received.
The authorities released two prisoners of conscience in April. James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Othman Upindo had been detained in 1986 and then banished to remote parts of the country in 1987 for circulating a petition calling for a multi-party system in Tanzania (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
In August K.L. Bazigiza, a student leader, was arrested after he publicly criticized the composition of a Tanzanian delegation sent to a youth festival in North Korea. He had been among the delegates and was considered to be a prisoner of conscience until his release, without charge, later in August.
At least 100 people were arrested in Zanzibar in connection with opposition to the union with mainland Tanzania. Many were released without charge after 48 hours' detention. Others were charged with attending illegal meetings or participating in proscribed political activities. In June, 35 people on the island of Pemba were charged with membership of an illegal
political party and with attending illegal meetings. They were released on bail and, like most others who faced such charges, had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
Seif Shariff Hamad, a former chief minister of Zanzibar and a prominent critic of the union, was arrested in May shortly after he had called for a referendum on the union. He was initially charged with attending illegal meetings on Pemba. Following a search of his home, illegal possession of government documents was added to the charges against him. This offence is punishable by up to 12 years' imprisonment. In July the charges were changed on the grounds that some of the documents allegedly found addressed intelligence matters. Under the terms of a national security law he may now face up to 20 years' imprisonment. He was refused bail and remained in custody at the end of the year, awaiting the outcome of a preliminary inquiry into whether evidence against him warrants his prosecution. He may be a prisoner of conscience.
In June, 15 people held in Zanzibar who may be prisoners of conscience were sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for participating in an illegal demonstration and destroying property. Three of them were also convicted of inciting others to breach the peace. The 15 were arrested after a demonstration held in May 1988 to protest against a speech by Sofia Kawawa, the head of the Tanzania Womens' Organization. She had criticized a number of Muslim practices on the grounds that they discriminate against women. As police broke up the demonstration, cars were damaged and stones were thrown at them. The police opened fire, killing two demonstrators and wounding several others. Official accounts of the demonstrations differed significantly from those of eye-witnesses. It was not clear that the 15 men convicted were involved in the violence which occurred at the end of the demonstration.
Several reports alleged that criminal suspects on the mainland had been ill-treated and tortured by the sungusungu, local police employed by traditional authorities, and the ordinary police. In at least two cases, the authorities arrested police officers accused of torturing or ill-treating prisoners. In July, 11 sungusungu were charged with torturing four criminal suspects whom they had allegedly beaten
in Bukoba. In September Teretid David Nkunda died in Oysterbay Police Station in Dar es Salaam and two police officers were charged with his murder. Their trial had not begun by the end of the year.
The High Court sentenced at least 18 prisoners to death by hanging, all of them convicted of murder. There were no reports of executions.
Fifteen refugees from Burundi, who had lived in Tanzania for several years, were arrested in March at Mishamo refugee camp in Mpandi District. They included Remi Gahutu, President of a Burundi opposition movement, the Parti pour la lib-ration du peuple Hutu (palipehutu), Hutu People's Liberation Party. The Tanzanian authorities accused the 15 of political activity which could be detrimental to Tanzania's relations with Burundi. The detainees were released shortly after arrest and ordered to leave the country. When they failed to depart they were rearrested and held in Keko Prison in Dar es Salaam, pending deportation to a third country.
In April at least 21 other Burundi refugees were reportedly arrested in Ulyankulu refugee camp, also for alleged political activities, and detained in Urambo Prison. It was not clear if they remained in detention at the end of the year. The arrests coincided with improved relations between Tanzania and Burundi.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Othman Upindo, while remaining concerned about the short-term detention of people arrested in Zanzibar on account of their peaceful political activities. The organization appealed for the release of K.L. Bazigiza and investigated the cases of Seif Shariff Hamid and 15 other people in Zanzibar who may have been prisoners of conscience. In September Amnesty International raised its concerns in Zanzibar when the organization's representatives met Dr Omar Ali luma, the Chief Minister of Zanzibar, in London.
