ETHIOPIA
Detention without trial of government opponents, including prisoners of conscience, continued. Over 170 people were arrested and held incommunicado after an unsuccessful coup attempt in May: the trial of 14 of them began in December but it was feared that some others might have died or been executed in custody. Over 900 prisoners were released in September: these included over 300 political detainees, many of whom were prisoners of conscience. As in previous years, the security forces were reported to have tortured or ill-treated political prisoners and to have extrajudicially executed some politi> cal prisoners and many unarmed civilians
ETHIOPIA
as fighting continued between government troops and opposition forces in several parts of the country.
A state of emergency imposed in 1988 remained in force in Eritrea and Hgray, where opposition forces held or gained control of substantial territory. There was also fighting in other regions, including Gojjam, Wollega and Hararghe. Peace talks between the government and the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (eplf) began in September, and for several months there was a de facto cease-fire in Eritrea. However, intensified fighting continued in the second half of the year in the Wollo, Gondar and Shoa regions of central Ethiopia, as the Hgray People's Liberation Front (tplf) and an allied group extended their control and captured several towns. Incidents were reported of the eplf and tplf imprisoning or executing political opponents.
In an abortive coup attempt on 16 May by members of the armed forces, led by the army chief of staff and air force cotmnan-der, government opponents shot dead the Minister of Defence. Soldiers in the Eritrean capital of Asmara mutinied and called for peace negotiations wdth opposition forces. They also demanded constitutional changes to permit freedom of expression. The coup attempt was put down after three days of fighting in the capital, Addis Ababa, Asmara and other military centres. The government reported that 44 coup supporters had been killed, including the army chief of staff and air force commander. It was impossible to evaluate claims by unofficial sources that several people arrested in connection with the coup attempt had been executed extrajudicially.
It remained difficult to obtain information about political prisoners and was frequently impossible to corroborate reports of abuses committed in areas affected by armed conflict. Intimidation by the security authorities of suspected opponents, relatives of political prisoners and released political prisoners added to the problems of acciuately assessing the human rights situation, and made it impossible to determine the precise number of political prisoners held in 1989. However, at least several hundred were believed to be still held at the end of the year, including prisoners of conscience, despite the major releases.
After the May coup attempt, large numbers of armed forces personnel were arrested, in addition to those captured in the fighting. The government annoimced that 176 members of the armed forces were being held, but unofficial sources reported that several civilians had also been detained including the wives of three of the coup leaders. Among the civilians arrested were Teferra Wonde, former deputy prime minister, and Genet Mebratu, a World Health Organization employee and widow of one of the coup leaders. Some of those arrested were later released uncharged, including two other wives of coup leaders, but Genet Mebratu remained in detention. The detainees were held incommunicado and there were unconfirmed reports that at least one detainee "disappeared" while in custody. The authorities announced in September that a special military court was being set up to try the detainees and on 19 December the joint trial began of 13 army generals and the navy commander on a charge of treason. The trial was continuing at the end of the year.
Other arrests of alleged government opponents were reported diu-ing the year, particularly in Addis Ababa and areas where opposition forces were active. Prisoners often appeared to be held on suspicion of supporting insurgents from their home areas solely on the basis of their ethnic or regional origin. Members of several Protestant churches were reportedly detained for short periods in western Ethiopia and accused of "anti-revolutionary activities". Arrests of people trying to evade conscription were also reported.
On 2 September the government announced an amnesty to mark the 15th anniversary of the revolution which over-
ETHIOPIA
threw Emperor Haile Selassie's govermnent in 1974. In all, 907 prisoners were reportedly released, including 87 political prisoners. Many prisoners of conscience were freed, including Bede-Mariam, Michael and Wossen-Seged Mekonnen, three grandsons of the late Emperor Haile Selassie who had been held without charge since 1974. Also released were Tsehai Tolessa, wife of the Reverend Gudina Tumsa of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church who "disappeared" in 1979; Martha Kumsa, a journalist; and Zegeye Asfaw, a former Minister of lustice. They were among dozens of members of the Oromo ethnic group, held since 1980 on account of their alleged links with the Oromo Liberation Front (OLf), who were freed. Berhanu Dinka, Ethiopia's former representative to the United Nations (UN) in New York, who had been detained since 1986, was also freed. Over 30 long-term untried detainees who had been held as suspected supporters of Eritrean and Hgrayan opposition groups were released, as were seven suspected members of the opposition Ethiopian People's Democratic Alliance who had been detained without charge or trial since 1985,
A few days after the amnesty, a further 231 prisoners were released in Asmara. Most appeared to be political prisoners. Other political prisoners were also reported to have been released during 1989. One, Shimelis Teklu, a UN employee imprisoned since 1984, was freed in mid-1989 when the Supreme Court upheld his appeal against conviction for espionage. Amnesty International had been investigating his case as a possible prisoner of conscience.
Despite these releases, several hundred political prisoners remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1989, including some held since the early 1980s. In all cases they were held unlawfully: the Constitution requires that all detainees are brought before a court within 48 hours of arrest but the authorities have consistently failed to comply with this provision. Those who remained in detention included Dagne Bayissa, a development officer of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, and Demissie Kebede, a trade imionist. Both had been held since 1980, apparently because of suspected links with the olf. Berhanu Mamo, a former mayor of Mekelle, and Amare Dori, a district administrator in Adua, were also believed to be
still held. They were among hundreds of Tigrayans arrested in 1984 and accused of links with the tplf. Colonel Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed and 17 other members of the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia, an Ethiopia-based organization fighting the Somali Government, also remained in detention without charge or trial. They have been held since 1985 and
1986	[see Amnesty International Report 1989). There was no news about Tesfa-Mariam Zeggai, a UN employee and possible prisoner of conscience arrested in 1982 and serving a life sentence imposed in
1987	for alleged Unks with the eplf (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
There were new reports of torture, particularly in relation to the prisoners arrested after the May coup attempt. The prisoners were held incommimicado and some allegedly died under torture, although this could not be confirmed. The conditions under which prisoners were held for investigation - particularly in state security police centres - were harsh and amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
There were reports of extrajudicial executions of civilians by government security forces operating in Eritrea. Some of those detained in connection with the May coup attempt were said to have been summarily killed in custody. There were also reports that several airport employees were executed extrajudicially in Addis Ababa in October after being accused of sabotage.
Armed opposition organizations were also reported to have executed prisoners and committed other abuses. In May an eplf group was said to have killed up to 200 members of the Afar ethnic group who refused to join their organization. The tplf was reported to have executed two people - Teklu Hawaz, a former tplf central committee member, and Alula Tadesse, a journalist. The tplf was also reported to be holding prisoners in territory under its control, including Esteda Hadush, the wife of a former tplf military commander who had criticized the organization, and Hagos Atsbeha, the commander's brother, who had been abducted by the tplf in 1988 from Sudan, where he was a recognized refugee.
Amnesty International continued to appeal to President Mengistu Haile-Mariam for the release of prisoners of conscience and for other political prisoners to be
ETHIOPIA/riJI
brought to trial fairly and promptly, or released. The organization also expressed concern to the government about the incommunicado detention and reported tortme of those arrested after the May coup attempt, but no reply was received.
In March, in an oral statement to the UN Commission on Human Rights, Amnesty International drew attention to the government's attempt to cover up a pattern of serious human rights violations.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Ethiopia for UN review imder a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. The submission was also sent to the government, together with reconmiendations for measures to halt abuses, but no response was received.
In August Amnesty International published a report. Political Imprisonment in Ethiopia, which detailed the cases of many prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners. The report criticized the absence of effective safeguards against arbitrary and illegal detention. It concluded that persistent reports of torture indicated that the law prohibiting and penalizing tortiu'e was rarely applied. The government made no comment on the report, nor did it reply to other appeals or inquiries by Amnesty International. However, many of the prisoners mentioned in the report were among those released in September.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience in September and informed the authorities of its wish to send a delegation to visit Ethiopia to discuss human rights. However, no reply had been received by the end of the year.
