COLOMBIA
Many hundreds of people, including judicial officials investigating human rights violations, were extrajudicially executed. Scores of other people "disappeared" after detention. Multiple killings of unarmed civilians, attributed to army
personnel, police and paramilitary groups under army or police command, continued. The government failed to disband paramilitary organizations, despite its introduction of decree laws outlawing such forces. Independent investigations uncovered further evidence of links between the regular armed forces and paramilitary groups. At least four prison-ers of conscience were detained and charged under special decree laws ostensibly introduced to combat common criminals. Torture of political detainees, some of whom were prisoners of conscience, continued to be reported.
Cease-fires declared by the major guerrilla groups at the beginning of the year led to a reduction in the number of direct confrontations with government forces. Negotiations between the government and the Movimiento 19 de Abril (m-19), 19 April Movement, led to the signing of a peace agreement in November, subject to ratification by Congress. Other guerrilla forces, however, rejected the peace proposal.
The Ejército de Liberación Nacional (eln), National Liberation Army, continued its campaign of bombing oil pipelines and other economic targets. The eln was also responsible for the execution-style killing of kidnapped victims. In October a 73-year-old Roman Catholic bishop, Jesús Emilio Jaramillo, was seized by gunmen who identified themselves as members of the eln. The following day Bishop Jaramillo's body was found with gunshot woimds to the head. The eln reportedly claimed that the bishop's efforts to mediate between the eln and the government constituted "obstinate interference" in the eln's "internal affairs".
COLOMBIA
The apparently drugs-related assassination of presidential aspirant Luis Carlos Galán in August heightened political tension and signalled a dramatic increase in criminal violence, The government of President Virgilio Barco Vargas decreed state of siege laws to combat the drugs trade. The legislation included Decree Law 1859, which empowered the armed forces to arrest and hold suspects incommunicado for up to seven working days in military installations. A wave of bombings in the principal cities and selective killings of politicians, journalists and judicial officials were attributed to drug-traffickers, apparently retaliating against renewal of an extradition treaty with the LJnited States of America.
Against a background of continuing civil conflict and extensive drugs-related violence, government forces — sometimes operating in alliance with drug-traffickers — and paramilitary groups under their command committed widespread and systematic human rights violations. The abuses included extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". Members of legal left-wing parties such as the Communist Party and the political alliance Unión Patriótica (UP), Patriotic Union, continued to be targeted by paramilitary "death squads".
Luis Eduardo Yaya Cristancho, a UP town councillor in Villavicencio, Meta department, was shot dead by unidentified armed men in February. He reportedly had been subjected to death threats and given a police escort. On the morning of his death, however, the escort failed to appear. Within eight days of Luis Yaya's death, three members of the Communist Party's national executive were killed. Teófilo Forero, its National Secretary; Leonilde Mora, his wife; and José Antonio Sotelo, a Central Committee member, were killed in Bogotá when armed men opened fire on the car in which they were travelling. Four days later José Antequera, a member of the UP national coordinating committee and former general secretary of the Communist Youth, was shot dead by armed men at Bogotá's international airport, Senator Ernesto Samper Pizano, a senior member of the ruling Liberal Party, was seriously wounded in the attack.
Other killings of left-wing political leaders included the October shooting of Dr Gabriel Santamaría Montoya, a UP regional
president in Antioquia department and a deputy in the departmental assembly. Dr Santamaría had recently returned to the country after recovering abroad from injmies received in an earlier attempt on his life. The four assailants, armed with submachine-guns, entered the departmental assembly building in Medellin unhindered, despite the presence of numerous police guards at the entrance to the building. and killed Dr Santamaría. Dr Santamaria's bodyguards killed one of the armed men as he attempted to leave the building.
"Disappearance" after detention by regular armed forces and paramilitary personnel continued to be reported, particularly from rural areas undergoing counter-insur-gency operations. In February a military patrol detained Isidro Caballero Delgado, a teacher, and Maria del Carmen Santana, who was accompanying him, in Guaduas, department of Cesar. The patrol was believed to be from the Morrison military base in Líbano. Eye-witnesses testified before the regional Procurator that soldiers arrested the two, who were later taken away towards a mountainous area. Military authorities persistently refused to acknowledge their detention, and their whereabouts remained unknown.
In a report released in February, the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances foimd that the complexities of Colombian society made any comprehensive identification of those responsible for "disappearances" extremely difficult. It concluded, however, that "circumstantial evidence strongly suggests or precise information clearly demonstrates involvement of units of the armed forces or security services in enforced or involuntary disappearances".
The Colombian authorities made little progress in tracing the whereabouts of detainees who had "disappeared" or in bringing those responsible to justice. In February the Procurator General's Public Ministry ordered the 15-day suspension of an army captain for his part in the August 1986 arrest and "disappearance" of Alvaro Falla. In this case and all others, however, the military court system acquitted or dropped charges against members of the armed forces accused by the Public Ministry of responsibility for " disappearances ".
Clear evidence of official responsibility
COLOMBIA
for abuses attributed to paramilitary forces emerged from investigations by the Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (das), Administrative Security Department, das investigations identified a paramilitary network operating under the cover of acdegam, a cattle ranchers' association based in Puerto Boyacá. The network was allegedly responsible for the torture, "disappearance" and killing of hundreds of peasant farmers, community leaders and members of left-wing political movements in the Magdalena Medio region of central Colombia. The investigations also found that the network operated in coordination with sectors of the Colombian armed forces and was financed by landowners, industrialists and drug-traffickers,
Colonel Luis Bohórquez Montoya, commander of the Bárbula Battalion based in Puerto Boyacá, Magdalena Medio, was removed from his post in April after das investigations revealed that the battalion's base had been used as a training centre for paramilitary groups. In a letter addressed to the Minister of Defence, Colonel Bohórquez claimed he had been made a "scapegoat" and insisted that "the military tasks were carried out in complete accordance with the strategy and orders from army high command".
In April and May President Barco decreed a series of laws designed to combat paramilitary forces. The new decree laws included the suspension of legislation which had empowered the armed forces to provide civilians with military weapons and introduced up to 15 years' imprisonment for membership of an illegal armed group. However, the Colombian Government failed to implement these measures effectively and paramilitary forces continued to commit extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" with virtual impunity.
Some civilian judicial authorities made significant progress in identifying those responsible for human rights violations, including several multiple killings reported in 1988. In April a civilian judge issued arrest warrants against an army captain and several subordinates attached to the XIV Brigade, based in Puerto Berrio, Magdalena Medio region. They were accused of abducting and murdering 17 miners from the Encenillo gold mine in San Rafael, Antioquia department, in June 1988. All of the victims, ranging in age from 17 to 64, were UP activists. They
had apparently been hacked to death. According to the judge's ruling, the killings were reprisals for a left-wing guerrilla attack on an army convoy. It was not known at the end of the year whether the members of the armed forces implicated in the killings in San Rafael had been arrested.
The military justice system continued to reject the competence of civilian courts to investigate abuses attributed to army and police personnel, routinely claiming its own jurisdiction in such cases. Almost without exception, military courts failed to prosecute and convict those accused of committing human rights violations. In February arrest warrants were issued against army and police officers incriminated in the November 1988 attack on Segovia, Antioquia department. The military court system claimed jurisdiction to proceed with criminal investigation of the attack, in which 43 people were killed (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989). In a landmark decision, the Supreme Court of Justice awarded to civilian courts the jurisdiction to prosecute military personnel accused of human rights violations. The Supreme Court ruled that the '"acts of terrorism" allegedly committed by two army officers and one police officer in Segovia were common-law crimes, not linked to their military duties and thus falling outside military jurisdiction. The then Minister of Defence stated that the armed forces would "respect the Supreme Court's ruling although we do not agree with it".
Some civilian members of paramilitary groups were convicted of political killings. In the vast majority of cases, however, members of the armed forces implicated by independent inquiries into human rights violations were shielded from prosecution by their superior officers. The officers repeatedly failed to comply with arrest warrants issued by the civilian courts.
The killings of civilian judicial officials investigating abuses attributed to members of the armed forces and paramilitary groups increased. In January, 12 members of a judicial commission of inquiry, including magistrates and detectives, were killed in La Rochela, Santander department. Although military authorities promptly attributed responsibility for the killings to guerrilla forces, judicial investigations soon established that army-linked paramilitary forces based in the region were responsible.
