SOMALIA
Over 50 prisoners of conscience - one of them held for almost 20 years - and hundreds of other political prisoners were released under a general amnesty for political prisoners announced in January. A human rights lawyer and several Islamic leaders were among prisoners of conscience arrested in mid-1989, but most were freed within a few months. Hundreds of other political prisoners arrested in 1988 remained in detention without trial, and more were arrested during the year and held for varying periods. Some were tortured or ill-treated in detention, and prison conditions were harsh. Over 200 people were reportedly shot dead by the security forces during anti-government demonstrations in Mogadishu in July. Amid mass arrests, 46 people
detained by military police were extrajudicially executed. In several parts of the country where insurgents were active, reprisal killings of civilian non-combat-ants were reported. Over 100 people were estimated to be under death sentences during 1989, although no official figures were available; several were executed.
There was fighting throughout the year in the north between the opposition Somali National Movement (snm) and government forces. The latter committed numerous human rights violations against civilians suspected of supporting the snm, particularly members of the Issaq clan. Many people fled to Ethiopia, adding to the 400,000 Somali refugees already there, most of whom had fled Somalia in 1988. Fighting also broke out in the south of the country, in particular between government troops and the newly formed Somali Patriotic Movement (spm): here too there were reports of reprisals by government troops against unarmed civilians, thousands of whom fled to Kenya. The snm also reportedly killed a number of unarmed government supporters in early 1989. The victims were members of the Ogaden clan from Ethiopia living in refugee camps in the north.
On 25 January the government announced a general amnesty for all political prisoners and government opponents living abroad. In the following months, hundreds of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners were freed, and there was increasing public debate about human rights and political freedoms. An Amnesty International visit took place in June - the first time representatives from the organization had been allowed to visit during President Mohamed Siad Barre's 20-year rule. However, in a major setback for human rights, there were mass arrests and extrajudicial executions of suspected government opponents shortly afterwards. Some of those arrested were released in October. The goverrunent announced in August that political parties other than the ruling Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party would be permitted to contest the next parliamentary elections, postponed to December 1990.
Among the first to be freed under the general amnesty was Yusuf Osman Samantar, a lawyer and former member of parliament, detained continuously since 1975 and previously for several other
4429854268
SOMALIA
periods since 1969, By March, over 50 prisoners of conscience and several hundred other political prisoners had been released. Among them were prisoners of conscience sentenced to death or long prison terms after unfair trials by the National Security Cornl. They included Aden Yusuf Abokor, medical director of Hargeisa hospital, and others jailed with him in 1982; Abdi Ismail Yunis, a former university dean, and Suleiman Nuh Ali, an architect, who were both serving 24-year prison terms after the commutation of death sentences imposed on them in early 1988; and nine Islamic leaders originally sentenced to death in 1986, whose sentences were commuted to life imprisonment. Also freed were Safia Hashi Madar, a relief agency employee sentenced to life imprisonment in 1985, and five military cadets detained without trial after being forcibly repatriated from Egypt in August 1988. One of the cadets had incorrectly been reported to have died in custody (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Other prisoners of conscience were released later in the year. Fahima Dahir Jama, a school student, and four other women held in Hargeisa since 1986 were freed in August. However, hundreds of other political prisoners detained in 1988 after Snm attacks in the north were believed to be still imprisoned at the end of the year in Hargeisa, Berbera and Borama, Also still held were Hussein Mohamed Nur, an Ethiopian pilot detained without trial since 1976. and Ahmed Dhore Farah, a district judge detained without trial since 1979.
There were numerous new arrests of critics and suspected opponents of the government. Some were held for only a few days, but over 20 were detained without trial for several months. Ismail Jumaale Ossobleh, a prominent lav^ryer who had defended many political prisoners in the previous decade, was arrested in Mogadishu on 13 July. Others detained at the same time were Abdulkadir Aden Abdullah Osman, an engineer and son of a former president of Somalia; Abdirashid Sheikh Ali Sufi, Imam of Casa Populare mosque in Mogadishu; and several other religious leaders.
On 14 July there were mass arrests after anti-govemment demonstrations at the main mosques in Mogadishu. The demonstrators were protesting at the arrests of religious leaders who had criticized the
government's handling of investigations into the murder the previous week of the Roman Catholic Bishop of Mogadishu, Monsignor Salvatore Colombo. Some of the protesters attacked members of the security forces, several of whom were killed. Troops retaliated by shooting demonstrators and other suspected government opponents. In three days, over 200 people were reportedly killed, although the government only acknowledged 28 deaths. Hundreds of other suspected government opponents were arrested, including many who had not taken part in the demonstrations. They were held in National Security Service or army detention centres, such as Danane army camp, 50 kilometres southwest of Mogadishu. Most were released uncharged after a few days or weeks. However, some were still detained without trial at the end of the year, or were unaccounted for and feared killed.
On 16 July soldiers made over 100 arrests in the Medina district of Mogadishu. Forty-seven of those arrested, of whom all except two were members of the Issaq clan, were separated from the rest and taken in army trucks to Jezira, 30 kilometres on the way to Danane army camp. On the beach, soldiers shot them, killing all but one who survived with injuries. President Siad Barre ordered an inquiry into the incident, to be headed by the Chairman of the Defence Committee of the National Assembly. The result of the inquiry had not been disclosed by the end of the year.
On 24 July seciuity forces arrested Major General Aden Abdullahi Nur, a former defence minister, and General Mohamed Abdullah Ba'adleh, a former interior minister. They were accused of inciting opposition to the government - the former in connection with an army mutiny in Kismayu, and the latter in connection with the July demonstrations. Both were members of the National Assembly and ministers in the President's office: they were still detained without trial at the end of 1989.
Despite the constitutional and legal requirements that prisoners should be referred to a court within 48 hours of arrest, Ismail Jumaale Ossobleh, other prisoners of conscience and other political detainees were not taken to court or charged with any offence. The government alleged that Ismail Jumaale Ossobleh was
SOMALIA
"mobilizing an illegal assembly, holding secret meetings to overthrow the government, inciting trouble, and in possession of seditious and anti-govemment publications". He was also questioned about his meetings with Amnesty International delegates in lune, although the government denied that this was the reason for his arrest.
Ismail Jumaale Ossobleh and Abdulkadir Aden Abdullah Osman were released on 21 October in an anmesty to mark the 20th anniversary of President Siad Barre's accession to power. A total of 1,168 other prisoners were freed in the amnesty, but their identities and the reasons for their imprisonment were not made public, so it was not clear if any were political prisoners. Several religious leaders were freed on 1 November, but Abdirashid Sheikh Ali Sufi was still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Abukar Hassan Ahmed, known as "Yare", a law lecturer arrested in Mogadishu in November 1988, was tried by the National Security Court in March 1989, after spending fom months in pre-trial detention on charges of possessing seditious publications. One of these was an Amnesty International report, Somalia: A Long-Term Human Rights Crisis, published in September 1988. He pleaded not guilty and complained that he had been tortured by National Security Service officers. The judges did not order any investigation of his torture allegations and he was convicted. He was freed on pajrment of a fine and later fled the country to avoid rearrest.
Some reports were received of torture or ill-treatment of people arrested during the year for political reasons, particularly after the July demonstrations. Prison conditions were harsh and dozens of criminal prisoners in Mogadishu central prison reportedly died owing to poor conditions and medical neglect. Eleven port employees in Mogadishu died on 16 October after military police arrested them and imprisoned them in an arms store, where they died from suffocation. Eight police officers were later arrested and charged with responsibility for their deaths.
Hundreds of extrajudicial executions were reported in areas where insurgents were active. For example, over 200 civilians were killed by government troops in Erigavo, the capital of Sanag region in the north, soon after SNM forces withdrew after
capturing the town for some homs on 16 March. Killings of civilians by soldiers were also reported near Belet Wein in central Somalia and around the southern port of Kismayu after armed opposition activity by the United Somali Congress (use) and mutinous soldiers in mid-1989. Dozens of civilians were killed by soldiers in Dobleh, on the Kenyan border, on 20 September, after fighting with SPM forces in the area. Others fled to Kenya, but 18 of them were forcibly returned to Somalia by the Kenyan authorities a few days later and were reportedly killed by Somali soldiers. In villages near Galkayo in central Somalia, over 120 civilians were reportedly killed by troops on 24 November for allegedly providing assistance to the use or to soldiers who had mutinied.
Some 100 or more people were believed to be under sentence of death during the year in prisons throughout the country. Several executions were reported in Mogadishu central prison.
Amnesty International welcomed the release in early 1989 of many prisoners of conscience for whose release it had been appealing for many years. It continued to work for some prisoners who had not been released, some of whom were freed later in the year.
In February Amnesty International drew attention to its concerns about torture in an oral statement delivered to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. In May the organization submitted further information about its concerns in Somalia for United Nations review under a proce-dme, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. The submission was also sent to the government, together with recommendations for measures to halt abuses, but no response was received.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Somalia in June for talks with the government at the President's invitation. The delegates met President Siad Barre, relevant government ministers and officials, and received assurances that the government would cooperate with Amnesty International in the protection of human rights in Somalia.
In July, deeply concerned at new human rights abuses so soon after its visit. Amnesty International appealed for the
SOMALIA/SOUTH AFRICA
release of Ismail Jumaale Ossobleh and other prisoners of conscience arrested with him, and for an impartial investigation into the extrajudicial executions at Jezira. In October Amnesty International submitted to the government a series of recommendations for measures to guarantee protection of hiunan rights and published details of its current human rights concerns. The following month it sent the government a full report of its visit, as the basis for further talks requested for early 1990. It urged the government to amend national security laws which were incompatible with international human rights standards and to adopt safeguards to protect people from torture or extrajudicial execution.
