BULGARIA
At least 18 prisoners of conscience, and probably many more, were detained for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression or religion. Dozens of ethnic Turks remained imprisoned in connection with their resistance to the enforced assimilation of the ethnic 'Hirkish minority, which began in 1984. Five human rights activists were detained without charge or trial for nearly four
months before being released on bail. At least seven ethnic l^irks were killed and scores beaten during and immediately after demonstrations protesting against the continuing assimilation campaign. At least four people were sentenced to death and executed.
Important political changes, which began in November with the resignation of Todor Zhivkov, Chairman of the State Council, brought about the relaxation of censorship laws and the growth of independent groups. The new government, headed by former Foreign Minister Petar Mladenov, announced in November the abolition of Article 273 of the Criminal Code and declared an amnesty for all those detained under its provisions. Earlier in the year many prisoners of conscience had been imprisoned under Article 273 for "spreading imtrue allegations" leading to "dissatisfaction with the government" or "confusion within society". In December, 60 prisoners of conscience were released in an amnesty for all those detained under Article 108 of the Criminal Code, which deals with "anti-state agitation and propaganda"; Article 109, which deals with the formation of anti-govemment groups; and a number of other articles. Article 108 was amended to make it apply only to those advocating "fascism or other antidemocratic ideologies" or violence. In late December the government announced an end to key aspects of the official policy of assimilating ethnic Turks. It reinstated the right of ethnic Turks to choose their own names, speak "Rirkish and practise the Islamic religion (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989).
Until December the Bulgarian authorities
BULGARIA
continued to impose strict censorship on information concerning the Tkrkish ethnic minority. Because of the difficulty in obtaining reliable information, it was not clear how many imprisoned ethnic Tbrks were prisoners of conscience. However, it appeared that at least some convicted of offences such as "terrorism" or "hooliganism" might have been imprisoned for their non-violent activities in opposition to the assimilation campaign.
Following large-scale demonstrations in May against the assimilation campaign, many ethnic Turkish activists were expelled from the country. Subsequently, more than 300,000 ethnic Turks were permitted to leave for Turkey. New passport laws easing restrictions on travel abroad were introduced in September.
There were reports of prisoners of conscience jailed for human rights activities. Ali Topalov and Shukri Sherifov, both from Vama, were sentenced in August to six months' and 10 months' imprisonment respectively under Article 273 of the Criminal Code. The basis of the charge was a letter they had sent to the government in May, calling for ethnic TXirks to be granted full religious, cultural and civil rights. The letter was broadcast by foreign radio stations. Shukri Sherifov's sentence was reduced to six months' imprisonment on appeal in September. Both men were released in the November amnesty. Kostadin Ivanov, a factory worker from Mihailovgrad, was sentenced to 22 months' imprisonment in October under Articles 148 ("slandering a public official") and 273 of the Criminal Code, reportedly in connection with the distribution of leaflets and posters concerning the unofficial Independent Association for the Defence of Human Rights. In November Yanko Yankov, a jurist from Sofia, was released from prison after completing a five-year sentence for his human rights activities (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989].
After the May demonstrations many ethnic TYirks were detained and charged with offences against public and state order, some for the peaceful exercise of their rights to freedom of expression and assembly. For example, Fidan Demirov Goranov, who took part in a demonstration in Shumen on 27 May, was subsequently sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment under Article 273 of the Criminal Code. He was released in the November amnesty.
Five prisoners of conscience were held without charge or trial for nearly four months in Sofia. Anton Zapryanov, Nikolay Kolev, Konstantin lïenchev, Hristofor Sabev and Todor Gagalov, all leading members of unofficial human rights organizations, were detained at the end of May and early June after publicly supporting the demands of the ethnic "Rirkish minority for an end to the assimilation campaign. They were released on bail at the beginning of September and all charges were later dropped,
During the year further information was received about Asen Fedaliev Aliev (Bulgarian name Asen Filipov Stoyanov -see Amnesty International Report 1989]. Asen Fedaliev Aliev, an ethnic "Rirk, was detained in 1988 after staging a hunger-strike in protest at the authorities' refusal to allow him to emigrate. He was sentenced in June 1988 to 42 months' imprisonment for "slandering a public official" (Article 148 of the Criminal Code) and "hooliganism" (Article 325, paragraph 1, of the Criminal Code). The authorities stated that while in a state of intoxication Asen Fedaliev Aliev assaulted a restaurant manager in the village of Oborishte in February 1988. Other reports stated that Aliev was assaulted by security agents in the restaurant and that the charges against him were false.
Reports were received of killings and beatings of ethnic Turks by the security forces during and immediately after the May demonstrations. The official death toll was seven, but unofficial sources said many more had died. Hasan Aliev Amaudov, Mehmed Lom and Mehmed Saliev Rushudov died in Todor Ikonomovo, near Kaolinovo, on or around 21 May when troops opened fire into a crowd of reportedly peaceful demonstrators. On 23 or 24 May soldiers fired into a crowd of reportedly peaceful demonstrators in Ezerche in northeast Bulgaria near Razgrad and killed Ahmet Burukov and 18-year-old Sezgin Saliev Karaomerov. Myumjain Fehimov, a radio technician from Momchilgrad, died on 30 May, reportedly from wounds received when he was beaten in the street by security forces on 25 May. Particularly severe beatings in Dzhebel in the south were reported between 22 and 25 May -troops were alleged to have gone from house to house on 22 May indiscriminately beating the occupants.
In September the official Bulgarian
BULGARIA/BURKINA FASO
news agency reported that three men, sentenced to death in 1988 for murdering a woman during a robbery, had been executed. In November it reported that a man. sentenced to death in 1988 for murdering three people during robberies committed between luly and November, had been executed.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the authorities to release prisoners of conscience and to provide further information on a large number of prisoners - most of whom were ethnic Turks - who may have been prisoners of conscience. In February the organization published a report, Bulgaria: Imprisonment of Ethnic Turks and Human Rights Activists. The Bulgarian Government made some information available to Amnesty International in response to allegations referred to in the report, but the organization requested further details on a number of cases. In June Amnesty International wrote to the government calling for full and impartial investigations into reports of killings and beatings of ethnic Turks by the security forces during the second half of May.
