RWANDA
One prisoner of conscience serving a 10-year sentence and at least three political prisoners held without charge or trial remained in detention throughout the year. At least 76 death sentences were commuted by the Head of State; no executions were reported.
In October the Minister of lustice ordered the procuracy to charge or release 1,900 prisoners held without charge or trial in Kigali prison for periods ranging from a few months to several years. It was reported that most of them had been arrested wdthout warrants. It was not clear whether any of those affected by the order had been
**%%%(&&&&***)**
'***%%%%%%(&&&&&
RWANDA/SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
detained for political reasons. There was no subsequent information to indicate how many prisoners were released.
Donat Murego, a prisoner of conscience, continued to serve his 10-year sentence at Ruhengeri Prison in northern Rwanda (see Amnesty International Report 1989). He was convicted in 1981 by the State Security Court of distributing seditious documents. He was due for release in April 1990,
Innocent Ndayambaye, a student who was arrested in October 1986, continued to be held at the central prison in the capital, Kigali. He was reported to have been accused of writing and distributing leaflets criticizing the government of President Juv6nal Habyarimana. His case was reportedly referred to the procuracy for investigation and possible prosecution, but no date was set for his trial and the authorities offered no explanation for his lengthy detention without trial. He appeared to be held for exercising his right to freedom of expression.
Claude Bahintasi and Callixte Sinaruhamagaye remained in detention without charge or trial at Kigali central prison throughout 1989. They were arrested in December 1987 apparently because of their family connections with an opposition leader, Alexis Kanyarengwe, a former government minister who left the country in 1980 to avoid arrest (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In May, Aloys Sebiziga, a medical doctor at Kigali hospital, was also arrested, apparently because he was suspected of having been in contact with Alexis Kanyarengwe. He was still held without charge or trial at the end of the year and, like Claude Bahintasi and Callixte Sinaruhamagaye, appeared to be a prisoner of conscience.
Donat Muvananyabo remained in Ruhengeri Prison's high security unit serving a life sentence imposed in 1983 following his forcible repatriation from Uganda in 1981. He was convicted by the State Security Court of having had contact with opponents of the Rwandese Government while in Uganda, founding an opposition group and writing insulting remarks in his diary about President Habyarimana (see Amnesty International Report 1984). However, it was not clear that his activities involved the use or advocacy of violence and it appeared that he might be a prisoner of conscience.
Seventy-six prisoners had their death
sentences commuted to life imprisonment by President Habyarimana in March, at the beginning of a new session of the national assembly, but many other prisoners reportedly remained under sentence of death. In mid-1988 there were said to be about 200 prisoners under sentence of death at Kigali prison alone (see Amnesty International Report 2989). Five others, including Theoneste Lizinde, a former head of the security service, continued to be held incommunicado and in harsh conditions in Ruhengeri Prison's high security unit. All five, who were sentenced to death in 1985 on charges of secret and unlawful killings of political prisoners in the mid-1970s, were still awaiting a review of their cases by the Appeal Court (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of Donat Murego and investigated the case of Donat Muvananyabo as a possible prisoner of conscience. Amnesty International also pressed for other political detainees to be released if they were not to be charged or brought to trial on recognizably criminal charges. The organization welcomed the commutation in March of 76 death sentences and appealed to the government to commute all death sentences, to reduce the number of offences punishable by death as a step towards abolition of the death penalty, and to ensure that all prisoners facing possible death sentences are provided with automatic access to legal counsel.
