ALBANIA
An unknown number of prisoners of conscience were held in prison or corrective labour camps under legislation which severely restricted certain human rights. People who attempted to exercise their right to freedom of expression or freedom of movement were liable to harsh punishment. A 14-year-old boy allegedly died after he was arrested for attempting to leave the country without official permission. Legal safeguards for political detainees were inadequate and prison conditions harsh. A large number of offences, including all but one of the
political offences defined in the criminal code, were punishable by death. It was not known, however, whether any death sentences were imposed or executions carried out in 1989.
Information about political prisoners and the death penalty was limited as a result of strict official censorship and restrictions on freedom of movement.
On 13 November the Presidium of the People's Assembly decreed a "general pardon", but this meant release for only a few categories of political prisoners: those aged over 60 and convicted of either "anti-state agitation and propaganda" or attempting to leave the country without permission, and those convicted of the same offences who had one year or less of their sentence left to serve. In addition, all prisoners under 18 years old and all women serving sentences of up to 15 years' imprisonment, including political prisoners, were released. The sentences for other categories of political prisoners were reduced by one quarter.
The pardon decree confirmed that since the pardon of January 1986 the authorities had continued to imprison people for exercising their rights to freedom of movement and expression. The state restricted travel abroad. People who left or attempted to leave without permission were liable to prosecution for "flight from the state" under Article 47, paragraph 11, of the criminal code. This offence is punishable by 10 to 25 years' imprisonment or death. Among those reportedly serving long prison sentences for attempting to leave the country without permission was Mihali Kosta from Erseke. In mid-1989 Amnesty Intemational learned that he was serving a 25-year prison sentence, his second term of
ALBANIA
imprisonment for this offence.
In December refugees from Albania who reached Greece reported that four members of Albania's Greek minority had been arrested on 11 October while attempting to cross into Greece without official permission. According to the refugees' accoimt, four brothers from the Prasos family were arrested and then dragged behind a tractor through streets while the public was encouraged to beat them. This brutality allegedly led to the death of the youngest brother, Odysseas, aged 14. The refugees did not know the fate of the other three brothers. The Albanian authorities denied that these events took place.
People who criticized political or economic conditions in Albania or who publicly expressed or propagated their religious convictions were liable to imprisonment for "anti-state agitation and propaganda" under Article 55 of the criminal code. This article proscribes, among other things, "propaganda" considered to be "religious" or "anti-socialist". It provides for a punishment of three to 10 years' imprisonment, or death in cases of "especially serious consequences". Ethnic Albanian sources in Yugoslavia claimed that in early December demonstrators in the town of Shkoder were arrested after protesting against economic hardship and restrictions on human rights. The Albanian authorities denied these reports.
In 1967 all organized or public forms of worship were made illegal. In the following years there were many reports of clergy being sent into internal exile, usually to collective farms, or imprisoned.
In August Mother Teresa of Calcutta, who is of Albanian origin and the founder of the Missionaries of Charity religious order, visited Albania. However, official attitudes towards organized religion within the country appeared to remain unchanged. In March the Foreign Minister had reportedly told the French newspaper Le Monde: "In our country there is no place for religion". There was no further information during 1989 about Father Ndoc Luli (see Amnesty International Report 1985], a Roman Catholic priest reportedly imprisoned for celebrating religious services.
People continued to be punished with internal exile, without charge or trial, because their relatives had left the country without permission. The law provides internal exile for unspecified periods, by
administrative order and without recourse to courts, for "members of the family of fugitives" and people regarded as a danger to the country's social system. Petros Babis, a refugee who arrived in Greece in November, said that after his brother left Albania without permission in 1987, he and his family were exiled from their home in Sarande and sent to work on a state farm.
Legal safeguards for political detainees under investigation or on trial remained extremely limited. Under the Code of Criminal Procedure, they have no right while under investigation to visits from relatives. They also have no right to legal advice during investigation or trial imless the court "deems it necessary". In 1967 the institution of legal advocacy was abolished and lawyers lost their legal status.
Former political prisoners reported harsh conditions of imprisonment, including poor food and inadequate medical care. Political prisoners reportedly faced long hours of heavy labour with minimal industrial protection in corrective labour camps such as that at Qafe e Barit, where prisoners mine pyrites. Some prisoners of conscience were held at Burrel Prison, where detainees included former government officials and others regarded as particularly dangerous.
A refugee alleged during the year that three young border guards had been executed in January 1988 after they failed to prevent a high-ranking officer and his family from defecting to Yugoslavia. Unconfirmed reports were received that in the previous two years foiu- men had been executed after being convicted of economic crimes.
Amnesty Intemational called on the authorities for an independent and impartial investigation into allegations of torture of the Prasos brothers and the death of Odysseas Prasos. The organization urged the release of all prisoners of conscience and called on the government to ratify or accede to the intemational covenants on human rights.
