MALAYSIA
Sixteen prisoners of conscience, held without charge or trial, were released. Restrictions on others released from detention in 1988 were lifted. Three long-term political detainees who had been held without charge or trial since the 1970s were also released but placed under restrictions of movement, association and expression. Allegations of ill-treatment in detention continued and the national press reported that four people died in police custody. At least 71 death sentences were imposed, and at least 16 people were executed. Most of those executed had been convicted on drugs charges.
In Jime the Malaysian Parliament passed an amendment to the Internal Security Act (isa) which reduced the power of the courts to challenge administrative detention orders. As a result, detainees held without trial and allegedly posing a threat to national security may challenge their detentions only on procedural grounds. The courts cannot rule on the validity of the reasons given by the Minister of Home Affairs for their detention. Prime Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamad, who is also Minister of Home Affairs, said the amendment was needed to prevent coiuts from overturning executive decisions.
At the beginning of the year 16 prisoners of conscience were held under the ISA. This act empowers the Minister of Home Affairs to authorize the detention, without charge or trial, of anyone suspected of acting "in a manner prejudicial to the security of Malaysia". Detention orders may be renewed for periods of up to two years. The 16 had been held since late 1987. They were among 106 critics and opponents of
the government arrested in late 1987 during what the authorities termed "Operation Lallang" (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989). The other 90 detainees had been released before the end of 1988, although some had been placed under restriction orders.
The 16 still held included Karpal Singh and Lim Kit Siang, both leading members of the opposition Democratic Action Party; Dr Tuang Pik King, a Chinese educationalist; and Arokia Dass, a trade union official. All 16 were released before the end of April. Some of them, however, had restrictions imposed on their freedom of movement and association. In June the government lifted all restrictions placed on former "Operation Lallang" detainees.
Three other political detainees held without trial were also released between January and April. Teo Leong Hock, Heng Boon Lean and Cheah Swee Sam had been detained under the ISA since the late 1970s for alleged communist activities. Under the conditions of their release, their freedom of movement, association and expression were restricted. They were required to report regularly to the police and to refrain from making statements to the press.
Police brutality against prisoners continued to be reported. Abdul Rahman Hamzah, a former political secretary to the Chief Minister of the East Malaysian state of Sarawak, filed an affidavit in the High Court in January claiming ill-treatment during interrogation by police officers in 1988. He had been detained under the ISA and accused of involvement in a plot to assassinate the Prime Minister. He said that police had subjected him to threats, physical abuse and humiliating acts, some of a sexual nature. He was released unconditionally in July 1989. In December a statement issued by the Attorney General's Chambers said there was insufficient evidence to prosecute the police officers accused of ill-treating him and no action would be taken against them.
Defendants in several criminal cases testified in court that they had been forced to make false confessions during interrogation as a result of assaults by police. Disciplinary action against two police officers for such assaults was reported in January and February. The Deputy Minister of Home Affairs told Parliament in March that his ministry monitored all reports alleging the use of force by police personnel
MALAYSIA/MALDIVES/MALI
and would not hesitate to take appropriate action against those found guilty.
At least four people reportedly died in police custody during the year. A forensic consultant giving evidence at a coroner's inquest said that since 1979 he had examined up to 17 cases annually of death in police custody in the Kuala Lumpur area. He stated that a small number of these deaths had resulted from "foul play". The consultant provided this information at the inquest into the death of D. Anthonysamy, who had been detained under the isa on a charge of armed robbery and died in police custody in October. An inadequately detailed post-mortem report led the coroner to return an open verdict.
At least 71 people received mandatory death sentences. Sixty of these sentences were imposed for drugs offences, seven for possession of firearms and four for murder. The Supreme Court confirmed the death sentences imposed on 33 people, who are permitted to file a final appeal with the Pardons Board of the state where the offence was committed.
At least 16 executions were carried out. Thirteen people were hanged for drugs offences, two for murder and one for a firearms offence.
Amnesty International appealed for the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience and for the commutation of all death sentences.
