CZECHOSLOVAKIA
<
All known prisoners of conscience imprisoned under the former government of President Gustav Husak were released towards the end of the year, and criminal charges against those who might have become prisoners of conscience were dropped. Until the change of government there had been at least 36 known prisoners of conscience, while many more may have been held under laws restricting the peaceful exercise of human rights. Hundreds of people who peacefully exercised the rights to free expression and association were detained, charged and freed, then prosecuted while at liberty. Some detainees reported that they had been ill-treated in police custody. At least one person was sentenced to death.
In mid-November major political changes led to the resignation of the entire Communist Party leadership and the introduction of non-communists, including former prisoners of conscience, into government posts. On 29 December Vaclav Havel, a former prisoner of conscience, was sworn in as President.
At least 16 prisoners of conscience were released within two weeks of the Communist Party leadership's resignation. An amnesty annoimced in December freed an unknown number of people imprisoned on
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
all the charges usually brought against prisoners of conscience in the past.
The Penal Code review, which took place throughout 1989, was accelerated by the new government, On 13 December the Federal Assembly approved legislation proposed by First Deputy Prime Minister Jan Carnogmsky, a former prisoner of conscience. The new laws were intended to strengthen the independence of the judiciary and bring the penal law into line with international standards guaranteeing the right to freedom of expression, assembly, association and religion. Article 101 of the Penal Code, which prohibited "misuse of religious office", was repealed. The punishment for "leaving the republic without permission", an offence under Article 109, was changed from imprisonment to a fine, provided violence was not used. Both articles had been invoked to punish the peaceful exercise of human rights. In contrast to previous years, no sentences under Article 109 for peacefully attempting to leave the country were reported. In December the Prime Minister announced that legislation to abolish the death penalty was being prepared.
There remained no legal provision for a civilian alternative to military service. In July Vladan Koci (see Amnesty International Report 1989} was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment for refusing conscription. Vladan Koci, a Christian, objected to military service on religious grounds. He had received a 15-month sentence in 1988 on the same charge and was released that year under an amnesty. When he was called up again in May 1989, he refused to respond and was rearrested. He was pardoned and released in December.
Until December the state had a monopoly on publishing and prisoners of conscience detained during the year included people held for producing unofficial printed, audio or visual material politically imacceptable to the government. For example, Frantisek Starek was convicted of "incitement" under Article ICQ of the Penal Code for producing an unofficial cultural journal and video magazine, He was sentenced in June to 30 months' imprisonment. Petr Cibulka, a worker from Bmo who circulated unofficial literatiue and music cassettes, spent 13 months in pretrial detention on charges of "incitement", "speculation" prohibited imder Article 117 and "unauthorized business enterprise"
prohibited under Article 118. Both prisoners were released in November.
Hana Marvanova and Tomas Dvorak (see Amnesty International Report 1989), who edited the bulletin of the unofficial Independent Peace Movement, were released in May after six months' detention. They had been given suspended sentences for "incitement" under Article 100 in April, but were held for a further month because the prosecutor objected to their release. In May an appeal court in Prague upheld the original sentence. In the amnesty announced in December these sentences were revoked, and the same charge of "incitement" against Lubomir Vydra, who had been arrested with the two editors but released in December 1988, was dropped.
Those distributing leaflets faced increased penalties after the maximum sanction for "violating public order", an offence proscribed imder Section 6 of the Law on Misdemeanours, was doubled in February to six months' imprisonment. Jaroslav Popelka, a worker from Bmo, was sentenced in April to four monthfe' imprisonment for distributing leaflets. The leaflets called for a public meeting to discuss the Communist Party leadership's retirement and the formation of a Green Party. He had been convicted and imprisoned five times in 12 months for distributing such material, and he spent several weeks in custody later in the year before acquittal on the same charge.
Many people were detained without charge for up to 48 hoius to prevent the exercise of their rights to fi-ee expression and association. Until mid-November the authorities rarely gave unofficial groups permission to hold public meetings. Criminal proceedings were initiated against himdreds of people who took part in peaceful, unsanctioned gatherings and who were usually at liberty during the prosecution. Those arrested at the beginning of a week-long wave of demonstrations in January included Jana Petrova and Otakar Veverka, members of unofficial peace groups, and playvmght Vaclav Havel. Together with other human rights activists, they had tried to lay flowers in Prague in memory of Jan Palach, a student who set fire to himself in 1969 to protest the effects of the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion of the country. The three were charged with public order offences. Vaclav Havel was sentenced to
CZECHOSLOVAKIA/DJIBOUTI
nine months' imprisonment and Jana Petrova to eight months. Both were paroled after serving half their sentences. Otakar Veverka, sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment, was pardoned at the end of November.
Dozens of people reported that they had been beaten and otherwise ill-treated by police who detained them following im-sanctioned demonstrations. David Kabzan, for example, alleged that on 17 January he received some 20 truncheon blows to the head, back and arms at a police station in Prague. The blows followed his objection to officers inserting false information into his testimony.
In January Jaroslav Maly was sentenced to death by a court in Prague for the murder of three people. He remained under sentence of death at the end of the year.
Throughout the year Amnesty International called for the release of all prisoners of conscience and sought information on others thought likely to be prisoners of conscience. The organization appealed for commutation of Jaroslav Maly's death sentence and for the abolition of die death penalty. In June Amnesty International wrote to the Procurator General of Czechoslovakia concerning allegations that detainees were ill-treated in police custody following the January demonstrations. In July the organization wrote to the Ministers of Justice in the Czech and Slovak Republics, commenting on certain laws within the context of the Penal Code review.
Amnesty International representatives raised the organization's concerns during a visit in September to officials at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Procurator General's Office. The representatives also met members of the officially registered Committee of the Czechoslovak Public for Human Rights and Humanitarian Cooperation, formed in December 1988.
For the first time, Amnesty International delegates were granted access to courtrooms during the year to observe proceedings. In October a delegate attended a hearing in Bmo, where Stanislav Devaty was to appeal against his 20-month sentence for organizing petitions. The defendant, however, failed to appear and the hearing was adjourned. Stanislav Devaty was one of numerous people who received an amnesty in December. In November an Amnesty International delegate attended
the trial of prisoner of conscience Jan Camogursky, which took place in Bratislava. The defendant, charged with "incitement" and, under Article 98, with "subversion", had criticized the Warsaw Pact invasion and published an unofficial journal. He was acquitted.
