MAURITIUS
Nine possible prisoners of conscience were briefly detained during the year. One man was sentenced to be hanged for
MAURITIUS/MEXICO
dnig-trafHcking, bringing the number of prisoners under sentence of death to six. There were no executions.
In January Harish Boodhoo, leader of the Parti socialiste mauricien (psm), Mauritian Socialist Party, was arrested after calling for an inquiry into the alleged involvement of government ministers in the sale of Mauritian passports. Vedi Ballah, editor of the psm newspaper. Le Socialiste, The Socialist, was also arrested after he published Harish Boodhoo's allegations. Both men were charged under the Public Order Act with giving out false information that could cause disturbances. Vedi Ballah was released on bail after one week, but Harish Boodhoo remained in custody for three weeks until bail was granted. The trial of the two men had not begun by the end of the year.
In August six trade unionists including Ravin Ramasawmy, President of the Fédération des syndicats progressistes (fsp), Federation of Progressive Tïade Unions, and one journalist were arrested as police broke up a peaceful demonstration in support of a sacked trade union official. The seven were accused of participating in an illegal demonstration and were freed on bail. It emerged in a court hearing in November that the authorities had still not prepared the precise charges against the seven. Their trial had not begun by the end of the year.
In August Radha Krishna Kimnath, an Indian national, was sentenced to death in the Coxirt of Assizes after being convicted under the Dangerous Drugs Act. He had an automatic right of appeal to the Supreme Court, but this had not been heard by the end of the year.
In June the Supreme Court turned down the appeal of Steven Francis, an Indian national sentenced to death in October 1988 for drug-trafficking (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. The court granted him permission to appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (jcpc) in the United Kingdom, the highest court of appeal for Mauritius. Four other prisoners under sentence of death, two for drug-trafficking and two for murder, continued to wait for their appeals to be heard by the jcpc.
Amnesty International appealed to the Mauritian Government to commute the sentences of those facing execution. It also urged the government to abolish the death penalty and called for the penalty to be removed from the Dangerous Drugs Act as an important step towards abolition.
