BANGLADESH
Many Hindus held without charge or trial for up to six months in connection with a separatist movement were released, but several others were arrested. Reports of torture in police custody continued to be received. At least 13 people were sentenced to death but it is not known if there were any executions. Over 30 tribal villagers in the Chittagong Hill TVacts were reportedly killed in apparent extrajudicial executions by members of a civil defence unit and other non-tribal settlers.
The government of President Hossain Mohammad Ershad introduced new legislation in February providing for elected
BANGLADESH
councils with tribal majorities to be established in the Rangamati, Khagrachaxi and Bandarban districts of the Chittagong Hill TVacts. The government declared an amnesty from 23 April, granting immunity against prosecution to members of the armed tribal opposition group, the Shanti Bahini (Peace Forces), who surrendered prior to the council elections on 25 June; there was very little response. The Jana Samhati Samiti (jss), People's Solidarity Association, the political wing of the Shanti Bahini, opposed the new administrative arrangements and boycotted the Jmie elections. The Shanti Bahini was blamed for scores of killings, including the murder of 13 non-tribal people in Kaptai sub-district in April. It continued its violent opposition to the government, and attacks on non-combatant civilians in the area, after the elections. Twelve people (including eight tribal people) were killed when a bomb exploded on a passenger boat in Naniarchar sub-district in August in an attack attributed to the Shanti Bahini.
Several people were reportedly arrested in the southwest for alleged involvement in a Hindu separatist movement based in India. Over 100 others, including possible prisoners of conscience, had been arrested for similar reasons in December 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989): some of them were released on the order of Dhaka High Court after spending up to six months in detention without charge or trial. They included Chittaranjan Ghose, secretary of the Faridpur district National Awami Party, and Bipul Kumar Ghose, Joint Secretary of the Faridpur district Awami League. In February the Home Minister said 40 people were in detention under the Special Powers Act (spa) of 1974 for involvement in the separatist move-
ment; in June, 26 people were acknowledged to be in detention. It was not known how many remained in detention at the end of the year.
People alleged to have committed a "prejudicial act" likely to "endanger public safety or the maintenance of public order" can be detained without charge or trial under the spa for up to 30 days; the District Magistrate can renew detention orders indefinitely with the approval of the Ministry of Home Affairs. In June the Home Minister said that 2,436 prisoners had been detained under the spa from January 1988 to April 1989. It was not known how many of them were political prisoners and whether they included any prisoners of conscience.
In August five leaders of the Bangladesh Agricultural Workers Association, including Habibur Rahman Hira, were reportedly detained without charge or trial under the spa. They had organized protests around agricultural workers' grievances and against the arrests of four agricultural workers on what they said were false charges. They had been released by November.
The tortme of criminal suspects by police continued to be reported. Two sisters were reportedly raped by police officers in Chittagong in August when they went to the police station to file a complaint. Several criminal suspects died in custody, allegedly as a result of torture. In one reported case a murder suspect named Ofazuddin was admitted to hospital in June with head and other injuries apparently sustained when he was interrogated at Dhamrai police station, Dhamrai district. He died in hospital one month later. A local human rights organization brought charges against a police officer accused of causing his death but the case had not been heard by the end of the year. In another case, Shahidul Islam reportedly had extensive injuries and was unable to speak when he was taken to hospital from Katwali police station, Jessore district, in June. He died the next day. A judicial inquiry was not known to have been held into his death. A police officer in Jessore was sentenced to seven years' rigorous imprisonment in February for causing a prisoner's death through torture.
Police severely beat several people during strikes and some arrested demonstrators were reportedly tortured. Nurul Islam Chotan, a leader of the left-wing five-party
BANGLADESH/BARBADOS
alliance, was arrested during a strike called by the alliance in August. He suffered a fractured leg and hand allegedly as a result of severe beatings inflicted while he was in custody. A private prosecution was brought against the six police officers allegedly involved, but the outcome was not known by the end of the year.
At least 13 people were sentenced to death for murder, but the true figure was probably higher. It was not known if there were any executions.
In May at least 36 tribal villagers in the Chittagong Hill Tracts were reportedly killed by \^llage Defence Party (vdp) members and other non-tribal settlers. The vdps are local civil defence imits recruited, armed and trained by the police to protect their localities at night. The killings were apparently in reprisal for the murder of the non-tribal chairperson of Langadu council, allegedly by the Shanti Bahini: between six and 11 villages were reportedly attacked. Survivors were said to have fled to the hills and forests for refuge, and thousands crossed the border into TVipura in India, joining tens of thousands of refugees who remained in India from previous years.
After the Langadu killings, tribal leader Raja Debashish Roy was placed under house arrest for three days, preventing him from attending a Buddhist ceremony to commemorate the dead. The day before his arrest he and 21 other tribal leaders had submitted a memorandum to the authorities demanding action against the perpetrators of the killings.
The government informed Amnesty International in June that it had investigated the killings and found that 16 tribal people had been killed by an "unruly mob". It said that over 30 people had been arrested on suspicion of involvement in rioting; the precise charges were not made known, It suggested that the attack was a spontaneous outburst by non-tribal people reacting to the killing of the Langadu council chairperson, which the security forces had immediately attempted to contain. However, it did not provide full details of the inquiry, the findings of which conflict with reports Amnesty International received from other sources. No trials were known to have taken place by the end of the year in connection with these killings.
Amnesty International sought information about detainees held under the SPA.
It called on the government to prohibit the execution of minors and reduce the number of offences punishable by death as steps towards abolition.
