GUYANA
Over 200 strike supporters were arrested during peaceful demonstrations or activities. Three people were awaiting trial at the end of the year charged with treason, which carries a mandatory death sentence. One execution was carried out and at least two people were sentenced to hang for murder. A bill was passed extending the use of the death penalty to some drug offences.
The imposition of stringent economic measures resulted in a strike by workers in the sugar and bauxite industries, Guyana's main sources of income. The strike started in April and lasted for over a month. More than 200 people were arrested during peaceful demonstrations in support of the strike or while involved in strike-relief activities. They were held for up to a few days and released without charges. During the strike there were acts of violence and arson, which the government attributed to two opposition parties — the People's Progressive Party (ppp) and the Working People's Alliance (wpa). Both organizations denied the allegation.
Bhoj Pertab Singh. Karran Persaud Deokarran and Neville Wordsworth, all ppp activists, were arrested by uniformed and plainclothes police officers between 3am and 4am on 28 April at their homes, according to eye-witnesses. They were held in unacloiowledged detention for nearly eight days. They were not allowed to see
GUYANA/HAITI
lawyers until 5 May and did not appear before a magistrate until 9 May. They were charged with treason for allegedly conspiring to overthrow the government. Their lawyers claimed at pre-trial proceedings that alleged confession statements taken during their unacknowledged detention had been obtained through police torture and inhuman treatment. Karran Deokarran collapsed in court on 1 August during pre-trial proceedings: he was taken to hospital for alleged head injuries and was reportedly kept chained to his bed. The trial of the three men had not started by the end of the year.
Abdool Shameer Hack was executed on 31 January. He had been convicted of murder and sentenced to death in May 1987. The National Assembly approved a bill in July extending the use of the death penalty to cases where death occurs as a result of supplying or administering narcotics to anyone under the age of 18. The President had not signed the bill into law by the end of the year.
There were no developments in the libel case against members of the executive of the Guyana Human Rights Association stemming from the publication in July 1988 of a report on police violence (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government in February about the execution of Abdool Shameer Hack and inquired whether he had had the opportunity to communicate with lawyers after the death warrant had been issued. No reply had been received by the end of the year. Amnesty International wrote to President Desmond Hoyte in December expressing concern about the new legislation expanding the use of the death penalty and urging him not to give his assent to the bill.
