CYPRUS
Two conscientious objectors to military service were imprisoned and were considered to be prisoners of conscience.
In April the govemment ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Cypriot law makes no provision for altemative civilian service for conscientious objectors to either military service or reservist exercises, A draft law providing for unarmed and civilian service, announced in 1988, had not been debated in parliament by the end of the yeeir. The proposed duration of the civilian service
CYPRUS/CZECHOSLOVAKIA
was almost double that of military service. The draft law only made provision for religious objectors and did not take into account those who declare their conscientious objection after conscription.
Stelios Papadopoulos, a Jehovah's Witness, was detained from 11 January to 18 February following his refusal on conscientious grounds to participate in reservist exercises. He was held in a cell without a bed, lighting or heating.
Yannis Parpas, the first person in Cyprus to refuse to serve in the armed forces on solely pacifist grounds, was repeatedly charged for refusing to comply each time he was called up for reservist exercises. His trials were postponed until 8 June, when he was sentenced to fom months' imprisonment by Nicosia Central Court. On 18 August he was sentenced to a further six months' imprisonment by the same court. His appeal against the second sentence was rejected in October and he was still in prison at the end of the year.
In July Amnesty International received a response from the Turkish Cypriot leader, Rauf Denktas, to an inquiry it had addressed to the Tlnkish Prime Minister, Turgut Ozal, about three Greek Cypriots missing since the 1974 hostilities in Cyprus. In August Amnesty International addressed further inquiries concerning the cases to Mr Denktas and in November received a response stating that the "Darkish Cypriot authorities believed that two of the missing had been killed in Cyprus in 1974 and that they had no information about the third. In August the organization published a report — Missing Persons in Cyprus: Amnesty International's Actions 1974-89.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Stelios Papadopoulos and Yannis Parpas. The government responded by referring to the existence of the draft law and stated that no provision for conscientious objectors to reservist exercises was envisaged.
In February an Amnesty International delegate travelled to Cyprus to observe one of Yannis Parpas' trials, but the trial was postponed.
In March Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Defence welcoming the proposed introduction of a civilian alternative to military service but urging that the length of civilian service should not be punitive, that the grounds for objection should be widened and that provision
should be made for objection which develops after conscription into the armed forces. In August the organization wrote to President George Vassiliou, again raising its concerns about the shortcomings of the draft law. No reply had been received to either letter by the end of the year.
