GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
Prisoners detained under anti-terrorist legislation continued to be held in isolation. Allegations of gratuitous strip-searching of such prisoners were also received.
In July the frg ratified Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention on Human Rights (concerning the abolition of the death penalty).
Prolonged isolation can have serious physical and psychological effects on prisoners and may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The authorities claimed that prisoners held in isolation under anti-terrorist legislation were in self-
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
imposed isolation because they refused to be included in the general prison population and wished only to be accommodated with like-minded prisoners. The prisoners argued that the conditions attached by the authorities to association with other (non-political) prisoners were too onerous, for them and for the other prisoners. They also argued that political prisoners should be accommodated together. Most prisoners detained under anti-terrorist legislation (mainly Article 129a of the Penal Code) were not allowed to associate with each other.
In February 45 such prisoners, mainly members of the Red Army Faction (raf) or its sympathizers, began a hunger-strike throughout the country. One of their demands was that the prisoners should be accommodated together in one or two large groups. The hunger-strike ended in May.
In November Alfred Herrhausen, the President of the Deutsche Bank, was killed by a bomb. In a letter claiming responsibility for the attack, members of the raf demanded inter alia that prisoners held under anti-terrorist legislation should be accommodated together.
Three prisoners who were held in virtual isolation were Manuela Happe, Eva Haule and Andrea Sievering. The three women were imprisoned in a high-security section of Stuttgart (sometimes known as Stammheim) prison, a men's prison. The state, Bad en-W端rttemberg, does not have a high-security women's prison. Manuela Happe had been imprisoned in Stuttgart since June 1984, Eva Haule since July 1987 and Andrea Sievering since August 1988. They were not allowed to associate with each other and reportedly only had intermittent contact with other women prisoners who were held in Stuttgart for short periods pending transfer to other prisons. The number of other women held in the prison was said to vary between one and nine. At the end of the year Manuela Happe and Eva Haule were transferred to prisons in other states.
One reason given by prisoners held under anti-terrorist legislation for refusing to associate with other prisoners was that this would involve repeated and gratuitous strip-searching. Amnesty International objects to strip-searching if it is undertaken with the deliberate intention of degrading or humiliating the prisoner.
In March Stuttgart regional court lifted a
long-standing requirement that Christian Klar, detained under Article 129a in Stuttgart, be strip-searched before and after contact with other prisoners. The court stated that other less intrusive means of security control were available, such as frisking or the use of a metal detector. As such methods of security control had been available for a number of years, the court's decision raised questions about the claim by the federal and state authorities that strip-searching was conducted solely for security purposes without any intent to degrade or humiliate.
Prisoners held under anti-terrorist legislation complained that the prison authorities increased their isolation by means such as conspicuously noting down which non-political prisoners associated regularly with them, and by warning non-political prisoners that they would suffer if they had too much contact with prisoners held for terrorist offences.
During the year Amnesty International had extensive contact and correspondence with the authorities on the issue of isolation. In April, during meetings with a representative of Amnesty International, officials from the Baden-W端rttemberg and Bavarian Ministries of Justice denied that special note was made of contacts between prisoners held under Article 129a and other prisoners. They also denied that any prisoner would be disadvantaged in any way as a result of such contact. The Baden-W端rttemberg officials said that they expressly welcomed such contact and that any special measures were for security reasons only. At the end of the year the Baden-W端rttemberg Justice Ministry stated that Manuela Happe and Eva Haule had been transferred because Stuttgart prison was not suitable for the long-term detention of women prisoners.
In its letters Amnesty International said that, in most cases, it was not in a position to assess the conflicting claims as to whether the isolation of prisoners held under anti-terrorist legislation was voluntary or involuntary, or the extent to which the conditions attached to association with other prisoners were justified on security grounds. However, the organization believed that the evidence required it to take seriously allegations that offers of increased contact with other prisoners were accompanied by unreasonable conditions. Amnesty International called for
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF/GHANA
prisoners deemed to warrant stringent security measures to be transferred to prisons where the security arrangements would allow them to associate more freely and permanently with other prisoners. At the end of the year the correspondence was continuing.
In February the West Berlin Interior Minister replied to Amnesty International's letter of December 1988 which had expressed concern over arrests and reported ill-treatment of demonstrators and bystanders during the anti-iMF/World Bank protests in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The Interior Minister said that Amnesty International's concerns were unfounded. In February the organization published its concerns and the Interior Minister's reply in a document entitled West Berlin: The anti-fMF/World Bank Protests.
