YUGOSLAVIA
At least 4,500 people were detained for political reasons during 1989, the great majority of them ethnic Albanians. Of these, some 1,700 were prisoners of conscience, of whom about 1,000 were imprisoned for up to 60 days for taking part in non-violent protest strikes in Kosovo province in February. At least 27 people were killed and over 1,000 arrested during demonstrations in March, November and December by ethnic Albanians protesting against constitua tional change. Political prisoners were often denied a fair trial and there were allegations that political detainees had been ill-treated during pre-trial detention. At least one person died in suspicious circumstances after being held for questioning by police. Ethnic Albanians who were arrested for political reasons in March and held in administrative detention reported that they were brutally beaten by prison staff. Conditions in some prisons where prisoners of conscience were detained were harsh. At least one person was sentenced to death and another was executed: both had been con< victed of murder.
The political and economic crisis in the country deepened. In February there were widespread strikes by ethnic Albanians in Kosovo province in protest against proposed constitutional changes limiting the province's autonomy and giving greater powers to the republic of Serbia, which includes Kosovo. The changes followed complaints by the Serb and Montenegrin minorities in Kosovo that the local authorities failed to protect them from persecu-
tion by ethnic Albanians, the majority in the province. On 27 February the federal authorities introduced emergency measures in Kosovo and deployed federal security forces there. Shortly afterwards some 50 ethnic Albanian officials and industrialists were ariested in connection with the strikes and about 1,000 striking workers were sentenced to up to 60 days' imprisonment. The adoption of the constitutional changes on 23 March led to six days of demonstrations and riots by ethnic Albanians in which, according to official sources, 22 demonstrators and two police officers were killed. Yugoslav and foreign press reports estimated that over 100 people may have died. Subsequently about 900 demonstrators were sentenced to up to 60 days' imprisonment. In addition, 237 ethnic Albanians, including people who had signed a petition against the constitutional changes, were arrested and held without charge in administrative detention, known as "isolation". Some were held in administrative detention for over four months. Although the authorities stated that by mid-July no one was still held in "isolation", over 40 administrative detainees continued to be held for investigation on political charges.
The authorities stated that in the first six months of 1989 the police in Kosovo reported 614 people for political crimes, and 2,284 for minor political offences (punishable by up to 60 days' imprisonment). The corresponding figiu-es for the country as a whole were 858 and 3,481. In November the trial began of Azem Vllasi, Kosovo's former Communist Party President, and 14 other ethnic Albanians. Strikes and demonstrations by ethnic Albanians resulted in hulher arrests and convictions. Three demonstrators died during conflicts with security forces. Among them was Bedri Sokoli, who, according to an official account, was shot by a police officer acting in self-defence. However, three eye-witnesses asserted that Bedri Sokoli was unarmed and was shot in the back while attempting to flee.
The number of political prisoners serving sentences was reduced to 232 from 436 in the period from January to November, according to official figures. This was partly due to the official pardoning of over 70 political prisoners. Of the 232, all but 22 were reportedly ethnic Albanians. However, this figure did not include the
YUGOSLAVIA
great majority of political prisoners who were awaiting trial or the results of appeal hearings, or those serving prison sentences of up to 60 days for minor political offences.
The death penalty was abolished in September under Slovenian law, but remained in force under the laws of Yugoslavia's other constituent republics. Draft amendments to the federal criminal code put before the Yugoslav Assembly at the end of November proposed a reduction in the nvunber of capital offences.
On 18 April Yugoslavia signed the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Pimishment, but had not ratified this by the end of the year.
Among the prisoners of conscience convicted dining the year were Liman Jashari and four other ethnic Albanians. In January they were sentenced by a court in Skopje, Macedonia, to between six and 10 years' imprisonment on charges under Article 134 of the federal criminal code of "inciting national hatred". They had allegedly expressed nationalist views and led demonstrations in August 1988 against the closing of classes in local schools with Albanian as the language of instruction. On appeal, Liman Jashari's prison sentence was reduced to nine years; the other prisoners' sentences were all reduced by three years.
In April Nexhat Maliqi and nine other ethnic Albanians were sentenced to between one and five years' imprisonment by a court in Pristina, Kosovo. They were convicted of being members of an illegal organization seeking republic status for Kosovo province and of distributing nationalist pamphlets. They were not accused of having used or advocated violence. Their sentences were confirmed on appeal,
In Kosovo people continued to be prosecuted for "hostile propaganda" under Article 133 of the federal criminal code, but this was rare elsewhere. In July Pristina district court sentenced Rexhep Bislimi to two years' imprisonment for having given to friends three books which in the coiut's view presented the situation in Yugoslavia in a "malicious and untrue way".
Scores of ethnic Albanians were charged with "counter-revolutionary undermining of the social order" imder Article 114 of the federal criminal code, generally in connec-
tion with protests against constitutional change. Among them was Bajram Selmani, who was sentenced in July to six years' imprisonment. He was accused of organizing peaceful demonstrations in November 1988 and strikes in February 1989 by fellow-workers at a cement factory.
Article 114 had been contested frequently because of its broad formulation. It became the object of further controversy after its use in the much-publicized case of Azem Vllasi and 14 co-defendants. Apart from Azem Vllasi and one other, the accused were employees of Stari TVg mine. All 15 were charged with having organized or supported strikes at the mine in February, when miners called for the resignation of unpopular political leaders and expressed their opposition to constitutional changes. Azem Vllasi himself was accused of having visited the miners and thus of having encouraged them to persist in their demands. He was also said to have encoiu-aged the demonstrations of November 1988. Although the accused were not charged with having used or advocated violence, the prosecution sought to hold them responsible for the events of March, including the deaths that occurred during demonstrations, at a time when they were in detention. These charges were punishable by prison sentences of between 10 and 20 years or the death penalty. The trial had not finished by the end of the year.
At least 20 prisoners of conscience were serving sentences for refusing to do military service, usually on religious groimds. Most were Jehovah's Witnesses from the republics of Slovenia and Croatia. In July new regulations were introduced providing for a 24-month period of unarmed military service (twice the length of armed military service) for religious conscientious objectors. The authorities stated that by the end of November all imprisoned conscientious objectors had been released.
Political prisoners often did not receive fair trials. At the trial of Ilir Nallbani and eight other soldiers accused of attempting to set fire to a hall at the Belgrade military academy in 1988, the Belgrade military court refused to hear witnesses and other evidence proposed by the defence. At this trial, as at many other political trials, public access was restricted, although the proceedings were formally open. Seven of the nine accused and two witnesses alleged in court that officials conducting investigation
YUGOSLAVIA
proceedings had forced them to make false statements. The court did not seek to investigate their allegations that threats and other psychological and physical pressures had been used. In June the accused were all convicted and sentenced to between three and 10 years' imprisonment.
Lawyers who have regularly defended ethnic Albanians accused of political offences said that many of their clients had stated in court that they had been forced by police or state security officers to make felse self-incriminating statements, but that these complaints were almost always ignored. They nonetheless noted that on several occasions during 1989 courts in Kosovo had acquitted people charged with political offences. This had rarely happened in the past.
In May and June the Croatian press published accounts of ill-treatment by several ethnic Albanians. They were among 237 political detainees arrested following the introduction of emergency measiu-es in Kosovo and held in "isolation" without charge or trial. One of them, Agim Vllasi, described how a doctor questioned him about his health in Leskovac prison on 28 March. He said he was then beaten by two prison staff and afterwards was twice forced to run the gauntlet of a group of prison officers, who beat him with truncheons and kicked and punched him, On the second occasion he was naked. He was beaten again on the second day. Another detainee, Bahri Osmani, described similar ill-treatment in Vranje prison. He said he was later transferred to Sabac prison where he was beaten unconscious by a police interrogator. TWo days later he was taken to Belgrade prison hospital where he was allegedly held for five days in chains. Agim Vllasi and Bahri Osmani were released on 15 May. In October, 12 officers from Vranje prison were indicted on charges of having beaten and insulted 22 detainees. In December the trial began of nine guards, the director and the head of the security service at Leskovac prison on charges of ill-treating 41 detainees, including Agim Vllasi.
Xhemail Berisha from Prizren, Kosovo, died in custody on 6 April. According to an official statement, he died from injuries sustained after he threw himself from the second floor of a police station where he was being questioned by police, and there were no injuries on his body other than those caused by his fall. Unofficial sources
alleged that he was a political detainee and had been physically and psychologically ill-treated before his death.
Prison conditions were reportedly harsh in Zenica, Bosnia-Hercegovina; in Lepoglava and Stara Gradiska, Croatia; in Idrizovo,-Macedonia; and certain local prisons where some prisoners of conscience were held.
In August Laszlo Tubicak was executed and in November Tomislav Tomovski was sentenced to death. Both had been convicted of murder.
Throughout the year Amnesty International worked for the release of prisoners of conscience. It called on the authorities to end the practice of "isolation" and to institute an impartial investigation into allegations of ill-treatment of ethnic Albanians held in "isolation". Amnesty International also urged an impartial investigation into the death of Xhemail Berisha as well as the deaths that occurred during demonstrations by ethnic Albanians in March and November, The organization called for the commutation of death sentences.
In September Amnesty International delegates observed the trial of prisoners of conscience lovan Opacic, a Serb, and Haxhi Maliqi, Xhemal Jashari and Fuat Jashari, ethnic Albanians, Jovan Opacic was acquitted by a court in Sibenik, Croatia, of the main charges against him, which included "inciting national hatred". He was released pending appeal against a conviction for "disturbing a public meeting". In Skopje, Haxhi Maliqi and his co-defendants were convicted of "inciting national hatred" and sentenced to between three and nine years' imprisonment. Amnesty International's delegate concluded that they had not incited violence.
Amnesty International delegates were denied access to three political trials in Kosovo: those of Avdullah Lohaj and 10 co-defendants in February; of Azem Vllasi and 14 co-defendants, which started on 30 October; and of Selim Vllasi in November. It considered all the defendants in these trials to be prisoners of conscience. In December Selim Vllasi was acquitted and released.
In December the organization received a letter from the state presidency stating its intention to bring Yugoslav legislation governing the rights of citizens "into accord with adopted international conventions".
