SPAIN
Allegations of ill-treatment were made by detainees held under anti-terrorist legisla-tion and by criminal suspects in police custody. Numerous judicial proceedings involving members of the security forces were in progress in connection with allegations of torture and ill-treatment. There
were also complaints of ill-treatment in prisons. A Galician nationalist was imprisoned for burning a Spanish flag during a political demonstration.
A three-month cease-fire observed by the armed Basque group Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (eta) ended in April with a series of bomb attacks. By the end of the year 23 people, including members of the security forces and civilians, had been killed in violent actions reportedly carried out by eta. A small number of killings and violent actions were attributed to other armed separatist groups and to armed political groups of the left and right.
In May Spain ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Tortiure and Inhuman or Degrading TYeatment or Punishment.
Many judicial inquiries opened in previous years into allegations of torture and ill-treatment remained unresolved, but several members of the seciirity forces were found guilty of torturing and ill-treating detainees.
In October the Supreme Court issued a noteworthy ruling, overturning the Madrid Provincial Court's acquittal in 1985 of two police officers. They had been charged with allowing the torture of losé Arregui, an alleged eta member detained under their supervision. José Arregui died in hospital after nine days' incommunicado detention in Madrid in 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1981 and 1982]. The certified cause of death was pneumonia, but the autopsy also revealed injuries to his lungs and eyes, bums on his feet, bruises on his body and severe internal bleeding. The Supreme Court sentenced one officer to four months' suspended imprisomnent and three years' suspension from duty. It
SPAIN
sentenced the other to three months' suspended imprisonment and two years' suspension from duty.
There were sporadic reports of arrests under anti-terrorist legislation. Since May 1988 the maximum permitted period of incommunicado detention imder this legislation has been five days. During 1989 most detainees were released before this limit. Detainees continued to allege ill-treatment, especially in the form of disorientation techniques such as hooding and deprivation of food and sleep during persistent interrogation.
During the last two weeks of September, at least 46 people suspected of collaborating with the Araba commando of ETA were arrested in the Basque country, Some were released without appearing in court, but most were brought before the National Court in Madrid. A number of detainees complained to the judges that they had been tortured and ill-treated while held incommxmicado by the Civil Guard in the Basque country and in Madrid.
Relatives and lav^ryers who saw the detainees during and after their court appearance alleged that some of them displayed injuries resulting from ill-treatment. On 20 September Alejandro Ros declared to the court that he had been beaten and subjected to a mock hanging. José Antonio Mujika Huici claimed he was subjected to severe beatings and near-asphyxiation. When he appeared in court on 21 September, he was heavily bruised near his left eye and in the region of his kidneys. Nearly all the suspected Araba detainees reportedly complained of repeated insults, threats and psychological pressure such as hooding and blindfolding.
Several criminal suspects were reportedly ill-treated in police custody. Félix Rodríguez Santana was arrested in Las Palmas on 4 July, on suspicion of sexually assaulting two female minors. After an unknown period in police custody, he was transferred on remand to a local prison. Fifteen hours later, he was admitted to hospital for the treatment of serious injuries apparently incurred as a result of severe beatings. He died on 23 July. A judicial inquiry was opened after his sister complained to the local coiut that she had heard him screaming while police beat him. In a public statement the police denied all responsibility for Félix Rodríguez' injuries, speculating that he had
probably been beaten by fellow prisoners after his admission to prison. The local prison director, however, stated that Félix Rodriguez had not been beaten while in prison and had been kept apart from other prisoners at all times. There was no news regarding the outcome of the judicial inquiry at the end of the year.
Incidents of ill-treatment were reported in several prisons during the year. There were reports that prisoners held at Alcalá-Meco maximum security prison were subjected to persistent physical ill-treatment by prison guards and that immobilizing sprays were sometimes used for punishment. It appeared that the alleged ill-treatment often occurred after prisoners had refused to stand for regular cell-checks, submit to strip-searches or comply with other orders given by prison guards.
The claims of ill-treatment were made by prisoners accused of common criminal offences as well as by alleged members of Basque, Catalan and Galician armed political groups. Some prisoners required medical assistance as a result of their ill-treatment and some allegations were supported by information from lawyers and national human rights groups.
Francisco Rodriguez Sánchez, a prominent member of the Bloque Nacionalista Gallego (bng), a Galician nationalist party, was imprisoned in June. He had played a leading role in a demonstration organized by the bng in June 1984 during which a Spanish flag was burned. Police arrested and detained him briefly three days later on suspicion of "committing an outrage against the Spanish nation by insulting the flag". He denied the charge, but in 1986 La Coruña Provincial Court sentenced him to two years, four months and one day's imprisonment. In March 1989 the Supreme Court rejected Francisco Rodriguez' appeal against the sentence and he was imprisoned on 21 June. He was granted provisional liberty on 18 July, pending the outcome of a further appeal to the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court had not ruled on his case by the end of the year.
Amnesty International expressed concern at the prosecution and detention of Francisco Rodriguez because there was no evidence of his use or advocacy of violence.
Amnesty International requested information on the steps taken to investigate ill-treatment alleged by detainees arrested
SPAIN/SRI LANKA
under anti-terrorist legislation and by criminal suspects held in police custody. It also monitored the progress of judicial inquiries into alleged ill-treatment opened in previous years. In November Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior expressing concern about reports suggesting systematic ill-treatment of prisoners in Alcalá-Meco prison. It urged a full and impartial investigation into the allegations and asked to be informed of developments in cases where formal complaints had been lodged with the judicial authorities.
Thousands of people "disappeared", died in custody or were victims of extrajudicial executions carried out in the south by Sri Lankan security forces and "death squads" believed to be associated with them. The government failed to clarify the fate of 800 people who "disappeared" in previous years. Thousands were detained without trial under emergency regulations and there were widespread allegations of torture. The Indian Peace Keeping Force (ipkf) reportedly carried out extrajudicial executions in the northeast and numerous reports alleged torture of prisoners by ipkf personnel and Tamil groups allied to them.
In January President Ranasinghe Premadasa's interim government lifted the state of emergency which had been in force since May 1983 and released 1,519 people who had been detained without charge under emergency regulations. These regulations, including Regulation 55ff permitting police to dispose of bodies without postmortem or inquest, were reintroduced in June amid widespread violent strike action
and unrest instigated by the armed opposition group Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP), People's Liberation Front.
Parliamentary elections held in February were boycotted by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (ltte) in the northeast. The jvp, which threatened to kill participants, boycotted elections in the south. The ruhng United National Party (unp) was returned to power after a campaign marked by political violence. Fourteen opposition candidates and several hundred other people, including members of the ijnp, were killed, Most of the attacks in the south were attributed to the jvp and in the northeast to the LTTE. Rivalries between parties contesting the. elections may also have resulted in some killings.
The jvP and the associated Deshapremi fanatha Viyaparaya, Patriotic People's Movement, continued a campaign of violence and intimidation and were widely believed responsible for thousands of murders. The victims included people perceived as "traitors" to the groups, prisoners, security forces personnel and their families, members of the ruling unp, senior public officials, broadcasters and left-wing opposition activists, including some Buddhist monks. Members of the two groups reinforced their calls to strike and to demonstrate against the government by threatening to murder those who refused to participate. They also destroyed government offices, post offices, tea plantations and other state property.
Rohana Wijeweera, the jvp leader, and his deputy, Upatissa Gamanayake, were reportedly killed in November in disputed circumstances. The government said that after Rohana Wijeweera's arrest he had taken security forces personnel to the jvp headquarters in Colombo and had been killed there in a shoot-out. Officials said Upatissa Gamanayake was shot dead soon afterwards while attempting to escape from custody. In addition, several other jvp leaders were reportedly killed.
The ltte was also considered responsible for political murders. At least 38 people died in Trincomalee in April in a bomb explosion attributed to the ltte. Other victims included about 100 Sinhalese villagers killed in the first four months of the year, a Tamil parliamentary candidate, the Government Agent of Jaffna, and two leaders of the Tamil United Liberation Front.
In April President Premadasa offered an
