CHAD
Several hundred political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were held throughout the year. Over 150 others were released, including four women prisoners of conscience. None of more than 200 political detainees arrested during the year was brought to trial. They were held in secret detention centres where conditions were harsh and torture was reportedly common. The fate of numerous prisoners arrested in previous years was still unknown.
The government faced armed opposition in the southeastern prefecture of Guéra and fighting broke out in eastern Chad near the Sudan border after the arrests in April of several hundred members of the Zaghawa ethnic group. The arrests followed an alleged coup attempt. However, the government of President Hissein Habré continued its process of reconciliation with other political groups and several former opposition leaders were appointed as ministers in March. In August a peace agreement was signed with neighbouring Libya, although Libyan prisoners of war remained imprisoned in Chad.
A new constitution was approved by referendum in December and took immediate eñ'ect. It contained important human rights guarantees, including prohibitions against arbitrary arrest, torture, or inhuman or degrading treatment. It also provided for freedom of expression and association, although in practice only the political party
established by the President in 1984 was allowed to function.
In April the government said it had thwarted a coup attempt led by Ibrahim Mahamat Itno, the Interior Minister; Hassane Djamous, the army commander; and Idriss Deby, a former army commander acting as adviser to the President.
The minister was arrested along with his brother and others. The two former army commanders evaded arrest and left the capital, N'Djamena, in a military convoy. Most members of the convoy were soldiers who supported the commanders and belonged to the Zaghawa ethnic group. Government troops piusued them and clashes occurred in eastern Chad and across the frontier in neighbouring Sudan's Darfur region. Hassane Djamous was wounded and captured by government troops. He reportedly died in a military hospital in N'Djamena on 21 April. It was not known how many others were captured. Several thousand Zaghawa were displaced by the fighting and crossed into Sudan to seek asylum. Further clashes between government troops and Zaghawa rebels were reported in October.
More than 200 Zaghawa were arrested in N'Djamena and northeast Chad in connection with the alleged coup attempt. Few details about the detainees were available and their whereabouts were unknown at the end of the year. None was charged or brought to trial. Unconfirmed reports suggested that some were secretly killed or had died in custody. It appeared that some detainees were held because of their ethnic origin or their family connections with those allegedly involved in the conspiracy.
Those arrested included Mahamat Abdoulaye, a university professor, and six brothers of Sidik Fadoul, who had been detained since June 1988. One of the six, Dr Zakania Fadoul, was held only briefly but the other five were apparently still held incommunicado at the end of the year.
In March the government announced the release of 116 political detainees. Those freed included four women prisoners of conscience. Mabrouka Houni Rahil and her daughter, Mardi^ Ibrahim, had been held since the mid-1980s, and Hadja Merami and her daughter, Azzina Sako, since February 1986. A further 45 political prisoners were released in December. They included Mokhtar Bachar Mokhtar, who was a member of the government when
CHAD/CHILE
arrested in July 1988 for criticizing the President. Most of the other prisoners released in March and December had been detained for reasons which were not disclosed.
More than 200 people held without charge or trial in previous years were believed still held in secret detention. Although Chad's Code of Penal Procedure provides for all prisoners to be brought before the judicial authorities within a few days of arrest, in practice these political detainees were held outside the framework of the law. Unofficial sources suggested that some had been killed while in the custody of the national security service, the Direction de la documentation et de la sécurité (dds). Directorate for Documentation and Security. Those held included over 180 members of the Hadjerai ethnic group arrested in N'Djamena and in the Guéra prefecture between May and July
1987	(see Amnesty International Report
1988	and 1989]. The Hadjerai were apparently suspected of supporting the armed opposition Mouvement du salut national du Tchad (mosanat). Movement for the National Salvation of Chad, which is composed primarily of Hadjerai. Some Hadjerai detainees appeared to be prisoners of conscience held because of their ethnic origin. Those reportedly remaining in custody at the end of the year included Ahmat Dadji, the director of a state-owned company; Hissein Manga (nicknamed "Michelin"), a businessman; and Dimanche Seli, a secondary school student.
At least 20 people associated with former President Goukouni Oueddeï, including three of his relatives, also remained in secret detention at the end of 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). They were arrested in mid-1988, shortly after returning to Chad from abroad.
Political detainees were reportedly tortured and ill-treated. The dds in particular allegedly subjected detainees to severe beatings, electric shocks and harsh conditions. Reports were received in early 1989 that Asseila Ibrahim, a Hadjerai mother of four, had been tortured and had died soon after her release in late 1988. She had been detained in November 1988 after trying to leave the country to join her husband, a suspected government opponent. The authorities did not confirm her death and no investigation into its circumstances was known to have been carried out,
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of people who may have been prisoners of conscience. The organization urged the government to try other political detainees or release them. Amnesty International pressed the government to end secret detentions, to take measures to prevent torture and to clarify the whereabouts of all political prisoners.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Chad for United Nations review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
In August the government issued a public statement denying the "disappearance", torture or extrajudicial execution of prisoners. The statement acknowledged, however, the "exceptional detentions" of government opponents involved in armed opposition. It suggested that such prisoners were detained outside the framework of the law and that their participation in armed opposition justified their being subjected to "exceptional treatment", although the precise meaning of this term was not indicated.
