UNITED KINGDOM
An official investigation into complaints about police behaviour after disturbances in London in 1985 was completed, but its findings were not made public. Four prisoners who had been convicted of murder in 1975 after bomb attacks in England had their convictions quashed as a result of evidence that police had lied in court about their alleged confessions. Six other people, also sentenced in 1975 on the basis of disputed evidence to life imprisonment for murder, remained imprisoned. Investigations into killings by the security
forces continued to be hampered by delays and procedural constraints on inquests and by govemment refusals to make public the findings of police inquiries. The govemment continued to reject proposals for a judicial inquiry to examine disputed killings and re-evaluate the procedures under which investigations and inquests are held in Northem Ireland. Nor would it consider a judicial examination of all the available evidence concerning the killings of three members of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) by British soldiers in Gibraltar in 1988. Evidence emerged of collusion between members of the security forces in Northem Ireland and loyalist armed groups. Asylum-seekers were expelled without being allowed an adequate opportunity to present their cases. A court mled that asylum-seekers who had been retumed against their will to Sri Lanka in 1988 should be allowed to return to the United Kingdom (uk).
Armed groups from both the minority Catholic and the majority Protestant communities in Northem Ireland continued to resort to violence in support of their demands. Republican armed groups such as the ira are opposed to the British presence in Northern Ireland and fight for a united Ireland. Members of security forces, loyalist leaders and civilians have been killed as a result of ira attacks, mainly in Northem Ireland but also in England and continental Europe. Loyalist armed groups, notably the Ulster Volunteer Force (uvf) and the Ulster Freedom Fighters, want Northern Ireland to remain a part of the uk. Their acts of violence are mainly directed against the Catholic population. It was reported that during 1989, 54 people were
UNITED KINGDOM
killed by the ira, 19 by loyalist groups, and four by the security forces.
The government continued to derogate from those articles of the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which state that anyone arrested has the right to be brought promptly before a judge. This right was violated in cases where people had been arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which allows suspects to be held for up to seven days without judicial supervision (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
In September the Police Complaints Authority (pca) brought disciplinary charges against the senior police officer who led inquiries into disturbances at London's Broadwater Farm estate in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989). The in camera disciplinary hearing had not taken place by the end of the year. The charges followed an investigation supervised by the pca into complaints about police behaviour during the interrogation of juveniles charged with the murder of a police officer who was killed during the riot. The pca stated that it would not make public the findings of its investigation.
Four prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment in 1975 for ira pub bombings in Guildford and Woolwich, known as the "Guildford Four", were released in October. The Court of Appeal quashed their convictions after it was shovm that the four had been wrongly convicted because of police malpractice, including lying to the courts about confessions. The government then set up an inquiry, headed by a former senior judge, into the circumstances of the convictions and into the reasons it took so long for crucial information to be disclosed. The inquiry was also to look into wider policy issues, such as the use of uncorroborated confessions as the basis for prosecution, the adequacy of safeguards for suspects in terrorist cases, and the procedures used to investigate possible miscarriages of justice.
Six people sentenced to life imprisonment in 1975 for ira bombings in Birmingham, known as the "Birmingham Six", remained imprisoned. The six consistently claimed that their confessions resulted from ill-treatment and threats of violence while being held incommimicado (see Amnesty International Report 1988
and 1989). New information added to concern about the reliability of the convictions. The government's assertion that the prisoners' allegations of ill-treatment by police were groundless was undermined in June when the West Midlands Serious Crimes Squad, some of whose officers had interrogated the six in 1974, was disbanded. Some police officers from the squad had been involved in obtaining confessions subsequently found by courts to be unreliable. An investigation into the practices of the disbanded squad was opened, supervised by the pca and carried out by a senior officer from another police force. The investigation, which covered only the cases handled by the squad since 1986, was continuing at the end of the year. Repeated requests for the investigation to include the cases of the "Birmingham Six" were rejected by the police. On 23 November the European Parliament voted to have the case of the six Birmingham prisoners investigated by its Legal Affairs Committee.
Inquests into the deaths of six unarmed people killed in 1982 by the security forces in Northern Ireland had still not been completed at the end of the year. Of these, the inquest into the deaths of Gervaise McKerr, Eugene Toman and Sean Bums, which began in November 1988, was adjourned because of an appeal to the Court of Appeal (see Amnesty International Report 1989). It was further postponed in January 1989 after the government appealed against the judgment of the Coiut of Appeal to the House of Lords. The appeal was not resolved during 1989, delaying inquests into some 17 killings by members of the security forces.
A police inquiry, carried out between 1984 and 1986 by senior police officers John Stalker and Colin Sampson, found evidence that police officers had conspired to pervert the course of justice after the 1982 killings. However, the report of the inquiry continued to be withheld from the public on grounds of "national security" (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
New reports suggested that evidence from Spanish police officers could be crucial in answering questions left unresolved by a coroner's inquest into the deaths of three unarmed ira members in Gibraltar (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Mairead Farrell, Daniel McCann and Sean Savage had been shot dead in March 1988
UNITED KINGDOM
in disputed circumstances by British soldiers. The UK Government said that the three had planned a bomb attack; explosives were later found in Spain. Some eyewitnesses testified at the inquest, held in Gibraltar in September 1988, that the three were shot without warning. They also stated that after the victims fell to the ground, they were shot again while lying incapacitated. The soldiers said that they had continued shooting until the three were dead because they believed — wrongly — that the three were carrying a device which could set off a bomb. The jury found that the three had been lawfully killed. British intelligence officers testified at the inquest that they had received no prior warning that the three suspects were going to enter Gibraltar on 6 March 1988. Some Spanish police officers reportedly contradicted this after the inquest. They stated that the British authorities had been notified that the three were heading towards Gibraltar on that day. Although the new reports did not provide a clear pictiue of what had happened between 4 and 6 March 1988 in Spain, they served to heighten concern about the Gibraltar inquest's failure to examine fully the circumstances of the killings, including evidence from Spanish surveillance teams.
Evidence emerged that intelligence files on republican suspects were being handed over by members of the security forces in Northern Ireland to members of loyalist armed groups. In some instances these files were used to target individuals and kill them. In August Loughlin Maginn was killed by the clandestine UVF, which claimed that he was a liaison officer of the ira. When his family challenged this claim, the UVF revealed that they had obtained their information from police files which were in their possession. Earlier in the year two members of the security forces were given 18-month suspended sentences for passing confidential files and photographs of ira suspects to loyalist organizations that carry out sectarian killings. After the convictions, one of them resigned from the Ulster Defence Regiment but the other remained a soldier in the British Army.
In mid-September the new Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, Hugh Annesley, appointed John Stevens, the Deputy Chief Constable of Cambridgeshire, to investigate the disappearance of security documents from
police and army bases. By the end of September lists containing over 250 names of suspects had been given to the news media by members of the security forces or by loyalist groups. In October the authorities said .they had revised procedures for the handling of intelligence information on suspects by members of the security forces.
A number of cases illustrated deficiencies in procedures for dealing with asylum applications. In July the High Court ruled that five Tamil asylum-seekers, whom the authorities had forcibly returned to Sri Lanka in 1988, should be allowed to return to the uk. The procedmes had allowed the five no opportunity to appeal against refusal of asylum before being returned to Sri Lanka, where at least two of them were reportedly detained and tortured (see Sri Lanka).
The authorities returned a number of Turkish Kurds to T\irkey, reportedly without fully examining their claims for asylum. A Turkish Kurd, who had been identified as a refugee by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, was expelled. Selahattin Ozberk stated that he had recently been beaten during interrogation by the T\irkish police. The authorities refused his application for asylum and expelled him, without giving him any opportunity for an appeal to be heard. He was, however, allowed to travel to Italy
In March Amnesty International called on the government to investigate the overall pattern of police behaviour in the wake of the 1985 Broadwater Farm riot. It said that allegations made by detainees and rulings of trial court judges revealed evidence of police interrogation procedures which put at risk the fairness of subsequent trials. The organization therefore urged the government to review fully the cases of all those convicted of serious offences in connection with the disturbances on the basis of uncorroborated and contested confessions. The government replied that it had no role in the pca investigation, although it believed that the issues raised by Amnesty International were being dealt with in the context of that investigation. The government stated that if the pca investigation were to provide grounds for cases to be referred to the Court of Appeal, the Home Secretary would consider them.
Amnesty International sent an observer to the appeal hearing of the "Guildford
UNITED KINGDOM/UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Four" in October, and welcomed their release, In the light of new information on the "Birmingham Six", Amnesty International urged the govemment to review their cases. The organization reiterated its concem that a considerable body of evidence existed that the six men had been ill-treated while in police custody and that their confessions could have been involuntary.
During a meeting held in April Amnesty Intemational told the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland about its concem over the lack of thorough investigations into disputed killings by security forces in Northern Ireland and the fact that results of investigations were not made public. Amnesty Intemational renewed its call for the govemment to establish a full judicial inquiry into disputed killings in Northern Ireland, focusing in particular on the procedures used to investigate such incidents and on legislation goveming the use of lethal force. It also expressed concem that inquests into the disputed killings of 1982 had still not been completed.
In April Amnesty Intemational published Investigating Lethal Shootings: The Gibraltar Inquest. This report outlined the organization's concems relating to the 1988 shootings in Gibraltar and the coroner's inquest into the deaths. Amnesty International's delegates who observed the inquest found that the proceedings were conducted fairly but failed to bring out the full facts. They also found that the inquest failed to answer the main question raised by the Gibraltar killings: whether the three unarmed IRA members had been killed as a result of an official policy to eliminate or permit the elimination of specific individuals rather than to arrest them. The evidence was from the outset incomplete. Details of government policy, the planning of the operation, and the quality of the intelligence information were not revealed because the govemment blocked information. Cmcial forensic evidence was lacking as well as testimonies from Spanish officers involved in the surveillance operation before the three were killed. The coroner had explicitly discouraged the jury fi-om reaching an open verdict (one which does not reach a conclusion on how death occurred). Given the complex and contradictory evidence presented and the absence of cmcial evidence. Amnesty Intemational believed that it was wTong to discourage
such a verdict. The organization urged the government to establish a judicial examination of all the evidence in this case, including testimony by Spanish officers. Amneisty Intemational considered that existing inquest procedures were inadequate for a full investigation of the circumstances surrounding disputed killings. It called on the govemment to ensure effective procedures for fully investigating and explaining disputed killings by its security forces.
