JAMAICA
Six prisoners were executed during the year and about 170 were under sentence of death, one of the largest death row populations per capita in the world. A total of 57 prisoners have been executed since 1980, which marked the end of a four-year de facto suspension of executions in Jamaica.
In March the government put before the Senate the report of the Fraser Committee on Capital Punishment and Penal Reform. The Committee had been appointed in
1979	to consider if the death penalty was an appropriate punishment for murder, and its report was originally submitted in 1981. However, it was not made public by the government until 1987 when it was put befitre the Senate, for its information only.
The Committee recommended the commutation to life imprisonment of all death sentences imposed before 31 December
1980	(the date originally prescribed for submitting its report). This was not accepted by the government and a number of prisoners sentenced before the end of 1980 were executed after the Committee made its recommendations. The Committee recommended that the number of capital offences should be reduced and that, for five years, only people convicted of murder using a firearm or explosives should be subject to the death penalty.
The government did not act on any of the Committee's recommendations and failed to respond to its proposal for steps
towards the abolition of the death penalty "as part of a comprehensive system of penal reform which should commence without delay".
In June Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice and to all Members of Parliament welcoming the government's decision to make the Fraser Committee's report public and urging a parliamentary debate on abolition of the death penalty. Amnesty International also appealed to the government to suspend all executions pending a full parliamentary discussion of the report and its findings. However, there was no such discussion and in November executions resumed after a nine-month break.
Amnesty International urged the government to grant clemency to all prisoners scheduled to be executed during the year. They included Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan, who were due to hang on 24 February. They received stays of execution after the Human Rights Committee, established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, appealed for them not to be executed while the Committee considered a communication on their behalf. The two prisoners, who were sentenced to death in January 1979, claimed that the delays in the judicial proceedings in their cases violated the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Jamaica is a party. The Committee was still considering the cases at the end of 1987.
In July 1987 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights also appealed to the Jamaican Government to commute the death sentences on Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan, on humanitarian grounds. The Jamaica Court of Appeals issued its decision on their case in December 1980, but did not give its reasons until September 1984. The Commission found that the two men had suffered a denial of justice between 1980 and 1984 which was "tantamount to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment", because the two prisoners had not been able to appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London during this period and consequently spent four years on death row awaiting execution. Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan were still on death row at the end of the year.
On 29 May Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice to urge an inquiry into reports that a prisoner, Victor Francis, had been beaten by guards at St
THE AMERICAS / JAMAICA / MEXICO
Catherine's District Prison on two separate occasions in October and November 1986 and to urge official action to ensure that prisoners were not subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. No reply had been received to Amnesty International's letter by the end of the year.
