ARGENTINA
Past human rights violations continued to be a focus of political unrest in Argentina during 1987. Investigations into the fate of more than 8,900 people who "dis-appeared" in the mid-1970s after being abducted by the military and security forces came to a virtual standstill with the passing on 5 June of the Law of Due Obedience, which strictly limited trials of military and police personnel accused of human rights related crimes between 1976 and 1983. The passing of this law was prompted by discontent and open rebellion within the ranks of the armed forces about continuing trials of their personnel before civilian courts.
The first measure to limit the trials was introduced by the government in December 1986. Following military unrest at the prospect of two more major trials before the Buenos Aires Appeals Court (which had been responsible for the conviction in 1985 of the commanders of the former military juntas), the government approved Law 23.492, known as the Punto Final, Full Stop, on 26 December 1986. This set a 60-day deadline for the formal initiation of new prosecutions of members of the armed forces, police and prison services accused of past human rights violations. After its expiry no further actions could be brought except in cases involving theft, the abduction of minors or the falsification of their documents. Unexpectedly, when the deadline expired it was found that appeals courts throughout the country had issued summonses against more than 300 officers, including some still in active service.
The first months of the year were marked by a series of protests and attempts by members of the armed forces to block further trials by civilian courts. In February, six admirals were detained on the order of the Buenos Aires Appeals Court for failing to answer a summons to testify at a preliminary hearing connected with the Escuela de Mecánica de Ja Armada (Naval Mechanics School) trial. This was examining accusations that detainees had been tortured in the navy's main detention centre in Buenos Aires. After the preliminary hearings, the court formally charged 12 navy officers, including Alfredo Astiz. and they were placed in pre-trial detention.
In early April preventive detention orders were imposed on military and security personnel by civilian courts in Bahia Blanca. Comodoro Rivadavia and Mendoza. On 15 April the Federal Court in Córdoba ordered the arrest of Major Ernesto Barreiro, who was accused of torturing prisoners in an army detention centre. Major Barreiro promptly took refuge in his army unit and on 16 April middle-ranking officers took over the Campo de Mayo army base, near Buenos Aires, to support him. They demanded an end to the human rights trials and the resignation of the Army Chief of Staff, General Rios Ereñú, who had instructed his officers to cooperate with the civilian hearings. In response, there were popular demonstrations in support of the government but President Raúl Alfonsín conceded to the rebel officers' demands when other army units refused to obey orders to arrest them.
The Law of Due Obedience was then enacted on 5 June to forestall most of the trials by granting immunity to all but the most senior military officers for crimes committed during the repression. All but the senior officers were automatically presumed to have been obeying orders from a superior. The only exceptions admitted were for cases of rape or the abduction of children. The new law reversed the provisions of the Reforms to the Code of Military Justice of 1984, which had established the principle that subordinates could not claim "due obedience" if charged with crimes involving "atrocious or aberrant acts". As Amnesty International pointed out to the government, the new law appears to violate the United Nations Convention against Torture, to which Argentina is a party, which stipulates that "an
THE AMERICAS / ARGENTINA
order from a superior officer or a public authority may not be invoked as a justification for torture".
The Law of Due Obedience was held to be constitutional by a majority ruling of the Argentine Supreme Court on 23 June. Following this, three subordinate officers convicted of torture in the trial of General Ramon Camps in December 1986 had their sentences quashed. They were released on the grounds that they had acted in obedience to orders from a superior. In all, about 300 members of the armed forces and police were believed to have benefited immediately from the new law and most defendants in pre-trial detention were released. Some trials on human rights-related charges were expected to continue, depending on the result of appeals to the Supreme Court.
At the beginning of 1987, there were 12 prisoners serving sentences imposed for politically-motivated offences after trials conducted during the period of military rule which failed to conform to international standards for a fair trial. All 12 had been arrested between 1974 and 1976, and convicted on the basis of statements allegedly extracted under torture. The government announced in February that it would introduce a draft law to review the prisoners' situation but this had not been done by the end of the year. By that time five of the 12 prisoners had been released on parole after completing two-thirds of their sentences. A sixth. Osvaldo López, had been freed in November. He had been sentenced to 24 years' imprisonment in 1977 by a military court. He was released after the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States passed a resolution in June which declared that his right to due process had been violated and that the Argentine Government should rectify this within 60 days. The Argentine Supreme Court referred his case to a civilian appeals court which reduced his sentence and Osvaldo López was freed.
Continued attempts were made throughout 1987 to investigate the fate of children who "disappeared" during the period of military government. Many children are still missing because their parents were abducted, killed or secretly imprisoned by security forces between 1976 and 1983. A few children were abducted with their parents, but most of those registered
as "disappeared" by the present government are believed to have been born to pregnant women in detention centres at the height of the military repression. These infants were taken from their mothers shortly after birth and allegedly given to couples connected with the armed forces or police to raise as their own.
The organization most committed to these investigations continued to be the AbueJas de Plaza de Mayo, formed in 1977 by grandparents of the missing children. In previous years they had traced a total of 43 children, three of whom were known to have died violently at the hands of the military. Twenty others, however, had been returned to the custody of their natural relatives. In 1987 their investigations mainly concerned four children living in neighbouring Paraguay, whose natural parents were believed to have "disappeared" in detention under the military. All four were in the care of couples formerly linked to the Argentine military and police force and had been taken to Paraguay illegally, after Argentine courts ordered genetic tests to be carried out to determine the children's true parentage.
Amnesty International delegates visited Argentina in October to discuss with the government the organization's concerns about the Law of Due Obedience, the continued imprisonment of those sentenced after apparently unfair trials during the period of military rule and the fate of the "disappeared" children. In November Amnesty International published a report, Argentina: The Military Juntas and Human Rights about the trial of the former members of the ruling juntas. This concluded that the trial was fair and that the rights of the defendants had been respected. However, in publishing the report, Amnesty International also drew attention to its concern about the Law of Due Obedience. By conferring immunity from prosecution on many of those accused of torture, the new law both undermined the rule of law, which the earlier trial had vindicated, and set a dangerous precedent for the future.
THE AMERICAS / BARBADOS / BOLIVIA
