ZAIRE
More than 40 prisoners of conscience were detained without trial or banished to areas far from their homes during the first half of the year for supporting an illegal opposition party. A number of other government opponents were banished or re-stricted to towns in which they were obliged to report regularly to the authorities. Only a few new arrests of government opponents in the capital, Kinshasa, were reported; some of the detainees were tortured or severely beaten. In eastern Kivu region, numerous civilians were arrested by soldiers, detained for long
AFRICA/ZAIRE
periods and in some cases executed extrajudicially in an area where an armed opposition group was reported to be operating.
Significant steps were taken by the government in 1987 to emphasize the importance of human rights. In July Zaire acceded to the African Charter on Human and People's Rights. Early in the year 12 members of a military security service, disbanded in October 1986, were tried by a military court in Kinshasa on charges including the illegal detention of civilians. All of the defendants were convicted and the most senior officer among them was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.
A new Department for the Citizen's Rights and Freedoms, which had been established in October 1986, began investigating complaints of public service performance and abuses committed by officials. It opened offices in a number of Kinshasa districts but did not have representatives elsewhere in the country. Complaints were submitted to these offices and then transmitted to the Department itself, but the results of investigations had not been announced by the end of the year.
The Department signed agreements with branches of the security forces permitted to arrest and imprison suspects, thereby formalizing access to detention centres and to appropriate officials for discussion of alleged abuses. The security forces' powers of arrest and detention, nevertheless, remained unchanged. The two main security services, the Agence nationale de documentation (AND), National Documentation Agency, and the Service d'action et de renseignements militaires (SARM), Military Action and Intelligence Service, retained powers to detain prisoners incommunicado without charge or trial for as long as they considered necessary.
In contrast to these two services, other branches of the security forces may legally detain suspects for only a few days before referring them to the procuracy responsible for further investigation. However, many of the military and paramilitary units empowered to detain suspects for a few days exceeded their legal limits and held detainees in custody for weeks or even months without referring them to the procuracy.
During the year the AND detained both prisoners of conscience and other polit-
ical prisoners incommunicado for periods of several months or more. Although the prisoners of conscience were freed from detention and then banished to remote areas, other long-term political detainees remained in custody at the end of the year. They included seven AND agents arrested in April and several other people, all accused of espionage.
Most political prisoners arrested during the year supported opposition political groups considered illegal under the terms of Zaire's one-party Constitution. As in previous years, many prisoners were detained or banished for supporting the Union pour ia démocratie et Je progrès social (UDPS), Union for Democracy and Social Progress. Members of the Jehovah's Witness sect, which was banned in 1986, were also arrested.
A number of UDPS members arrested and detained by the AND in 1986 were banished to villages in Kasaï Oriental region and elsewhere in February and March 1987. The total number of UDPS supporters arrested in 1985 or 1986 and restricted under administrative banishment orders in 1987 was more than 40. The State Commissioner for the Administration of the Territory (Minister of the Interior) issued banishment orders. The formal procedures for banishment, which are contained in a 1961 law and include a regular review by a special commission, were not observed.
Among those banished were both leaders and supporters of the UDPS, including several former National Assembly members who have been repeatedly detained or banished since 1981. The UDPS chairman, Kibassa Maliba, was confined under house arrest in Lubumbashi during the first half of the year. Another UDPS founder, Lumbu Maloba Ndiba, was held under house arrest in a military camp at Kalemie at the beginning of the year. He was later imprisoned in a cell at the camp and forced to renounce his connections with the UDPS. While imprisoned, his head was shaved with broken glass and he was deprived of food and beaten.
Kyungu Mukange, a UDPS supporter, was arrested in early January after protesting against restrictions imposed on him following his release in May 1986 from 30 months' detention without trial. He was initially held in military custody in Lubumbashi, then effectively "dis-
AFRICA/ZAIRE
appeared". His family was unable to learn where he was subsequently detained. He was freed in June with other UDPS supporters but detained again briefly in October.
In late June and July all UDPS supporters' banishment orders were lifted and in October the State Commissioner told Amnesty International that no UDPS supporters or other citizens remained banished. The mid-year releases occurred after the authorities and UDPS leaders, brought from their places of banishment, participated in a series of meetings. However, several months after the releases, some of those banished to Kasai Oriental region were still not permitted to return to their homes in Kinshasa.
There were further arrests of UDPS supporters in Kinshasa between July and October, although none of the detainees was held for more than a week. Some were detained for wearing ties, which the authorities consider to be contrary to Zairian traditions, while others were arrested during the course of meetings in private houses. Two men were arrested because they possessed statements made by UDPS leaders living outside Zaire.
Several political detainees were released in the middle of the year. In July Akuka Atangowena, a woman arrested in Kinshasa in October 1986, was freed. The reason for her nine months of incommunicado detention in military custody was apparently the activities of her former husband, who was living outside the country following political imprisonment in Zaire. She was held in the Deuxième Cité de Voua near the presidential offices. For at least the first half of 1987, as in previous years, suspected government opponents were evidently held in this secret detention centre. Some detainees held there were reportedly tortured. An eye-witness reported in March that a law student detained there was bleeding and bore marks of torture.
Torture was not reported on the same scale as in previous years, but beatings and torture allegedly accompanied some detentions by the armed forces in Kivu region. The main area of concern was northeast Kivu, between Beni and the Ugandan border, where an armed opposition group reportedly operated for several periods between November 1986 and July 1987. Counter-insurgency operations apparently precipitated a number of civilian
arrests. Detainees were taken to military posts in Beni and elsewhere but none was known to have been charged or brought to trial. The whereabouts of many detainees was not clear at the end of the year. For example, there was still no news about the fate of a farmer from Mutwanga village, Karamagi, who was arrested by soldiers in November 1986 and subsequently "disappeared".
There were further arrests in the area in 1987 and several thousand villagers apparently attempted to escape the violence by seeking refuge in Uganda. Some of these refugees provided details about a number of extrajudicial executions allegedly carried out by Zairian soldiers in the Beni area. The bodies of four civilians with bullet wounds in their heads were found on 7 January in the Semliki river near Beni. Soldiers reportedly killed them after finding opposition political party leaflets in their possession. In another incident reported in August, a man from Matolu village suspected of associating with armed government opponents was held in custody for three days and then publicly executed. In other cases reported in July and August, soldiers allegedly tortured civilians to obtain either information or money.
Six people arrested in 1984 were tried by the State Security Court in April and May on charges relating to two bomb explosions in Kinshasa. All of the defendants were convicted: three were sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment and three received 10-year prison terms. Several defendants had reportedly been tortured in custody and then forced to make self-incriminating statements. At least one of them had not met his defence lawyer until the trial began and had virtually no assistance from legal counsel. Another defendant had been publicly accused by the head of state of responsibility for one bomb attack. He and at least two others were convicted despite the absence of independent evidence against them. Amnesty International was concerned that some or all of the defendants were convicted unfairly. All appealed to the Cassation Court, but the results of their appeals were not known by the end of the year.
During the first half of the year. Amnesty International appealed for the release of all those detained or banished for alleged links with the UDPS. The organization also
AFRICA/ZAIRE/ZAMBIA
called for the lifting of restrictions on Weregemere Bingwa Nyalumeke. who was banished to Katana in Kivu region during the first half of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1987), and on former detainees restricted to Lubumbashi. In March Amnesty International wrote to the State Commissioner for the Administration of the Territory about abuses committed in the Kabare district of Kivu (see Amnesty International Report 1987), but no response was received. Urgent appeals also followed the reported "disappearance" of Kyungu Mukange and reports of incommunicado detention and torture in Kinshasa.
In October an Amnesty International mission visited Kinshasa at the invitation of the State Commissioner for the Citizen's Rights and Freedoms. The delegates obtained information about the work of the new government department established to protect basic rights guaranteed by the Constitution and to investigate allegations of abuses. Most complaints made to the Department for the Citizen's Rights and Freedoms, however, seemed to address miscarriages of justice and administrative problems, rather than serious violations of human rights. It also appeared that the Department did not yet have the capacity to investigate abuses committed outside Kinshasa. Amnesty International's delegates met senior members of several security force branches and obtained details of their detention powers and safeguards against illegal or arbitrary detention and other abuses.
As in previous years. Amnesty International in May submitted information about its concerns in Zaire under the United Nation's procedure for confidentially reviewing reports of human rights violations.
