BURUNDI
Many prisoners of conscience were held without charge or trial before President |ean>Baptiste Bagaza was deposed in September 1987 because of their opposi" tion to government restrictions on religious activities and dominance by the Tutsi community. The new government, beaded by Major Pierre Buyoya, promptly ordered the release of over 200 political prisoners. At least four associates of Pres* ident Bagaza were arrested, however, and were reported still to be in custody at the end of 1987. Many of those imprisoned before September were held without charge or trial, often incommunicado, and many were tortured or severely beaten.
Restrictions on religious activities announced in previous years remained in force until September, when many were lifted by the new government. They had resulted in the imprisonment of members of various Christian churches, including Roman Catholic priests and catechists, Seventh Day Adventists and Jehovah's Witnesses. At the end of March, President Bagaza's government announced the release of all imprisoned Roman Catholic clergy; three priests and three catechists
were freed. One of the priests, Father Gabriel Barakana, was serving a four-year prison sentence imposed in 1985 after being convicted of insulting the head of state. The five others had been held without charge. However, less than two weeks later, one of those freed, Father Jean-Baptiste Ndikuriyo, was rearrested after thanking a church congregation for praying for his release. He was again detained without trial until September.
Several lay members of the Roman Catholic Church arrested in previous years remained in prison until August or September. Three who had been convicted with Father Barakana were freed in August on completing their two-year sentences, while another, Joseph Gacukuzi, was held until the September coup. Others were detained without trial until September: they included Stanislas Manirambona, a businessman and member of Bujumbura Cathedral's Pastoral Council, who was arrested in March 1984 and held for three and a half years with no legal proceedings.
More Jehovah's Witnesses were arrested during 1987 in the Bujumbura area. Over a dozen members of this banned sect had been detained in early 1986, although some had later been freed. One Jehovah's Witness arrested in April 1987, a teacher named Ernest Bangirimana, was reported by eye-witnesses in Bujumbura's Mpimba Prison to have been seriously injured by beatings: some sources claimed he had died in custody. A number of Jehovah's Witnesses were freed in September, but it was not clear what had become of Ernest Bangirimana.
Most of the other prisoners of conscience held before the September coup were members of the majority Hutu community who were critical of the dominant role within the government of the minority Tutsi community. They were all believed to have been released by the new government, which included members of the Hutu community, although all the members of the military committee appointed to run the country in September were members of the Tutsi community. Some of those freed had been arrested in late 1986, mainly in Bururi province in the southwest, after confidential instructions to primary school head teachers in the area were made public: these required each head teacher to list pupils who were Hutu and those who were Tutsi. A number of
AFRICA/ BURUNDI / CAMEROON
teachers arrested in late 1986 were released uncharged in March, but Gervais Nduwayo and several others remained in Murembwe Prison in Rumonge until September. Others arrested at the same time, including a doctor working in Bururi Hospital, Pierre Baricako, were also held until September.
Further arrests of well-known members of the Hutu community occurred at the beginning of June. Their names had been on envelopes brought from Europe by Cóme Minani, an airport technician arrested at Bujumbura airport. Those arrested included Charles Shahuli, a senior civil servant, and Déo-Marce! Minisha, a teacher in Kamenge. No charges were announced against those arrested. Còme Minani was alleged to have been tortured, apparently because he was suspected of being a courier for a clandestine opposition group. Following the September coup, government sources reported that all those arrested in June had been released.
Amnesty International learned of one death sentence imposed during the year, in February, on a man convicted of murder. In September the new government announced that all sentences of death were being commuted to prison sentences, but it was not known how many prisoners were affected.
Following the September coup, the new government criticized President Bagaza for ordering the arbitrary detention of opponents of his government and released more than 200 political prisoners. Four senior officials in President Bagaza's administration were arrested and were still detained at the end of 1987: two former government ministers, a former head of the national security service and a police chief. Ali four were reported to be accused of fraud or embezzlement, although no formal charges were announced.
Between January and September, Amnesty International appealed for the release of several dozen prisoners of conscience whose identities were known. In June the organization published a report about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and detention without trial in Burundi. In addition. Amnesty International appealed for the release of 15 prisoners whose cases were described in the report.
27
