GRENADA
Fourteen former members of the People's Revolutionary Government (PRG) convicted of the murder of former Prime Minister Maurice Bishop remained under sentence of death pending appeals against their convictions (see Amnesty Inter'
THE AMERICAS / GRENADA / GUATEMALA
national Report 1987). During the year there were a number of complaints about their treatment in prison.
Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister in February to express concern about reports that these prisoners had had their sheets, blankets and underwear removed; that they were confined to their cells for nearly 24 hours a day with little or no outside exercise; that consultation with their lawyers was permitted only within hearing of a prison guard; and that notes taken by the prisoners to prepare their appeals had been confiscated. No reply was received.
In November two Amnesty International delegates visited the prison. Following this. Amnesty International wrote again to the Prime Minister in late December stating that, although the physical conditions on death row compared favourably with other parts of the prison, it remained concerned about the treatment of the PRG prisoners, especially Phyllis Coard, who continued to be held in solitary confinement.
Amnesty International also expressed concern about reports that Phyllis Coard had been placed on a bread and water punishment diet in September for asking the prison authorities about papers connected with her appeal which were left for her and which she did not receive. The organization said it was concerned that a prisoner's complaint or request for information should be treated in such a punitive manner, which appeared to be contrary to the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports that she and other prisoners had been placed on bread and water punishment diets (for up to 21 days in some cases) without the daily medical supervision required under the Standard Minimum Rules.
