ZAMBIA
At least 12 people imprisoned for political reasons, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were held under a law permitting indefinite detention without trial. Some 50 Angolan refugees were reportedly imprisoned for political reasons. There were also reports that prisoners, including political detainees
and criminal suspects, were tortured and ill-treated. At least seven people were sentenced to death for murder or aggravated robbery, but it was not known if there were any executions.
Several political detainees continued to be held under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, which empower the President to authorize indefinite detention without trial. Detainees who were released included Manfred Mwangana Mukumbuta and Ronald Chansa, two of three people held without trial since 1981 in connection with an alleged plot to arrange the escape from custody of several prisoners awaiting trial for treason. They were released uncharged but the third detainee, Faustino Lombe, was still held at the end of 1987.
Four South African nationals who had been arrested in May 1986, after South African security forces attacked Lusaka, were released in February. The four South Africans had stated that police had tortured and ill-treated them during interrogation soon after their arrest. The government had accused them of spying for South Africa but they were released without charge.
Among those arrested in 1986 and still detained at the end of the year were four detainees alleged to have been members of the clandestine opposition People's Redemption Organization (FRO). Two of them, Peter Chiko Bwalya and Stanislous Kachenjela, unsuccessfully sought release by filing habeas corpus applications in the High Court. The government said that Joseph Chitalu, a publisher and third detainee, faced charges of publishing a seditious document. No details about its content were available. All four detainees
AFRICA/ZAMBIA
were held under presidential detention orders permitted by the public security regulations. Grounds for detention under these regulations cannot be challenged in court but the law provides for review of detainees' cases by a special tribunal. However, the recommendations of the tribunal are not made public and are not binding on the President.
There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. In several cases involving people charged with political and criminal offences, the courts accepted evidence that the defendants had been tortured or ill-treated in pre-trial detention to obtain "confessions". For example, Moffat Kashweka, who was tried before the Livingstone High Court on charges of spying, alleged that during his pre-trial detention police handcuffed his hands and legs, suspended him from an iron bar balanced between two tables and severely beat him. He said this treatment was commonly known as "the swing", "kampeJu" or "taxi rank" torture. He was also denied food, held in a cold, damp, solitary cell and had his genitals squeezed with pliers by police who forced him to sign a "confession" statement.
The court rejected the confession in July and ruled that Moffat Kashweka had been tortured. The judge also called for the police officer responsible to be prosecuted. No charges against the police officer were reported to have been made in 1987 and Moffat Kashweka's trial had not been concluded at the end of the year.
In November a High Court judge refused to admit as evidence a confession statement made by Isaiah Moyo, a transport company employee also charged with spying for South Africa. The court heard evidence that he had "confessed" only after he was tortured and threatened with death by police in the Lilayi police training camp following his detention under the public security regulations in March 1986. His trial was continuing at the end of the year.
Allegations that police tortured and ill-treated a number of criminal suspects were also reported. Thomas Kunda, who was tried in February on robbery charges, told the court that he was beaten, denied food, and threatened with death if he did not confess to the charges. He also told the court that he had been denied medical treatment for tuberculosis and access to
his family. The Ndola magistrates court accepted his allegations and refused to admit as evidence his pre-trial "confession". He died, reportedly of tuberculosis, in Ndola remand prison in June before his trial could be completed.
Tens of thousands of Angolan nationals remained as refugees in Zambia, mostly in the west of the country. The majority were members of the Ovimbundu ethnic group, from which the l/nido Nacionoi para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, draws its main support. In 1987 the Zambian authorities alleged that UNITA, which is engaged in armed opposition to the Angolan Government, was providing support for opponents of the government in Zambia but it was not clear whether this allegation was the basis for the arrest of the Angolan refugees.
In July soldiers and Special Branch police officers arrested four Angolans. All were apparently living in the Meheba refugee camp near Solwezi in western Zambia. They were taken to Solwezi, where they were reportedly beaten with rifle butts. Further arrests of Angolan refugees, apparently suspected of being UNITA sympathizers, were reported in September. As many as 50 refugees were said to have been detained, although the identities of only a few were confirmed. Some detainees may have been released but at least four Angolans were still held without charge at Solwezi Prison at the end of the year.
Amnesty international expressed concern to the government about the prolonged detention without trial of many political prisoners and investigated the cases of several who may have been prisoners of conscience. No reports were received of any investigation or prosecution of those allegedly responsible for torturing detainees, as promised by the government, in either 1986 or 1987. Amnesty International urged the government to release the Angolan nationals if they were not to be charged and promptly tried on criminal offences, and in November published a summary of its concerns entitled Amnesty InternationaJ's Concerns in the Republic of Zambia.
At least seven people were sentenced to death for murder or aggravated robbery, including a 67-year-old man and a 55-year-old woman. It was not known whether there were any executions.
AFRICA/ZIMBABWE
