KENYA
Many political prisoners, including some arrested for the non-violent expression of their opinions, were held incommunicado in secret and illegal custody for periods of up to several months. They effectively "disappeared" in custody and were reportedly tortured. Some of them were later released. Thirty-nine others were brought to trial in 1987, without legal representation, and were convicted of political offences. The defendants had pleaded guilty, in many cases allegedly
AFRICA/KENYA
because they had been tortured or subjected to other duress. At least 30 people were condemned to death for armed rob> bery, bringing the estimated number of condemned prisoners to over 200. It was not known if there were any executions.
Many alleged members or supporters of a clandestine opposition organization Mwakenya (Muungano wo Wazalendo wa Kukuomboa Kenya, Union of Nationalists for the Liberation of Kenya) were arrested in the first months of 1987. Hundreds of others had been arrested in 1986. Some of those arrested in 1987 were prisoners of conscience, including Gibson Kamau Kuria, a leading human rights lawyer and university lecturer. He effectively "disappeared" after his arrest on 26 February and no police unit acknowledged detaining him. In contravention of the law, he was not brought before a court within 24 hours. When a habeas corpus application made on his behalf came to court on 12 March, the authorities disclosed for the first time that he had been served with a detention order eight days earlier under the Public Security Regulations. These regulations permit the Minister of State responsible for internal security to authorize indefinite detention without trial and are not subject to challenge in the courts. While no reason for Gibson Kamau Kuria's detention was publicly given, he was apparently imprisoned because he served as legal counsel for a number of political prisoners. His arrest occurred shortly after he filed suit against the government for the alleged torture and illegal detention of three prisoners of conscience arrested in 1986 and the alleged torture and death in custody of another political prisoner. He was freed unconditionally on 12 December, Independence Day, by order of President Daniel arap Moi.
Gacheche wa Miano, a former law student detained under Public Security Regulations in July 1986, and an unnamed Kenya Airforce officer, detained secretly since the August 1982 coup attempt by air force personnel, were also held without trial until their release on 12 December. Other prisoners who were arrested on political grounds in 1987 were released without charge some days or weeks after they "disappeared". They included two members of Parliament, Charles Rubia and Abuya Abuya, who were arrested in Nairobi in January.
Several political prisoners sentenced to less than two years' imprisonment in 1986 were released during 1987 after being granted remission of sentence.
Paul Amina, a freelance journalist and prisoner of conscience detained under the Public Security Regulations, remained in custody at the end of 1987. He was arrested at the Nairobi Law Courts on 4 August while investigating legal proceedings in the case of a man shot dead in police custody in 1986. He was held incommunicado in police custody for over two weeks before the official Kenya Gazette published a notice of his detention. Again, no reasons were given by the authorities for his arrest and it appeared that he was imprisoned for reporting on a politically-sensitive court case.
In addition to Paul Amina, nine other prisoners of conscience remained in detention without trial under the Public Security Regulations at the end of the year. They included Raila Odinga, held since 1982 (see Amnesty international Report 1987), and eight others detained in 1986.
At least 39 people were brought to court on political charges in 1987 but none of them received fair trials. Like more than 50 political prisoners brought to trial in 1986, they had been held illegally and incommunicado before they were brought to court. There was no advance notice of their trials and none of the defendants had legal representation. In all cases, the defendants pleaded guilty to the charges against them, most of which were related to alleged participation in Mwakenyo activities. Most of the trials, which took place before the Chief Magistrate of Kenya, were concluded within about half an hour and all defendants were sentenced to prison terms.
Those convicted included politicians, businessmen, civil servants and students. John Kamangara Maina, a former parliamentary candidate, was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment on 29 January for "neglecting to report a felony". The felony not reported was the existence of a Mwakenya leaflet. Odhiambo Olel, a medical doctor treating former Vice President Oginga Odinga, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment in April for "taking an illegal oath" to join Mwakenya. He had been in good health at the time of his arrest but was unable to walk and had facial injuries when he appeared in court after two weeks' incommunicado detention by the police Special Branch. The Chief Magistrate reportedly made no com-
AFRICA/KENYA
ment about his physical condition. All of the 39 defendants convicted remained imprisoned at the end of 1987.
Many of those arrested as suspected supporters of Mwokenya were reportedly tortured or ill-treated during detention at police Special Branch offices in Nyayo House or Nyati House in Nairobi. They were said to have been held in cells flooded with water for up to seven days, denied food, beaten, forced to do strenuous physical exercises, and threatened with death or indefinite detention. They were also denied access to relatives, lawyers and doctors. Some of the prisoners, however, were taken to hospital or released when seriously ill.
Richard Wekesa, a student, was sentenced in April to 10 years' imprisonment for allegedly receiving money from the Libyan Government to provide information about student opposition to the Kenyan Government. His sentence was reduced on appeal to six years.
There were further politically-motivated arrests but most of those held were released after a few days. For example, some 20 people were arrested in Mombasa on 30 October for demonstrating against the authorities' alleged anti-Muslim bias. About 50 others were arrested on 4 November after further demonstrations and rioting. Almost all of the detainees in these two groups were released without charge within a few days. Two detainees, however, were facing charges of incitement to violence at the end of the year.
Seven student leaders at the University of Nairobi were arrested in November after they called for more student involvement in national affairs and criticized a government decision to deny them passports to attend a conference in Cuba. The arrests, in addition to the banning of the students' union, resulted in student demonstrations which were forcibly broken up by the police. Police officers assaulted numerous students and four foreign journalists. Six of the students were subsequently released, as were those arrested during the demonstrations.
Robert Wafula Buke. the chairman of the student union, was held incommunicado for two weeks and then brought to court on 30 November. The court sentenced him to five years' imprisonment, after proceedings which followed patterns of previous unfair trials. Without legal representation, he pleaded guilty to providing the Libyan Government with information considered "pre-
judicial to Kenya's interests" about student activities.
At the end of the year, a total of more than 70 prisoners of conscience or political prisoners who may have been prisoners of conscience were serving sentences of up to 10 years. All of the convictions followed unfair trials, according to reports. Three students convicted of sedition in 1982 and 1983 also remained in prison.
Maina wa Kinyatti, a history lecturer, continued to serve a six-year prison sentence imposed in 1982 for alleged possession of a seditious document. His appeal against arbitrary denial of remission of his sentence was dismissed by a court in December 1987. The court ruled that he should have filed his appeal within one year of the remission denial, which occurred in 1983. He was in poor health and continued to be denied adequate medical treatment.
The deaths in police custody of three prisoners alleged to have been tortured were the subject of legal proceedings during 1987. Gregory Byaruhanga, a Ugandan national teaching in Kenya, died at Kisii Hospital on 23 March. A police Special Branch inspector was charged with his murder but discharged by the magistrate for lack of evidence. An autopsy found that Gregory Byaruhanga's death was due to injuries caused by an assault during the time he was in custody. No inquest into his death had been held by the end of 1987.
In October an inquest was held into the death of Stephen Wanjema, a carpenter, who died in custody in Nakuru on 13 September 19^6. He had been arrested two weeks earlier for suspected membership of Mwakenya. The inquest, told that he had complained of severe beatings by the police before his death, had not given its findings by the end of 1987.
Peter Njenga Karanja, a businessman and rally-driver, "disappeared" after his arrest in Nakuru on 7 February for alleged links with Mwakenya. His family later discovered that he had died while still in police custody in a Nairobi hospital on 28 February. An inquest into his death was scheduled to begin in November and then postponed until early December. An Amnesty International representative went to Nairobi to observe the proceedings but was officially informed that he would not be permitted to attend the inquest.
At the inquest, which was heard by the Chief Magistrate, evidence was given that
AFRICA/KENYA/LESOTHO
Peter Karanja had died of pneumonia and intestinal gangrene. When admitted to hospital two days before his death, he had been in severe pain, barely able to speak, and had deep, open wounds on his body and sores on his feet. He had been in good health before his arrest and two weeks' detention in police Special Branch custody. The inquest was continuing at the end of the year.
More than 200 people were believed to be under sentence of death at the end of 1987 for robbery or murder. At least 30 of them were sentenced during the year, but it was not known whether there were any executions.
In July Amnesty International published a 58-page report entitled Kenya: Torture, Poh'ticaJ Detention and Unfair Trials. The organization said that human rights had come under serious attack in Kenya since March 1986, when the government appeared to have adopted a deliberate program to silence or intimidate its political opponents. The report noted that senior government and law enforcement officers appeared to have condoned the undermining of crucial legal and constitutional safeguards for political prisoners, resulting in serious breaching of the rule of law.
Amnesty International also made numerous appeals to the government about the arrests of suspected political opponents who had "disappeared" and were believed to be at risk of torture. In addition, the organization called for the release of Gibson Kamau Kuria and other prisofiers of conscience. The government did not respond directly to any of Amnesty International's appeals and inquiries but government officials criticized Amnesty International publicly on a number of occasions. On 12 December President Moi said in a public speech that any Amnesty International official who "was found in" Kenya would be arrested.
