PARAGUAY
The state of siege which had been in force almost continuously since General Alfredo Stroessner became President in 1954 was lifted on 8 April. Five prisoners of conscience charged under anti-subversive legislation were held for up to six months before being released. More than 200 other opposition activists were arrested for demonstrating against the government, although most were released uncharged after short periods. In December a long-term prisoner of conscience.
THE AMERICAS / PARAGUAY
Captain Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza, was released after serving a 25-year prison sentence. There were also reports of attacks by paramilitary groups on opponents of the government, which were apparently condoned by the authorities.
The lifting of the state of siege which had been in force for most of President Stroessner's 33 years in office was followed by a campaign for democratic reform launched by opposition parties, most of which were not legally recognized. Public demonstrations were frequent, and hundreds of participants were arrested. In September, as opposition to President Stroessner's candidacy for re-election grew, reports emerged of attacks on opposition meetings by groups of civilians assisted by police.
In December a prisoner of conscience, Captain Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza, was released after completing a 25-year sentence, much of which was spent in solitary confinement in a high security prison. Captain Ortigoza, who had been tortured after his arrest, was tried by a military court under procedures failing to conform to international standards. He was originally sentenced to death, later commuted to 25 years' imprisonment. Captain Ortigoza was kept in a solitary cell and denied access to a lawyer until a few weeks before his release. The only visits permitted were from his immediate family. On his release Captain Ortigoza was not freed unconditionally but restricted to a small town in the interior of Paraguay.
Five prisoners of conscience were held for up to six months under the provisions of Law 209 of the penal code, which prohibits a wide range of activities from selling pamphlets to holding meetings if the authorities regard them as being inspired by Marxism. It also prescribes penalties for advocating "hatred or destruction of the social classes". Although prosecutions under Law 209 are often initiated against political opponents of the government, they rarely result in a formal trial or conviction. Among those held in pre-trial detention under Law 209 in 1987 were peaceful opponents of the government, such as the peasant trade union leader Marcelino Corazón Medina, who was detained in February and released in May. Similarly held were two lawyers, Miguel Abdón Saguier and his brother, Hermes Rafael Saguier, both members of
the opposition Partido Liberal Radical Auténtico (PLRA), Authentic Radical Liberal Party. The former was held for four months and then freed on bail in February 1987; the latter was arrested in August and freed on bail in December.
Two other lawyers, Miriam and Eduardo Morales, were detained in November by police in Puerto Stroessner and held in incommunicado detention for two days. Miriam Morales was then released but her husband remained in custody and was charged with "inciting disobedience" under Law 209. Eduardo Morales was active in human rights work and had represented peasants involved in land disputes. Shortly before his arrest he had acted on behalf of vendors in Puerto Stroessner whose licences had been abruptly revoked by the municipal authorities.
Other arrests occurred in the context of a campaign for democratic reform by the Febrerista Party and other opposition parties. They held public meetings and rallies and hundreds of opposition activists, trade unionists, peasant leaders, students and other participants were arrested. Most were released without charge after a short period. Domingo Laino, a PLRA leader who had returned from exile in April, had been arrested eight times by the end of 1987. The legal basis for these arrests was not clear in view of the lifting of the state of siege.
A disturbing new development emerged in September when a series of attacks began on people known to oppose President Stroessner's re-election. These were carried out by paramilitary groups, allegedly formed by members of the ruling Colorado party. In one incident on 11 November, four PLRA leaders were attacked at Caacupé by a group of 30 to 40 armed men while travelling to a meeting. They were beaten by their attackers, who were armed with guns, iron bars, sticks and whips and who were alleged to have been directed by a Ministry of the Interior official. The armed group was said to be composed of police from La Cordillera and supporters of the President. No one was reported to have been arrested in connection with this attack by the end of 1987.
Peasants involved in land disputes were subject to arbitrary arrest, beatings and other ill-treatment by the police or army. In the Alto Paraná department, all access to the Tavapy II peasant settlement.
THE AMERICAS / PARAGUAY / PERU
which had been peacefully occupied since 1983, was cut off at the end of 1986 when police and army personnel placed a cordon around it. The law requires that a landowner must obtain a court order in order to evict peasants from a peaceful occupation and such eviction orders are not difficult to obtain. However, no judicial expulsion order was obtained. Nevertheless. between February and May a number of peasants from Tavapy II were arbitrarily detained by the police and army and allegedly beaten and threatened with summary execution. On 10 May a group of doctors and nurses from Asunción were arrested after they had gone to offer medical assistance to the peasants of Tavapy II. Most of them were only briefly held but four men, known for their trade union militancy at the Hospital de Clínicas in Asunción, were held without charge for several days. At the end of May, however, the government gave the peasants a permanent right of settlement and the cordon was lifted.
Peasants involved in land disputes were also held for several months in pretrial detention, in some cases on minor charges because judges did not promptly hear their applications for provisional release. Such applications normally are heard within eight days, but it appeared that some were delayed for political reasons. For example. Norma Garcete de Pintos, the wife of a peasant leader, was held for four months in preventive detention in Encarnación on a charge of invading private property. She was alleged to have been beaten by police although she was pregnant and ill at the time of her arrest, and she later suffered a miscarriage. The police who arrested her were believed to have been seeking her husband, a leader of a group of peasants who had cultivated land in an area known as Pirapo'i for 11 years and wished to obtain permanent settlement. Norma Garcete de Pintos was eventually released from custody in late December but it was not known whether further legal proceedings would be taken against her.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal prisoners and suspects. In one case a 13-year-old boy, Guillermo Florenciagni, was alleged to have died as a result of torture by police at Yby Yaú in the department of Concepción. He had been arrested on 20 December 1986
and accused of stealing a bicycle. He was released after a month in custody, when marks of torture were said still to be visible on his body. He was admitted to hospital but died on 23 January. The official cause of death was given as septicaemia, but it was noted that the boy's spleen was swollen and that there were bruises on his body and particularly the soles of his feet. However, no investigation was known to have been carried out and no one prosecuted in connection with his death.
There were also reports that prisoners were kept permanently chained in bar fetters at the Third Police Station in Asunción and denied exercise in the open air. In March prisoners there went on hunger-strike to protest about these conditionsrAs a result the fetters were removed. Amnesty International drew these cases to the attention of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States. In November the lACHR published a report on human rights violations in Paraguay which identified the absence of an independent judiciary as one of the most important factors leading to ill-treatment and torture of prisoners.
Amnesty International took action during the year on behalf of a number of people detained under Law 209 and expressed concern about the delay in processing the case of Norma Garcete de Pintos and her alleged ill-treatment in custody. In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Paraguay to the United Nations procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations.
