ETHIOPIA
Many long-term prisoners of conscience, some held since 1974, remained in detention. Hundreds of other political prisoners were detained without formal charge or trial, including some who were serving prison sentences imposed by administrative order. There were persistent reports of suspected government opponents being tortured after their arrest. The conditions
in which political prisoners were held were harsh. Appeals to the authorities regarding political prisoners who had "disappeared" between 1979 and 1986 and who were believed to have been secretly executed received no response.
Fighting between government and opposition forces continued during 1987 in Eritrea, Tigray, Wollega, Hararghe and other regions. Civilians in these areas suspected of collaborating with opposition forces were reportedly detained and in many cases ill-treated.
A new Constitution was adopted in February, stating that Ethiopia is a People's Democratic Republic with only one political party, the Worker's Party of Ethiopia. In September the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia was inaugurated and the new National Assembly (Shengo) elected as President Mengistu Haile-Mariam, the former chairman of the dissolved Provisional Military Administrative Council (PMAC, known as the Dergue), which had ruled the country since the 1974 revolution.
Detailed information about political prisoners was difficult to obtain. The authorities disclosed no information and prisoners' relatives or former prisoners were often forced into silence by threats of reprisals. Several thousand political prisoners were, however, believed to be held in ordinary prisons and security prisons throughout the country, particularly in Addis Ababa and in regions where opposition forces were active. Most prisoners were reportedly held on suspicion of having links with armed opposition forces, particularly the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF), or the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). Some of them appeared to be prisoners of conscience, arrested on suspicion of opposition to the government primarily because of their Eritrean, Tigrayan or Oromo ethnic origin.
Many prisoners were also reportedly arrested for seeking to avoid military conscription or to flee the country, a "counterrevolutionary" offence for which the penalty may be lengthy imprisonment or, in special cases, death. In addition, the relatives of conscription evaders or those trying to leave the country illegally for political reasons were reportedly arrested in reprisal. Some people who refused to take part in the program of obligatory
AFRICA/ETHIOPIA
resettlement in new villages, which involved over three million people in 1987, were also reported to have been arrested.
At least 30 Ethiopian Jews, members of the Beta israeJ sect (House of Israel, known as Falashas), were arrested in Gondar and Addis Ababa in February 1987. They were imprisoned in Addis Ababa, where they were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year. They were apparently accused of helping to arrange for Ethiopian Jews to emigrate to Israel. Some eight others were reportedly arrested in March for trying to leave the country illegally.
Sources suggested that students demonstrating at Addis Ababa University on 10 October against poor campus conditions were arrested. However, it was not possible to establish if any of them were still held at the end of the year.
As in previous years, most political prisoners were held outside the framework of the law. Article 42 of the new Constitution states that all detained persons should be either brought to court within 48 hours or released. This procedure, which had been part of the country's Code of Criminal Procedure since 1961, was systematically ignored in previous years and apparently was not followed during 1987. Instead, suspected government opponents were held incommunicado for prolonged periods without being referred to court. They were usually held by the Central Investigation Organ, the state security service, and many were tortured. According to reports, they were not informed of the reasons for their detention and had no opportunity to seek legal redress.
Some political prisoners were serving administratively-imposed prison terms of up to 25 years. Thirteen people arrested in 1983 for alleged membership of the opposition Ethiopian Peoples' Democratic Alliance (EPDA), for example, did not appear before the officials who sentenced them and had no opportunity to defend themselves or challenge the legality of their imprisonment.
Many prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years remained in custody. Ten members of the family of the late Emperor Haile Selassie, who were arrested in 1974, were still imprisoned. They included his daughter, Tenagnework Haile Selassie, aged 75; four grand-daughters; a daughter-in-law; three grandsons and another relative. All continued to be held.
without trial, in the Central Prison (Kar-cheJe) in Addis Ababa.
Other prisoners of conscience were among a group arrested in 1980, when people of Oromo ethnic origin suspected of links with the OLF were targets of mass arrests. They included Tsehai Tolessa, the wife of the former head of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church; the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, who "disappeared" in 1979; Martha Kumsa, a journalist; Zegeye Asfaw, former Minister of Law and Justice, and Namaat Issa, a former civil servant. Namaat Issa's husband was held in a separate security prison and her handicapped son, born shortly after her arrest, remained in prison with her. None of the prisoners had been charged or tried.
Berhanu Dinka, Ethiopia's Permanent Representative to the United Nations in New York until his arrest during a visit to Ethiopia in May 1986, continued to be detained without trial. Although publicly accused of misusing public funds, he had not been charged and was believed to be detained for political reasons. Two former UN staff members in Ethiopia also remained in prison. Tesfa-Mariam Zeggay, arrested in 1983 and reportedly still suffering from injuries sustained during torture, was tried in 1987 and sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment for espionage. No details of the trial were disclosed and it was unclear whether he had been allowed proper defence. Shimelis Teklu, who was arrested in 1984 and allegedly tortured, was reportedly brought to court in early 1987. His trial was adjourned, however, and had apparently not resumed by the end of the year.
Between 30 and 50 members of the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (DFSS), an armed opposition group based in Ethiopia which is fighting the Somali Government, had been held without trial in Ethiopia since their arrest in 1985 and 1986. The DFSS chairman and several other officials were arrested by the Ethiopian security authorities in October 1985, reportedly after a political dispute with Ethiopian officials relating to the armed conflict. Other DFSS members were arrested in April and October 1986. They were believed to be held in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa and in prisons in Harar and Dire Dawa. According to reports, several were tortured and one of them, Abdullahi Mohamed Hassan, died
AFRICA/ETHIOPIA
in custody in October 1986.
Despite international appeals, no releases of political prisoners were announced at the time of the inauguration of the People's Democratic Republic in September. However, more than 50 Oromo political prisoners in Addis Ababa and Nekemte, including some prisoners of conscience detained since 1980 or earlier, were released without publicity between March and May. A considerable number of other prisoners, some held for several years and possibly including people captured in armed conflict, were reportedly freed during the year.
The government maintained its silence on the fate of many political prisoners who "disappeared" while in custody between 1979 and 1986. Unofficial sources suggested that most, if not all, had been secretly executed. Amnesty International appealed for news about some 40 political prisoners in Addis Ababa who "disappeared" in November 1985 after being taken from the Central Prison and the Central Investigation Centre (Maekelawi) to unknown destinations, but received no response. They included Asegahegne Araya and three other alleged EFDA leaders arrested in 1983. Others who "disappeared" at the same time were suspected members of the opposition organizations EPLF, TPLF and the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP). Some 10 other prisoners "disappeared" from the Central Investigation Centre in Addis Ababa in October 1986, including Gezahegne Kassa-hun, a trade unionist accused of links with the OLF. No information was revealed about them by the government and they, too, may have been secretly executed.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for other political prisoners to be either tried in accordance with international standards or released. When the new Constitution was adopted in February, Amnesty International appealed to the government to ratify and respect the major international human rights agreements, such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and to ensure that prisoners were protected from torture, ill-treatment, illegal detention, secret administrative imprisonment and "disappearance". Further appeals were made to President Mengistu after his inauguration in September but none received a response.
In February Amnesty International published testimonies of former political prisoners who had been tortured in Ethiopia by the security police in recent years. They maintained that they had been repeatedly tortured to force confessions of involvement with opposition organizations and identification of other opponents of the government. Torture methods often reported included prolonged beatings on the soles of the feet and suspension of the body in a contorted position from a rope. Some prisoners were also given electric shocks, raped, or subjected to death threats and mock execution. Former prisoners also reported being submerged in dirty water until they nearly lost consciousness or having their hands or fingernails crushed. Many prisoners were said to have died as a result of their injuries or to have been secretly executed.
These reports of torture were denied by the Ethiopian representative at the 43rd session of the UN Commission for Human Rights in February. He stated that a high-level committee had been established in 1986 to investigate allegations of torture, claiming that the law and practices in Ethiopia concerning the protection of individuals' physical and mental integrity were "in conformity with the accepted international law and practices". Amnesty International asked the government to provide details of the committee's unpublished findings but no information was disclosed.
Furthermore, Amnesty International received no reports that any official investigators had contacted former prisoners or victims of torture to collect evidence of human rights violations. The organization had no information about any steps taken by the government to prevent the use of torture. Additional cases of torture and ill-treatment were reported during 1987 and Amnesty International's information indicated that, with few exceptions, the article of the 1981 Special Penal Code prohibiting ill-treatment of prisoners had been ignored.
AFRICA/GABON/GAMBIA
