BENIN
At least 67 prisoners of conscience con* tinned to be detained without trial throughout 1987, although 11 others were in a group of 13 prisoners released in October. There were also reports of new arrests of suspected opponents of the government but none had been charged or brought to trial by the end of the year. Two people were executed in September and one other was sentenced to death in his absence.
A number of people were believed to have been detained following renewed protests in March by students at the University of Benin. They held a one-day strike to complain about conditions at the university, the non-payment of grants and a general lack of employment opportunities. The government claimed that the strike was organized by a group of anarchist students and threatened to suppress all unrest "with the utmost vigour". Some people, mostly students, arrested after the strike were still being held without charge or trial at Camp Sero Kpera, where they were being interrogated, at the end of 1987.
More than 70 people were held without trial throughout the year who had been detained in 1985 or 1986 in connection with earlier student unrest or on suspicion of supporting the banned Parti com-muniste du Dahomey, Communist Party of Dahomey. Benin was formerly called Dahomey. Among them were 67 prisoners of conscience and six considered likely to be prisoners of conscience. They were held in two remote prisons: the Civil Prison in Segbana and the Sero Kpera camp in Para-
kou (see Amnesty International Report
1987).
During 1987 some of the detainees repeatedly demanded to be given a fair trial or released. In February a group of prisoners held in the Civil Prison in Segbana wrote to members of the National Assembly in Cotonou to explain how their detention contravened Benin's laws. They also complained about their conditions, stating that they received inadequate food in prison and that they were denied visits from their families. There was a further protest in May. when some detainees in Segbana briefly went on hunger-strike to demand respect for their human rights and medical treatment for detainees in need of it. Some detainees in need of urgent medical treatment were allowed to go to hospital in August, but treatment was withheld as the authorities had failed to pay the necessary medical fees. Subsequently, following further protests, the Minister of the Interior visited the detainees and they were given medical treatment.
Thirteen of the detainees who had been held in Sero Kpera camp in Parakou were released in October by order of President Mathieu Kerekou. This had been recommended by the President of the Commission of Inquiry which had interrogated all the prisoners of concern to Amnesty International during 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1987). It was reported that those remaining in custody were to be either tried or released shortly, but none had been by the end of 1987.
At least one person was sentenced to death in absentia and at least two people were executed for murder during 1987. The two prisoners, both of whom were executed on 23 September, had been convicted of ritual murder and sentenced to death in August 1986. An appeal for clemency was rejected on 9 September.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in March to reiterate its concern about the prolonged detention without trial of more than 80 people held since 1985 or 1986. Amnesty International called for prisoners of conscience to be released immediately and unconditionally, for all other detainees to be brought to trial promptly and fairly or released and for impartial investigation of reports that detainees had been subjected to torture during interrogation. However, the government did not respond. In April
AFRICA / BENIN / BURKINA FASO
Amnesty International issued a report which named 88 prisoners of concern to the organization and cited allegations that detainees were tortured by military officers during interrogation by the Commission of Inquiry. Amnesty International called publicly for all prisoners of conscience to be released and for clarification of the reasons for detention in several other cases.
On 1 October Amnesty International was assured by M. Assani, a member of the National Revolutionary Assembly, that all but two of the prisoners of concern to the organization had been released, but this was not correct. He also invited Amnesty International to send a delegation to Benii. to investigate this situation first-hand. In December Amnesty International wrote to him pointing out the contradiction in the number of prisoners stated to have been released, but welcoming the opportunity to discuss matters of concern with the authorities in Cotonou.
Following the release of 13 detainees in October and reports that the remainder would either be released soon or brought to trial, Amnesty International wrote to the authorities to urge them not to prosecute anyone for peaceful political beliefs or activities and to ensure that any trials were conducted in accordance with international standards of fair trial.
Earlier. Amnesty International wrote to the government about the case of Ouaha-bou Arouna, who was sentenced to death in absentia in july after being convicted of murder. Amnesty International called for him not to be executed if he were taken into custody.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Benin to the United Nations under the procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. The submission was also sent to the government, which was invited to comment, but without response.
