SURINAME
There were new reports that the army had killed civilians in the course of operations against an armed opposition group. A number of suspected government opponents were detained, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. The authorities said that all of them had been released before the end of the year.
Throughout the year, there was continued conflict between government forces and the Jungle Commando, an armed opposition group led by former army sergeant Ronny Brunswijk, which was especially active in eastern Suriname. Both sides accused the other of responsibility for civilian killings and other abuses, but it was impossible in most cases to obtain independent corroboration.
Following the approval by referendum of a new Constitution in September, the first national elections since 1976 were held in November. The victorious opposition Front for Democracy and Development was expected to form a new government in January 1988. After the election, it was reported that Ronny Brunswijk had declared a cease-0re until the end of the year.
At the end of the year the state of emergency imposed throughout the country on 1 December 1986 was still in force only in the eastern districts of Marowijne, Brokopondo and Sipaliwini.
Most of those arrested as suspected supporters of the Jungle Commando were
members of the Bush Negro ethnic group. They included 11 members of the Sara-macca Bush Negro group who were arrested by army personnel in the Brokopondo district in April. They were then taken to Fort Zelandia, where they were held without charge and denied access to their families and lawyers for several weeks. At least one of them, Rudy Wächter, was reportedly tortured. All 11 detainees were subsequently released without charge.
A number of detainees, mostly Bush Negroes, were released in August, after spending over a year in custody without charge or trial because the authorities suspected they were members or supporters of the Jungle Commando. Further releases took place on 1 December and the authorities later said that no political prisoners remained in detention. It was not possible for Amnesty International to obtain independent verification of the releases.
There were new reports of civilian killings by the army, with some 40 such killings being reported from an area south of Paramaribo between 11 and 30 September. Some of the dead may have been members of the Jungle Commando, but most were said to have been villagers who had taken no part in the conflict. The most serious incident reportedly occurred on 11 September when soldiers travelling by road and river attacked villagers working in fields close to the road between Browns-weg and Pokigron. At least 19 bodies were found in the area by local people. The official Suriname News Agency subsequently described the victims as members of the rebel forces who had been killed in a clash with government troops. Members of an international medical organization working in the area, however, reported that eye-witnesses had confirmed the killing of unarmed civilians.
Further civilian killings by the army were reported to have occurred in September. Soldiers allegedly fired at three villagers travelling by boat, killing one and injuring another, on 18 September. According to reports, two Bush Negroes were shot dead by soldiers near Pokigron on 30 September.
In February Amnesty International representatives visited French Guiana to interview refugees who had fled there, mostly in late 1986, to escape the conflict in Suriname. They confirmed earlier reports
THEAMERICAS/SURINAME/TRINIDAOANDTOBAGO
of extrajudicial executions of unarmed civilians, primarily women and children, by the army. Subsequently, Amnesty International communicated its concerns about these killings to the government and urged that a list of those detained should be made public, that they should be either charged with recognizable criminal offences or released and that they should be given access to legal assistance. There was no response.
In September Amnesty International published a report, Suriname: Violations of Human Rights, detailing the information it had received about political killings and other human rights violations. It called on the government to conduct an independent inquiry into the killings and make the findings public, to prosecute those found responsible for these human rights violations and to grant compensation to the families of non-combatant victims. The report also called on the government to make public the name, date of arrest and place of detention of all those arrested as a result of the present conflict or their alleged opposition to the government, and to ensure that all detainees are either promptly charged and brought to court or released and to grant them access to lawyers and their relatives.
In December Amnesty International again wrote to the outgoing military government about the reported killing of civilians on 11 September and called for an official investigation.
Suriname ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture on 12 November, as well as acceding to the American Convention on Human Rights and recognizing the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
