COTE D'IVOIRE
At least 15 trade unionists were arrested, apparently for political reasons, in September and October. Two of them were released before the end of the year but at least 10 others were known to have been forcibly conscripted into the army as a form of punishment. The three other trade unionists were convicted on crimi-
AFRICA / CÔTE D'IVOIRE / DJIBOUTI
nal charges which appeared to be politi* cally motivated.
In March Robert Gbai Tagro, the leader of an unrecognized opposition party, the Parti républicain de Côte d'Ivoire, Republican Party of Côte d'Ivoire, was arrested along with some 30 members of the party because they had applied for permission to hold a party congress. All were released after a few weeks.
In July the elections of the executive committee of the Syndicat national des enseignants du second degré de Côte d'Ivoire (SYNESCl), a secondary school teachers' trade union, was disputed by many members of the union. The former union leadership claimed that the election had been fraudulent and refused to give the new committee access to union funds. The former leadership of the SYNES-CJ, one of the few independent trade unions not affiliated to the ruling party, had been critical of the government's education policy, whereas the new committee received encouragement from members of the government.
In September the former secretary general of SYNESCl, Laurent Akoun, and two former treasurers of the union were arrested and charged with embezzling the union's funds. They were held for three months in pre-trial detention, during which, in contravention of normal procedures, they were denied family visits. They were convicted in December by a court in Abidjan on charges of withholding the SYNESCl's funds from the new executive. Laurent Akoun and Yaya Traoré received six-month prison sentences and Stéphan Vangah was sentenced to four months' imprisonment. At the time of their trial, the legitimacy of the new executive committee was still under investigation by a labour court and the trial judge refused to allow discussion of this question.
Other former SYNESCl officials and some union members protested in the weeks following the three arrests. At least 12 protestors were detained by security police and held for up to two months without charge or referral to the Procuracy, effectively outside the terms of the law. Two women among those detained were released in early November, but at least 10 others, all men. were transferred from detention in Abidjan to a military camp in Séguéla and forcibly conscripted into the army. The authorities announced
that the reason for their conscription was "civic and moral education". In the past, journalists and students who participated in demonstrations or criticized the government have been restricted or punished by forcible conscription.
Nine students detained without charge or trial since November 1985 for participating in a strike were reportedly released before November 1987. They had been held at the same military camp in Séguéla.
Amnesty International considered those conscripted into the army to be prisoners of conscience, effectively restricted on account of their support for the SYNESCl trade union's former leaders. In December the organization appealed to the government for their release. Amnesty International was also concerned that Laurent Akoun and the two others sentenced with him might be prisoners of conscience, held on criminal charges that were politically motivated. In addition, they appeared to have been subjected to deliberately harsh conditions in pre-trial custody.
