MEXICO
There were renewed reports of arbitrary detentions and killings of members of peasant and Indian organizations, often in the context of land disputes. Many killings were attributed to civilian gunmen linked to private landowners, but appeared to be carried out with the acquiescence of the authorities. Reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners also continued, despite the introduction of federal legislation in 1986 prohibiting torture. Several prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience remained in prison.
Carlos Salinas de Cortari, the Minister for Planning and P'ederal Budget, was named by the current President. Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado, as presidential candidate of the ruling party, the Partido Revolucionario InstilucionaJ (PRI), Institutional Revolutionary Party, in elections to be held in July 1988. The PRI had won all national elections since its foundation in 1929.
The state government of Oaxaca set up an Indian legal rights office (Procuraduría deJ Indígena) with special powers to assist imprisoned Indians and speed up their release in cases where their imprisonment related to socio-economic or cultural problems. By the end of the year no information was available as to the functioning of this body.
At least 23 prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout the year. They had been arrested between 1982 and 1986; some were still undergoing trial and others had been sentenced to prison terms ranging from 10 to 32 years for offences including robbery, wounding and murder. However, it appeared that these charges had been brought against them for political reasons on account of their peaceful activities as peasant or community leaders.
Arbitrary detentions of peasants during land disputes continued to be reported. In one case 28 peasants were briefly detained in Tapachula, state of Chiapas, on 24 October following the eviction of their community from land to which they claimed to have legal title. They were all reported to have been beaten at the time of their arrest by state judicial police.
Zósimo Hernández Ramirez was released from prison on 26 October, after being held for more than two years on charges including murder (see Amnesty International Report 1987). He had been sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment but the sentence was quashed by the Veracruz State Appeals Court. Amnesty International had been investigating his case in the belief that his detention and prosecution may have resulted solely from his legal and non-violent activities.
On 22 March 17 prisoners, including eight possible prisoners of conscience, were removed from San Luis Potosí prison and transferred to an unused prison in Matehuala, approximately 150 kilometres to the north. This followed a violent incident in which a group of prisoners were apparently allowed to leave their cells during the night in order to attack the political prisoners, some of whom had organized peaceful meetings to protest about prison conditions. The 17 were returned to San Luis Potosí prison on 16 April but held incommunicado for another week. Some were reported to have been severely beaten and at least one, political prisoner Francisco Urbina, had severe injuries. Some were reportedly beaten again after their return to San Luis Potosí. One of the 17, Hilario Saldafta González, a criminal prisoner, was found dead in his cell on 19 April, having apparently hanged himself. Eight days later another criminal prisoner, Alfonso Castillo liménez, who had not been among those transferred, was
THE AMERICAS/-HONDURAS/JAMAICA
reported to have died after he too attempted to hang himself in his cell.
These incidents were the subject of a special parliamentary investigation, following which the director of the prison resigned. The state governor took extended leave and by the end of 1987 tensions within the prison appeared to have eased.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of people detained by police on criminal charges. A typical case was that of Juan José de la Cruz, who was detained by state judicial police on 6 May in La Ventana, state of Sonora. Following his release without charge two days later, he said that he had been thrown face down and severely beaten with his hands and feet tied and had carbonated water forced up his nose. The accusation against him appeared to be stealing cattle, but he stated that he believed the real reason for the incident was a land dispute. On release he spent three days in hospital undergoing treatment.
Dozens of killings were reported in rural areas, many of which were believed to have been carried out by armed civilian bands acting with the acquiescence of local authorities. In November, for example, a peasant farmer, Heliodoro Cordero, was reportedly killed by gunmen linked to local landowners in Ilamatlán, Veracruz. The Frente Democrático Oriental de México Emiliano Zapata (FDOMEZ), a regional peasant organization, said that he was the 15th member of the organization to have been killed in similar circumstances since the year began. Reports of other such killings were received from the states of Chiapas, Oaxaca, Hidalgo and Guerrero. Alejandro Cruz Martinez, a poet and activist with the left-wing grass-roots organization the Coalición Obrero Campesina Estudiantil del Istmo (COCEl) in the state of Oaxaca, was killed by gunmen on 24 September.
There were fears for the safety of Gabriel Fernando Valles Martinez, who "disappeared" after being detained in the state of Durango on 26 February. At the time, he was commander of the state judicial police in the town of Santiago Papasquiaro. He was reportedly commissioned by the state Attorney General, who is responsible for the state judicial police, to undertake a confidential investigation; when he delivered the result, he was detained. The
authorities maintained that there were no charges against him and that he was released on 27 February. Other sources, however, suggested that he had been transferred to Mexico City.
Other cases of prisoners who "disappeared" under previous governments, notably during the 1970s, remained unresolved. No further investigations were conducted into these cases, despite contemporary reports and testimonies that they had been detained. Explanations of their fate given by previous governments had still not been substantiated by documentary evidence, such as death certificates. At the end of 1987, Amnesty International was working on 52 cases of people who "disappeared" between 1972 and 1983.
In June the government ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
Amnesty International continued to communicate with the Mexican Government by letter and through visits to its International Secretariat from government representatives. Further correspondence was exchanged on cases raised in previous years in the states of Chiapas, Oaxaca and Puebia (see Amnesty international Report 1987) and on new cases raised by Amnesty International during 1987. Although the government responded with legal information on many cases, it did not fully address Amnesty International's concerns. One such case was that of seven prisoners Amnesty International believed to be prisoners of conscience who had been singled out and subjected to criminal prosecution as a result of their activities as peasant leaders in the state of Chiapas. They had been detained in May 1986 and accused of incitement to violence (see Amnesty International Report 1987). There were reported to have been irregularities in their trials and statements obtained under duress were said to have been used as evidence. The government did not comment on these aspects of the case.
In January Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Defence after receiving reports that people held in army custody in 1986 in the states of Hidalgo and Sinaloa had been tortured and ill-treated. The government replied in May, questioning the credibility of Amnesty International's sources and contending that the allegations were false since the alleged victims
THE AMERICAS / MEXICO / NICARAGUA
had been charged with drug-trafficking. In August Amnesty International expressed its dissatisfaction with this response, in particular the implication that the government's assessment of the good faith of the source took precedence over the consistency of the allegations, and that reports of torture of people detained for drug-related offences were not worthy of serious consideration. Amnesty International again urged a thorough investigation.
Several thousand political prisoners, including several believed to be prisoners of conscience, remained in custody at the end of 1987. They included former National Guards convicted of crimes committed under the previous government and people imprisoned for collaborating with armed opposition forces. The majority had been sentenced by special tribunals whose composition and summary procedures failed to meet international standards of fairness and impartiality. However, 985 political prisoners were released in November under a government pardon. Detainees reported having been held for long periods in conditions which appeared to constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and some alleged that they had been tortured. There were also reports of extrajudicial executions committed by government forces, particularly in rural areas affected by armed conflict. In most cases it was impossible to verify independently what had occurred or attribute responsibility for specific acts.
The government continued throughout the year to face armed opposition from irregular military forces receiving military assistance and training from the United
States Government, the coniros. The conflict affected extensive areas of the country, in particular the departments of linotega, Matagalpa, Boaco, Chontales and Zelaya. Civilians living and working in government-controlled and -defended farming cooperatives were frequent targets of contra attacks. Despite US Government funding of a human rights program to instill respect for human rights and investigate reports of abuses by the contras, new reports were received in 1987 of the killing of civilians by these forces in circumstances suggesting they had been summarily executed.
A new Constitution was adopted by the National Assembly on 9 January, which included articles upholding freedom of conscience, freedom of the press and freedom from arbitrary arrest, protecting the right to due process and prohibiting torture and ill-treatment. However, on the same day President Daniel Ortega suspended many of these rights by extending for a further year the state of emergency which had been in force with some interruptions since 1982. Rights suspended included freedom of the press, the right to strike, the right to hold outdoor public meetings and the right to habeas corpus in cases involving national security.
On 7 August Nicaragua, along with four other Central American states, signed the Central America Peace Agreement. (See entry on Guatemala.) In accordance with this agreement, on 25 August the government announced the formation of a national reconciliation commission, including representatives of the Catholic Church and political opposition parties, and permitted a major opposition newspaper, La Prensa, to reopen. It also relaxed restrictions on outdoor meetings. On 22 November the government pardoned and released 985 political prisoners. It also prepared decrees to lift the state of emergency and to amnesty the remaining prisoners held under the Public Order Law. Neither measure had been enacted by the end of 1987.
According to government figures, 3,434 people charged with or convicted of politically-motivated offences were held at the end of 1987. Of these, 924 were said to have been sentenced since 1981 under the Public Order Law. This defines offences related to national security, ranging from political violence to the exercise of freedom of expression. Many were re-
THE AMERICAS/-HONDURAS/JAMAICA
ported to have been convicted of collaborating with armed opposition groups, and a further 656 were said to be awaiting trial on similar charges at the end of 1987. Most of those imprisoned under the Public Order Law were tried by special lay tribunals known as Tribunales Populares Anti-Somocistas (TPAs), whose composition and proceedings failed to provide guarantees of a fair and impartial trial. Some of these prisoners may have been prisoners of conscience.
Almost all the remaining prisoners, more than 1,800 in all, were said by the government to have been convicted of crimes committed under the previous government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle when they were serving as members of the National Guard. Most were convicted by special courts whose summary procedures impeded their right to a fair trial. Some 200 of these prisoners were among the 985 released in November, but there was no general legal review of their cases.
Hundreds of peasants in rural areas affected by the armed conflict were detained during the year by the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE), the state security police. Many were held for months without access to legal counsel or being brought to court. Some were released uncharged, but others were tried by TPAs as alleged supporters of armed opposition groups and sentenced to prison terms of up to 30 years. A number appeared to have been convicted largely on the basis of contested "confessions" made in pretrial detention; in some cases detainees were said to have been forced to sign or put their fingerprints to statements whose contents were not disclosed to them.
One prisoner of conscience held throughout 1987 was Mario Baldizón Avi-lés, a government employee who was sentenced by a military appeals court in 1986 to 10 years' imprisonment for treason. He had been accused of helping his brother, Alvaro Baldizón Avilés, a former employee of the Interior Ministry, to leave Nicaragua and seek asylum in the USA in 1985. Amnesty International believed that he was actually imprisoned because of his family relationship with his brother. When he arrived in the USA, Alvaro Baldizón Avilés had publicly alleged that the Nicaraguan Government had committed systematic human rights violations. His allegations were later published by the US
State Department. Part of the evidence produced against Mario Baldizón Avilés at his trial was a "confession" which he made in pre-trial custody, but which he said he had not been allowed to read.
Former detainees arrested in previous years reported that they had been kepi alone for long periods in cramped cells, without light, adequate ventilation or food, and had been threatened and forced to sign incriminating extrajudicial confessions. For example, Tomás Blandón Hernández, who was released in November, said that he had been held for five days in a dark cell too small for him to sit or stand up in at Rio Blanco. Matagalpa. after his arrest in January 1986. He had then been transferred to the EKJSE detention facility known as Las Tejas in Matagalpa, where he was held for three months. He said he had been beaten, violently threatened and made to sign blank sheets of paper, which were later filled in and submitted as his "confession" when he was brought to trial. He denied in court that he had made the statement, but was convicted in September 1986 for assisting the contras and sentenced to five years' imprisonment.
In a similar case, Maria Auxiliadora Rivas Urbina, a mother of five, was serving a seven-year prison term imposed by the TPA despite her telling the court that she could neither read nor write and had been "helped" while in DGSE custody to sign a confession, the contents of which she denied. A DGSE officer summoned by the TPA to answer her allegation did not appear.
The most common complaints by former detainees were that they had been held alone for days or weeks in DGSE cells known as Chiquitas (the tiny ones), in which they could neither easily sit nor stand and which lacked adequate light or ventilation, and that they had been deprived of food for long periods. Few detainees alleged that they had been tortured. although some said they had been beaten and subjected to mock executions and that threats had been made against them or their families. One former detainee said that he had been kicked and tortured with electric shocks to his arms, and that a pistol barrel was thrust into his mouth as part of a mock execution in March 1986 at Las Tejas detention centre in Matagalpa. He said he was also held for five days without food or water in a totally dark ceil which was too small to sit down
