NAMIBIA
Suspected opponents of continued South African administration of Namibia, in-eluding prisoners of conscience, were detained without trial, in some cases for long periods. There was graphic new evidence of the torture of political detainees. In one case, security police officers admitted in court that they had tortured and beaten defendants held in pre-trial custody. The officers were subsequently arrested at the judge's direction but released when the authorities declined to prosecute them. In another case, a security police officer was charged but acquitted in connection with the death in custody of a political detainee in 1980. Six members of the military, including three senior officers, were charged in connection with the stabbing to death of a former political prisoner during an attack by the security forces on people attending a political rally in November 1986. There were also reports of extrajudicial executions by South African security forces operating in northern Namibia. The death penalty continued to be imposed but neither the precise number of sentences nor whether executions took place was known.
The South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) continued throughout the year to oppose South Africa's administration of Namibia. SWAPO operated as a legal political organization within the country. An external wing, based in Angola, launched guerrilla attacks into Namibia against South African forces and those supporting them. South African forces were responsible for repeated incursions
into Angola and attacks against SWAPO bases there. Both sides accused the other of killing civilians but in most cases it was impossible to verify who was responsible. It continued to be reported that SWAPO held a number of prisoners within its camps in Angola.
Many people were reportedly detained without charge or trial in 1987, including a number of prisoners of conscience. They included prominent members of SWAPO's internal wing, trade unionists, teachers and others, particularly in the north, who were suspected of supporting SWAPO, opposing continued South African rule or possessing information about SWAPO guerrillas. A number of detainees were first held under the provisions of Proclamation AG.9 of 1977, an administrative decree which permits the security forces to arrest people arbitrarily and detain them without charge for an unlimited period. Previously, this provision was much used, as it permitted detainees to be held incommunicado, but in February 1986 a Supreme Court ruling established the right of detainees to have access to a lawyer after 30 days in custody. Apparently as a consequence of this ruling, a pattern emerged in 1987 whereby some detainees were held initially under AG.9 and then transferred, within 30 days, to detention under Section 6 of the South African Terrorism Act. Others were held from the outset under Section 6, which, unlike AG.9, stipulates that detainees must be held incommunicado for the duration of their detention. Section 6 also permits the security police to hold detainees without charge and in solitary confinement for an unlimited period during interrogation and to withhold all information about the reasons for their imprisonment and about their whereabouts. The Terrorism Act was repealed in South Africa in 1982, following a succession of deaths in detention. The act remained applicable in Namibia but was little used in comparison with Proclamation AG.9 until the February 1986 Supreme Court ruling on detainees' rights to legal access.
Information about human rights remained difficult to obtain from northern Namibia, much of which continued under a dusk-to-dawn curfew throughout 1987, but there were periodic reports of politically-motivated arrests. For example, at least 12 people were reportedly
AFRICA/NAMIBIA/NIGER
detained in January in the Tsandi area of Ovamboland district. The group included 60-year-old Elizabeth Amukwaya, a teacher; Taimi Endjala, another woman; and other local teachers. They were reportedly held under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act before their release without charge. No reasons were given for their arrests. Josef Katofa, a former prisoner of conscience and victim of torture (see Amnesty International Report 1986), was also detained in January, together with his father. They were held initially under Proclamation AG.9 but the legal basis for their detention may have been changed to Section 6 of the Terrorism Act. Both men were released without charge. Josef Katofa was again detained in July and considered to be a prisoner of conscience. In late, September he was again released without charge. Following this release, he alleged that he had been severely assaulted in detention.
Five leading members of SWAPO's internal organization were arrested in dawn security police raids on 19 August. They included Hendrik Witbooi, SWAPO's Vice President; Daniel Tjongarero, its Deputy Chairman; and Anton Lubowski, a leading white member of SWAPO. Within days two other SWAPO activists, both officials of the Mineworkers' Union of Namibia (MUN), were also detained. Ben Uulenga. the secretary general of MUN, was arrested when he returned to Namibia from abroad. All seven were held incommunicado and in solitary confinement under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act at a detention camp at Osire (see Amnesty international Report 1986 and 1987).
The South African Administrator-General said that the detainees were held in connection with a bomb explosion in July but the real reason appeared to be their non-violent activities on behalf of SWAPO, in particular a MUN-led mine-workers' strike then in progress at Tsumeb. The seven men were released on the orders of a Supreme Court judge in September, after their relatives brought an action challenging the validity of their detentions. The judge also criticized the continued use of the Terrorism Act as a basis for detentions in Namibia.
Another senior SWAPO official, Jason Angula, was detained in October. He was first held under Proclamation AG.9 but within 30 days transferred to detention
under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act. He was still held incommunicado and in solitary confinement at the end of the year.
A number of detainees alleged that they were tortured or ill-treated. For example, Timoteos Ndakunda, a high-school headmaster. alleged that he and his wife were blindfolded, bound and subjected to degrading treatment while detained overnight by soldiers in March. Nimrod Mure-mi, who was released without charge in September after three weeks' detention under AG.9, alleged that efforts had been made to keep him awake continuously while in custody.
Chilling evidence of torture also emerged at the trial of two alleged SWAPO guerrillas and six civilians accused of assisting them. The eight had been arrested at different places and times and detained under Proclamation AG.9 at various interrogation centres. Defence lawyers contested confessions allegedly made by the defendants during pre-trial detention, on the grounds that they had been extracted under duress. Several security police officers then admitted in court that some of the defendants had been tortured. A captain in the police Counter-Insurgency Unit (COIN), formerly known as Koevoet (Crowbar), was said to have ripped an intravenous drip from the arm of Andreas Johnny Heita, who had been shot at the time of his arrest, and beaten him with a rubber hose during three hours' continuous interrogation. The victim showed the court scars on his head, back and shoulders which resulted from the assault by Captain Frans Ballach and other COIN personnel.
Other defendants in the case were also brutally assaulted. The barrel of a revolver was reportedly pushed into the mouth of one. The police denied this allegation and the use of electric shock torture on Andreas Johnny Heita. Under cross-examination by defence lawyers, however, security police interrogators said they believed it necessary to apply "maximum violence" in order to obtain "satisfactory information" from detainees. A security policeman of 13 years' service testified that interrogators were permitted licence to do whatever they wished to detainees so long as they did not "unnecessarily" kill them.
Following these disclosures, state-
AFRICA/NAMIBIA/NIGER
ments obtained under duress were withdrawn by the prosecution but six of the eight accused were subsequently convicted and jailed. The trial judge called for legal action against the two security police officers most directly responsible for torture. They were later charged but not brought to trial. In December the Attorney General decided that their prosecution should not proceed but gave no reasons for his decision.
A security police officer accused of responsibility for the death of a political detainee was brought to trial. Captain Pat King had been named by the Windhoek Supreme Court in 1983 as one of those responsible for the torture and death in detention of Johannes Kakuva, a farmer, in 1980 (see Amnesty InternationaJ fleport 1984). It was not clear why the authorities took so long to prosecute him but he was acquitted in December when the presiding judge ruled that there was insufficient evidence to convict him, despite the 1983 court ruling.
In September the authorities also brought murder charges against the commanding officer of the army's 101 Battalion, two colonels and three other military officers in connection with the November 1986 death of Immanuel Shifidi, a former political prisoner. He had been slabbed to death when people attending a SWAPO rally in Windhoek's Katutura township were suddenly attacked by a group of more than 50 armed men in civilian clothes, subsequently identified as members of 101 Battalion who had been officially dispatched from the north to disrupt the rally. Their trial had not begun by the end of the year and it appeared that South African State President P.W. Botha might invoke Section lOSter of the South African Defence Act to prevent their prosecution.
Many civilians in Ovamboland and other northern districts comprising , the military "operational zone" were reported to have been assaulted or killed by South African security forces or COIN personnel. In most cases, however, the individual circumstances in which the killings occurred were disputed. For example, when Joseph Dumeni, brother of church leader Bishop Kleopas Dumeni, was killed in June, the security forces said he had been shot because he broke curfew rules. His family denied this explanation, alleging that he had been killed outside the curfew
area while in possession of a travel permit issued by the military.
The death penalty continued to be applied but it was not known how many people were sentenced to death or whether any executions took place.
There were continued reports that the external wing of SWAPO was holding prisoners at its bases in Angola but the number of detainees and most of their identities were not known. SWAPO said they had acted as spies for South Africa but other sources claimed they had been detained on account of disputes within SWAPO. They included several former SWAPO officials and at least two men who, before they went into exile, had been detained by the South African authorities in Namibia in the 1970s on account of their activities on behalf of SWAPO.
Amnesty International intervened with the authorities on behalf of individual detainees and expressed particular concern about reports of torture and ill-treatment. In April Amnesty International published a report, Namibia; Torture and IlJ-treatment of Prisoners, which contained recent evidence of torture and criticized the use of legislation on immunity to prevent prosecution of security personnel accused of torturing or killing prisoners. Amnesty International also continued throughout 1987 to seek further information about prisoners held by SWAPO in Angola.
