GHANA
At least eight prisoners of conscience were arrested, six of whom were still held without charge at the end of 1987. Some 30 people, mostly members of the armed forces arrested after unsuccessful coup attempts in previous years, were reported to be held without trial throughout the year. About 60 people were known to have been sentenced to death. There were also executions, but their number was not known.
In May and July seven known critics of the government were arrested. They included Akwasi Adu-Amankwah, an official of the Trades Union Congress, and John Ndebugre. a former government minister; three others had previously been detained without charge for over three months in 1986. They were reportedly suspected of seditious activities, but no
charges were brought against them. They were all leading members of political groups which initially supported the government of Flight-Lieutenant J.J. Rawlings when it came to power as the result of a coup in 1981. but became increasingly critical of its policies, claiming that it had betrayed its original ideals. On 31 December two of the detainees. Kwesi Pratt, a journalist, and Yao Graham, a lawyer, were released uncharged. The others remained in detention without trial.
Ben Ephson, a journalist, was arrested on 22 September. A government-owned newspaper claimed he was suspected of gathering what was referred to as "economic intelligence", but it appeared that the real reason for his arrest was that he had written articles critical of the government.
These eight prisoners of conscience were detained under the Preventive Custody Law of 1982 (PNDC Law 4). This provides for indefinite detention without trial if, in the opinion of the ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), the detention is in the interests of national security. Under this law, the government is not obliged to inform detainees of the reasons for their arrest. In 1984 the PNDC removed the courts' ability to review administrative detention orders in accordance with the Habeas Corpus Act.
On 31 December 1986 Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings had announced that there would be a review of the cases of all detainees held without charge or trial. In January 1987, 340 prisoners were released, among whom were believed to be former military personnel detained without trial since the present government came to power in 1981. In February the government announced that charges of subversion against 12 people had been withdrawn and that they had been released. They included Victor Owusu, a former government minister and leader of the Popular Front Party, who had been detained in August 1986 on suspicion of involvement in a 1983 coup attempt. It was not clear whether J. Adjei Brempong, also suspected of plotting against the government, was among those released or whether he remained in detention without trial.
Three detainees arrested in previous years in connection with unsuccessful coup attempts were brought to trial during 1987. In November Lance Corporals
AFRICA/GHANA/GUINEA
Emmanuel Arhin and Jackson Duodo, detained since March 1984, were sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment by the National Public Tribunal in Accra, the highest court in the Public Tribunal court system. They were convicted of assisting the escape from prison in June 1983 of army officers suspected of involvement in earlier coup attempts, who subsequently again tried to overthrow the government. In another case, a businessman detained since September 1985 was acquitted by the National Public Tribunal in December of charges of providing financial backing for a coup attempt in December 1984.
Among those reported to be detained without trial throughout 1987 were at least 30 former members of the armed forces arrested in previous years and suspected of involvement in plots to overthrow the government. They included Bombardier Mustapha Mohamed, arrested following a coup attempt in November 1982; Lance Corporal Emmanuel Owusu Aninakwa, arrested in February 1983 after a plot to overthrow the government was uncovered: and Captain Kwabena Bogee, arrested following the discovery of a plot to assassinate Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings in February 1985.
Alhaji Ibrahim Mahama, a lawyer and former member of Parliament, was among about 12 people arrested in April in connection with a long-running dispute about the appointment of a traditional chief in Yendi in northern Ghana. He was reported to be still in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. On 28 July nine people were sentenced to death by the National Public Tribunal in connection with the death of four people in Yendi during faction fighting in January.
In all, at least 60 people were sentenced to death and a number executed. Most of those sentenced to death were convicted of murder or armed robbery by Public Tribunals, special courts established in 1982 which may impose the death penalty for offences specified by the ruling PNDC and in "cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that very grave circumstances meriting such a penalty have been revealed". It was not known how many executions were carried out. On 25 July a number of people convicted of armed robbery were executed by firing-squad in Accra.
The legal status of Captain Adjei Edward Ampofo remained unclear. He was
sentenced to death in absentia in August 1983 for alleged involvement in a coup attempt and subsequently arrested in May 1986. At the time of the release of detainees in February, the government stated that he had not been released because of the serious nature of the charges against him. It was not known whether the death sentence had been commuted to a term of imprisonment or whether the authorities intended to bring him, and others arrested at the same time, to trial.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, expressed concern at the long-term detention without trial of political prisoners, and appealed for the commutation of death penalties each time these were announced, but received no responses from the government to any of its appeals or inquiries.
