DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Three Haitian exiles were held without charge for five weeks before being deported to Panama. The authorities failed to clarify the fate of two people who "disappeared" in previous years, although they apparently reopened investigations into one of the cases.
Reports were received in the second half of the year that Haitians, many of whom live illegally in the Dominican Republic, were being indiscriminately rounded up by the security forces and threatened with being returned to Haiti unless they agreed to work on the sugar cane harvest. Amnesty International believes that many of those rounded up had a well-founded fear of political persecution if deported back to Haiti. Workers on the sugar cane plantations were said to be forced to work under armed guard and regularly beaten. In late October President Balaguer blamed Haitians for food shortages and said that the country was being taken over by a "massive immigration of Haitians".
On 13 November four Haitian exiles were arrested in Santo Domingo, apparently because of their political activities in the exile community. One of them, Patrick Moïse, was deported shortly afterwards to Panama, from where he had recently arrived. The three others, Patrick Moise's brother Elie, Claude Exantus Casimir and Abel Exantus, were taken to police headquarters where they were held without charge and without access to lawyers or family until 17 December. They were then sent to Panama, despite a court order forbidding their deportation following a petition of habeas corpus filed on their behalf by a local human rights group.
THE AMERICAS/DOMINICAN REPUBLIC/ECUADOR
Amnesty International had asked the authorities about their legal status and had urged that they should not be forcibly returned to Haiti, where it was feared they might face torture or summary execution by the security forces.
During 1987 the Government of the Dominican Republic ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
Amnesty International continued to press the authorities to investigate the whereabouts of Pablo Liberate Rodriguez, who "disappeared" following his arrest in 1974. On 23 April President Balaguer wrote to Amnesty International saying that the Procurator General of the Republic had been instructed to reactivate investigations into the case. However, no further news was received before the end of 1987, nor was action taken by the authorities to clarify the fate of Haitian refugee Luis Samuel Roche, who "disappeared" in 1982.
