THEAMERICAS/NICARAGUA
in and intensely hot. He alleged that other detainees had also been tortured.
New evidence also came to light about possible extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in previous years. In one case Nicaraguan refugees in Costa Rica alleged that 15 civilians had been killed by government forces in June 1985 in the mountainous region of Boca Tapada, near the Punta Gorda river in southern Zelaya. The victims were said to have been detained by government troops engaged in operations against the Alianza Revolucionaria Democrática (ARDE), a contra organization then based in Costa Rica. Neighbours who said they had helped to bury the bodies of some of the victims described finding them, mutilated with bullet and knife wounds, the day after the detentions. In 1987 Amnesty International raised these allegations with the office responsible for investigating and prosecuting crimes by military personnel, but was told that it had no information on the incidents in question. However, in another case, it was learned in 1987 that seven members of the DGSE and the Ministry of the Interior Special Forces had been sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment by a military court for the murder of three people who had been abducted by DGSE personnel and secretly executed as suspected contra collaborators. The three had been abducted from their homes in July 1983 in San Miguelito, department of Rio San Juan, and their mutilated bodies were discovered nearby a few days later. Information was also made available to Amnesty International in 1987 on the results of official investigations into the alleged extrajudicial execution of Pedro Sequeira Ramirez and five members of his family, including a five-year-old child, near San Miguelito in October 1985 and June 1986. Military authorities claimed that Pedro Sequeira had been shot dead after he had killed a soldier attempting to arrest him, but the circumstances in which other members of his family were killed were not explained. Another member of the same family, Tito Atiliano Ramirez Sequeira. was said by relatives to have "disappeared" after being detained in April 1986. New reports of extrajudicial executions were received in 1987, but could not be verified by the end of the year.
In November Amnesty International wrote to the government presenting its
concerns and later that month a mission visited Nicaragua. The delegates met the Minister of the Interior, the Vice-Minister of Justice, the General Prosecutor of the Sandinista Armed Forces, the director of the National Prison System, judges of the Supreme Court, the TPAs and the Managua appeals court, and a wide range of nongovernmental sources. The delegates were given unrestricted access to trial dossiers, and interviewed several prisoners serving sentences in the Centro de Readaptación Jorge Navarro (Tipitapa prison). At the invitation of the government, they also visited detention cells in El Chipote, the £>CSE headquarters in Managua, to which representatives of international human rights and humanitarian organizations had not previously been admitted.
In July Amnesty International published an exchange of correspondence with the US Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. Elliott Abrams, concerning human rights abuses by the contras. Amnesty International had written in October 1986 to the US Secretary of State, George Shultz. expressing concern that the issuing to contra forces of a Central Intelligence Agency training manual in 1983 had encouraged human rights abuses, including extrajudicial executions. The letter also raised several cases of killings by contra forces (see Amnesty internationaJ Report 1987). In February Elliott Abrams replied that the manual in question had been withdrawn and that the State Department was sceptical about the accuracy of reports of human rights abuses by the contras. He undertook to pass on the cases Amnesty International had raised to the Asociación Nicaragüense Pro-Derechos Humanos (ANPDH), Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights, a body financed by the US Government which liaises directly with the contra military command. Amnesty International's findings on the cases in question were corroborated in a detailed report released by the ANPDH in July. Despite human rights training and monitoring initiatives by this body. Amnesty International continued to receive reports of extrajudicial killings by contra forces in 1987.
THE AMERICAS/-HONDURAS/JAMAICA
