CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Several prisoners of conscience were held throughout the year and two of them were tried and sentenced to three years' imprisonment. Suspected government opponents were arrested but none of them had been tried by the end of the year. The trial of the former head of state, |ean-Bedel Bokassa, ended in June, when he was
AFRICA / CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
sentenced to death. This sentence was confirmed upon appeal but neither this nor three other death sentences imposed in 1982 had been carried out by the end of the year.
Under the terms of the Constitution adopted in November 1986, all political activities outside the framework of the newly created RassembJement du people centra/ricain (RPC), Central African People's Alliance, were banned. These terms effectively perpetuated the ban on political opposition groups which President André Kolingba imposed when he took power in 1981. When several supporters of opposition groups who had been living abroad returned to the country, they were detained upon arrival.
A series of arrests in Bangui was reported in September and October. The detainees allegedly had possessed explosives, but none of them had been charged or tried by the end of the year. These arrests occurred soon after 20 members of the Lebanese community in the country had been expelled for alleged involvement in the hijacking of an airplane flying from the neighbouring People's Republic of the Congo to France.
Three people considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience were imprisoned throughout the year. One of them, Walidou-Bachir, was held without charge or trial. He had been arrested in November 1986, apparently after he criticized the new Constitution.
The two others. Thomas Koazo and Jeanne-Marie Ruth-Roiland, were tried in August and sentenced to three-year prison terms by the Special Tribunal. This court was established in 1981 to try all political cases. The trial procedures did not differ from those of other courts, but defendants convicted by the Special Tribunal were not allowed to appeal to a higher court.
Thomas Koazo, a journalist, was arrested at the end of October 1986, after he had reported that a meeting took place between President Kolingba and the former head of state soon after Jean-Bedel Bokassa returned to the country in October 1986. Thomas Koazo was charged with misinforming the public. No clear evidence was produced at his trial that his reports had been incorrect. He refused to disclose the source of his information.
Jeanne-Marie Ruth-Rolland, a former president of the national Red Cross Socie-
ty, was charged with inciting people to disobey government regulations and insulting government officials. She was placed under house arrest in November 1986, after alleging that government officials had stolen diamonds. She was transferred to prison after arranging for children in her neighbourhood to distribute leaflets repeating the allegations. Although the truth of her claims was not examined in court, she was sentenced to imprisonment for having made the claims.
The trial of Jean-Bedel Bokassa before Bangui's Central Criminal Court lasted from December 1986 until June 1987, when he was convicted on four of the 14 charges against him and sentenced to death. The charges were the same as those on which he was tried in absentia in 1980. Although the prosecution used the trial to explore the fate of dozens of political prisoners who died while he was in power from 1966 until 1979, the charges against him related only to the 38 deaths addressed at his first trial. He denied responsibility for these deaths and the hearings between December 1986 and March 1987 primarily examined evidence about his alleged complicity in the deaths of particular prisoners.
The prosecution was unable to prove that Jean-Bedel Bokassa had been directly involved in murdering prisoners, but a number of witnesses testified in court that the climate of fear prevailing while he was in power had precluded the necessity for specific orders to kill prisoners. Evidence before the court indicated that government officials who were not facing charges had also caused prisoners' deaths.
The four counts on which Jean-Bedel Bokassa was convicted are: conspiracy to murder, illegal arrest and detention of children, illegal detention of other prisoners and embezzlement of public funds. Throughout the trial he was assisted by French and Central African lawyers. Following his conviction, he lodged an appeal with the Cassation Court and the appeal was rejected in November. By the end of the year, the death sentence imposed on him had not been carried out.
An Amnesty International observer attended the opening and closing sessions of the trial, as well as several weeks of hearings on the deaths of children and political prisoners. The observer noted that the defendant and his lawyers were
AFRICA/CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC/CHAD
able to speak freely.
However, five witnesses were arrested in the courtroom during the trial. One of the witnesses was sentenced immediately to one year's imprisonment: Patrice Zemo-niako, the mayor of Bangui in 1979, was convicted of contempt of court after he refused to obey the court's instruction that he stop repeating an allegation of French intervention in his country's affairs. A former gendarme testifying about the death of a former government minister was charged with the official's murder and a former accountant was charged with embezzling public funds. Two other witnesses were charged with perjury. The evidence against them was weak and Amnesty International was concerned that their arrests may have intimidated others waiting to give testimony, thereby pressuring them to give evidence that was more favourable to the prosecution than they might otherwise have given.
Amnesty International sought the release last year of three prisoners of conscience. It appealed for the commutation of the death sentence imposed on Jean-Bedel Bokassa, as well as the death sentences imposed in 1982 by the Special Tribunal on three people who remained imprisoned (see Amnesty internationaJ Report 1983).
