URUGUAY
Attempts to clarify the fate of people who "disappeared" when the country was under military rule were seriously limited by legislation introduced in late 1986.
The Ley de Caducidod de Ja Pretension Punitiva del Estado, law on the punitive powers of the state, was enacted in December 1986. It prevented the prosecution of officials accused of responsibility for human rights violations during the period of military rule between 1973 and 1985, if these violations had been politically motivated or carried out on orders from a superior.
Under Article 3, the government was allowed 30 days to rule whether cases fell within the terms of the law and should thus be terminated. All judicial investigations into cases already before the courts were frozen to await the government's ruling. Such rulings, according to press reports, were given in at least six cases, at least two of which involved allegations of torture. It was decided that they each fell within the terms of the law and that court proceedings should be closed.
Article 4 of the law, concerning "disappeared" prisoners, required judges to submit to the government testimonies about "disappearances" which had already been presented to the courts. The government was then required to investigate each case and to notify the relatives of the "disappeared" person of the results of the investigation within 120 days. In May it became known that the authorities had assigned the responsibility for investigating "disappearance" cases to Colonel José Sambucetti, a military prosecutor.
He dealt with five cases in 1987: those of Omar Paitta Cardozo, Fernando Miranda Pérez, Félix Sebastián Ortiz Piazoli, Eduardo Pérez and Amelia Sanjurjo Casal. However, their relatives, lawyers acting for them, and human rights organizations investigating the cases refused to cooperate. They argued that an investigation into human rights violations by the armed forces conducted by a military official on active service and subject to military discipline would not be sufficiently impartial and independent. They argued also that they had already given their evidence and that Colonel Sambucetti's main task should be to interview the police and military personnel allegedly responsible for the "disappearances", as this had not yet been done.
In all five cases, the military prosecutor concluded that there was no clear evidence that the "disappeared" had ever been detained. Fernando Miranda Pérez "disappeared" after two men in civilian clothes who had earlier identified themselves as members of the Fuerzas Con/untas, Combined Forces, took him from his home on 30 November 1975. In his case. Colonel Sambucetti suggested that criminals posing as security force personnel might have been responsible. However, he offered no evidence in support of this assertion.
Eduardo Pérez "disappeared" after being arrested in May 1974. Colonel Sambucetti interviewed José Nino Gavazzo Pereira, a retired colonel who had served in the First Artillery unit in whose custody Eduardo Pérez was alleged to have died. Colonel Gavazzo had previously been accused of having participated in the abduction and torture in Argentina of "disappeared" Uruguayans. He had been summoned to appear before a civilian magistrate in August 1985 but the armed forces blocked the proceedings, claiming that the case fell under the jurisdiction of a military court. When interviewed by Colonel Sambucetti, Colonel Gavazzo confirmed that he had been involved in anti-subversive activities but said he had been acting under orders and was not able to reveal any information about the operations. He denied involvement in human rights violations.
Colonel Sambucetti's finding that military and police personnel were not responsible for the "disappearance" of
THE AMERICAS / URUGUAY / VENEZUELA
Eduardo Pérez appeared to conflict with the position taken by the President's office which ruled under Article 3 that the case should be closed, as it fell within the terms of the new law. Given these circumstances, there appeared to be no further legal steps the family of Eduardo Pérez could take to find out what had happened to him.
At the end of 1987. opponents of the new law claimed that they had collected enough signatures - more than 525,000 in all. representing a quarter of the electorate - to have it put to referendum.
Amnesty International wrote to President Julio Maria Sanguinetti in January to seek details of the new law. and expressed concern that it might impede inquiries into "disappearances" and contribute to a sense of impunity on the part of those responsible for human rights violations. In his reply. President Sanguinetti said that the greatest need was to administer justice in such a way as to achieve social peace and reconciliation. Amnesty International wrote to the President again in August underlining the need for governments to do all in their power to ensure that full and impartial investigations are carried out into abuses committed under previous governments. It expressed concern that the impartiality of the procedures to investigate "disappearances" had been questioned by relatives of the "disappeared" and local human rights organizations, and urged that further steps be taken to clarify these cases. In October an Amnesty International mission met President Sanguinetti and discussed these concerns.
