LESOTHO
There were several short-term arrests of critics and opponents of the government in connection with a ban on political party activity. Inquests were held into the deaths of two political detainees in 1986. No progress was made in identifying those responsible for the apparently politically-motivated killings of two former govern-
ment ministers and their wives in November 1986.
The ban on political party activity imposed after the coup which brought Major-General Justin Lekhanya to power in January 1986 remained in force throughout 1987. In January Tsepiso Mokoena was convicted of contravening the ban by wearing clothing with the colours of the Basuto-land Congress Party. He received a suspended prison sentence of six months. Charles Mofeli, leader of the United Democratic Party (UDP), was arrested in June after he sent a petition to King Moshoeshoe II, the head of state, calling for a return to parliamentary democracy. He was released a week later, reportedly after his wife initiated court action which challenged the legality of his detention. A renewed call for return to parliamentary rule was made jointly in August by leaders of five political parties, including the UDP, who had also joined together in 1985 in opposition to the former government of Chief Leabua Jonathan. No arrests were known to have occurred following this renewed call.
Inquests were held into the deaths in detention during March 1986 of Brigadier B.M. Ramotsekhoana, the army second-in-command at the time of the January 1986 coup, and Colonel Sehlabo Sehlabo, leader of a mutiny apparently attempting to forestall the coup. In both cases, the inquests found that the detainees had died from injuries sustained in detention, but the identities of those responsible for their custody and interrogation were not disclosed. Subsequently, civil actions for damages were initiated by their families against the authorities. In September the
AFRICA/LESOTHO/LIBERIA
ruling Military Council issued an Indemnity Order which effectively granted immunity to the authorities and those acting on their behalf for acts committed following the coup. No inquest had been held by the end of the year into the death of Sergeant M. Tjane, who also died in detention in March 1986.
The authorities failed to identify those responsible for the abduction and murder of two former government ministers, Desmond Sixishe and Vincent Makhele, and their wives in November 1986 (see Amnesty international Report 1967]. Official reports said in March that Simon Makhetha, a South African refugee, had reappeared. In 1986 it was alleged that he had been forcibly abducted from Lesotho for political reasons by South African security agents. It was not clear whether he had been detained in South Africa following his alleged abduction.
Amnesty International was concerned during the year about the detention of Charles Mofeli and about the Indemnity Order issued in September, which appeared likely to prevent identification and prosecution of those responsible for the deaths in detention of Brigadier B.M. Ramotsekhoana and Colonel Sehlabo Sehlabo.
