THE AMERICAS / COLOMBIA
Another student, Gustavo Franco Marin, was abducted on 4 August. He was shot and blinded but survived and subsequently told the judicial authorities what had happened. He said he had been dragged from his house in Marinilla, near Medellin, and forced into an unmarked car by heavily armed men in plain clothes who identified themselves as members of the security forces. After driving through the town the assailants shot him in the back of the head and threw him from the car.
By the end of August four of the leaders of the "march for life" had themselves become victims of the "death squads". The morning after the march. Senator Pedro Luis Valencia was shot dead by unidentified gunmen who broke down the front door of his house with a jeep. Luis Felipe Vêlez, president of the Asociación de Institutores de Antioquia (ADIDA), Antioquia Teachers' Union, was shot and killed on 25 August as he arrived at the union office. Later that day, Dr Héctor Abad Gómez and Dr Leonardo Betancur Taborda, president and former vice-president of the CDDH, were killed by unidentified gunmen who opened fire as they were leaving a wake held for Luis Felipe Vêlez.
The killings coincided with the circulation within the country of "death lists", some of which were published in the national press. One of the lists named 34 prominent national figures including a former foreign minister, political leaders, journalists, trade union leaders, and Dr Héctor Abad Gómez. In the following weeks scores of "death lists" appeared in several major cities, including Cali and Bogotá. Some appeared to be elaborately prepared documents which accused hundreds of individuals and organizations of "subversive activities" and openly justified the formation of paramilitary groups and the elimination of alleged "communists". In September some of those named in the lists met government ministers to seek protection and urge an official investigation into the formation, composition and activities of the "death squads". Later the same month the Interior Minister informed Congress that an investigation had established the existence of 137 paramilitary groups operating in the country. However, the government failed to announce any measures to curtail the activities of such groups.
The head of the Departamento Admi-
nistrativo de Seguridad (DAS), Administrative Security Department, stated in September that his department was unable to investigate "death squad" killings because 70 per cent of its personnel were fully occupied in escorting over 600 people who had been threatened. Such attempts to provide protection, however, often proved ineffective.
In one incident, members of the national police - who have operated under the authority of the armed forces since the state of siege was imposed in 1984 - failed to prevent the killings of several Communist Party members in Medellin on 23 November. Despite a police guard, three men in civilian clothes armed with machine-guns entered the city centre offices of the Communist Youth organization. They forced everyone they found in the building into a small room, made them lie on the floor, and then opened fire. Six people were killed. A spokesman for the Medellin police said that the gunmen entered the building while the three members of the police guard were having coffee. However, it was later established that the guards were in fact present when the gunmen entered the building.
The escalation in political violence coincided with the start of a campaign for mayoral elections scheduled to take place in March 1988, the first of their kind to be held. Candidates and activists belonging to ail the major political parties contesting the elections, including the ruling Liberal Party, were among the victims of politically-motivated killings. Supporters of the Unión Patriótica (UP), Patriotic Union, appeared to be a particular target of the "death squads". The UP estimated that since its formation in 1985, over 550 of its activists, including four Members of Parliament and scores of local councillors and mayoral candidates, had been victims of politically-motivated killings. In May the UP leader, Dr Jaime Pardo Leal, gave the Procurator General evidence implicating members of the armed forces in the killings of 25 UP activists. An investigation into the allegations was initiated and a preliminary report on 14 of the cases was published in September. In six cases sufficient grounds had been found to open formal disciplinary hearings against members of the armed forces and investigations into the other eight cases were continuing. On 11 October Dr Pardo was himself killed by gunmen who intercepted his car in La Mesa. A month later the Minister of Justice announced that an official investigation had
THEAMERICAS/COLOMBtA
found that the kiUing had not been politically-motivated but was undoubtedly linked to drug-trafficking. This was rejected by the UP, who alleged that Dr Pardo had been the victim of a politically-motivated "death squad" killing.
The government took steps designed to enhance the role of the courts in investigating politically-motivated killings. Following Dr Pardo's death, the government announced in October the creation of Special Courts of Justice to investigate "political crimes which cause social upheaval". However, by the end of the year no further information had been made available concerning the functioning of the courts.
The government had previously sought to create Special Tribunals to investigate political killings. Although no specific criteria for the selection of cases to be investigated were established, cases in which the suspect came under a special jurisdiction, such as those involving members of the armed forces, were excluded. In March the Supreme Court of Justice ruled the decree law establishing the Special Tribunals to be unconstitutional. In a separate decision the Supreme Court of Justice also ruled that the state of siege legislation establishing military jurisdiction over civilians was unconstitutional. Pending cases passed to the civilian courts.
Despite efforts to improve the civilian judiciary's ability to investigate political killings, "death squads" continued to act with apparent impunity. Members of the police or armed forces implicated in "death squad" crimes continued to be tried by military courts, where the charges were invariably dismissed.
There were new reports of "disappearances" throughout 1987. For example, Martha Bohorquez and three other people were seized by gunmen wearing civilian clothes in the centre of Cali and then "disappeared". The following day her mother received a telephone call from someone who said he was a police officer and who stated that she was being held in the La Rivera police station in the southeast of the city. The mother went there and found the car in which Martha Bohorquez and her friends had been travelling parked in the police station car park. The police at first denied that the four were in custody, but one police officer subsequently disclosed confidentially that they had been arrested and handed over to the Third Army Brigade
in Cali. However, the military authorities denied any knowledge of the four.
In December the Procurator General's office informed the newly appointed Presidential Council on Human Rights that over 600 people reported to have "disappeared" since 1977 remained unaccounted for. It also stated that 290 cases had been resolved: 89 were known to be dead, while many of those found alive had been held in unacknowledged detention by the military. Human rights groups estimated that almost 1.200 people had "disappeared" since 1977. more than 200 of them since President Virgilio Barco took office in 1986.
Amnesty International intervened with the authorities on a number of occasions about alleged incidents of torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, and to urge the authorities to protect those under threat from "death squads". In May an Amnesty International mission visited Colombia. In December Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government in which it detailed its concerns about extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture and urged the authorities to take the necessary steps to protect basic human rights. It expressed Amnesty International's view that the government must assume responsibility for human rights abuses by both regular police and military forces and civilian auxiliary forces acting on their authority. It urged the government to ensure that all such forces abide by internationally agreed standards. It called for security force personnel accused of "disappearances" and unlawful killings to be prosecuted before ordinary civilian courts in order to protect the objectivity and impartiality of the trial.
Amnesty International continued to submit information on its concerns in Colombia to the relevant bodies of the United Nations and the Organization of American States.
THE AMERICAS/CHILE
