UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Twenty-five prisoners were executed in 1987, an increase over the previous two years. At the end of the year 1,982 prisoners were under sentence of death in 34 states. A church worker jailed for assisting undocumented Salvadoreans in the USA was adopted as a prisoner of con-science. There were complaints of ill-treatment of prisoners. Amnesty International continued to investigate a number of criminal trials in which it was alleged that the prosecutions were politically motivated.
On 19 February Amnesty International published a report. United States of America; The Death Penalty, and launched a major international campaign to publicize its concerns. The report looked at evidence suggesting that the death penalty in prac-
tice was arbitrary, racially biased and unfair. despite the introduction of elaborate judicial safeguards following US Supreme Court rulings in the 1970s.
The report examined racial disparities in death sentencing; the community, financial and other pressures which influence local prosecutors in their charging and sentencing recommendations; the fairness of jury selection in capital trials and problems of legal representation for indigent defendants in capital cases.
Amnesty International called for the abolition of the death penalty in state and federal law. Pending abolition, it urged that no further executions be carried out and called on states to conform to minimum international standards that preclude the imposition of death sentences on juvenile offenders and the mentally ill. It said that the evidence of racial discrimination in the application of the death penalty was a matter of urgent concern and recommended that the federal government commission an impartial inquiry into this question.
Amnesty International received a lengthy reply from the Department of Justice in July, in which it defended the death penalty on grounds of just punishment, deterrence and incapacitation. Amnesty International replied, reiterating its concerns and stating that studies had failed to provide convincing evidence that the death penalty deterred crime more effectively than other punishments.
Executions, which had been delayed pending a key Supreme Court ruling on race discrimination (see below) resumed in May. Of the 25 executions during the year, eight were carried out in Louisiana. The others took place in Alabama, Florida. Georgia, Mississippi, Texas, Utah and Virginia. Amnesty International appealed for clemency in every case where it learned that an execution was imminent.
Edward Earl Johnson, a black youth convicted of killing a white police officer, was executed by lethal gas in Mississippi on 20 May, despite what his lawyers believed were "substantial doubts" about his guilt. Further evidence in support of this claim emerged after the execution.
John Brogdon, executed by electrocution in Louisiana on 30 July for the rape and murder of a child, had been diagnosed as mentally retarded, with a mental age of 10. Another prisoner reportedly suffering
THE AMERICAS / UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
from a serious mental disorder, Billy Mitchell, was executed by electrocution in Georgia on 1 September.
Beauford White was executed by electrocution in Florida on 28 August. The trial jury had unanimously recommended a life sentence but this was overruled by the judge, who imposed the death penalty. Willie Watson was executed in Louisiana on 24 July after the US Supreme Court denied his application for a stay by a tied four-four vote.
In April the US Supreme Court gave a ruling in a key case in which it was alleged that the application of the death penalty was discriminatory on grounds of race. The appeal, brought on behalf of a black prisoner, Warren McCleskey, had cited a detailed study showing that defendants convicted of killing white victims in Georgia, especially black defendants, were several times more likely to receive death sentences than those in black victim cases. The study had taken into account a wide range of non-racial factors.
The Supreme Court denied the appeal by five votes to four. The majority opinion acknowledged that the study indicated "a discrepancy that appears to correlate with race" but held that Warren McCleskey had failed to prove purposeful discrimination by the "decision-makers" in his particular case. The court suggested that racial discrimination in the application of the death penalty was a matter for inquiry by legislatures. These, it said, were "better qualified to weigh and evaluate the results of statistical studies in terms of their own local conditions and with a flexibility of approach that is not available in the courts".
Four of the nine judges vigorously dissented, finding that the evidence showed a risk of racial discrimination in the operation of Georgia's death penalty statute that clearly violated the Constitution and, in the words of one judge, was "intolerable by any standard".
Following the ruling, Amnesty International wrote to the governors of Georgia and nine other states where there were marked racial disparities in death sentencing, calling for a moratorium on executions pending legislative inquiries into this issue.
In February the US Supreme Court agreed to rule on whether the Constitution permitted the execution of minors (people
under 18 at the time of the crime). Its decision in the case of a 15-year-old sentenced to death in Oklahoma was still pending at the end of 1987. Some 30 minors in 14 states were under sentence of death in 1987.
In March the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that the US Government had violated the American Declaration on the Rights and Duties of Man by allowing the execution of James Terry Roach, who was 17 at the time of the crime (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1986 and 1987). TheCommission held that the differing age limits set by US states resulted in "the arbitrary deprivation of life and equality before the law". The Commission also declared that there was an "emerging" norm establishing 18 as the minimum age at which the death penalty may be imposed.
Stacey Merkt, a church worker who had helped undocumented Salvadoreans to enter the USA. was convicted in 1985 of transporting and conspiring to transport illegal aliens. She started serving six months of an 18-month prison sentence in January 1987 but was released from prison in April to serve the rest of her sentence under house arrest. She was released from house arrest in July. Amnesty International adopted her as a prisoner of conscience as it believed that those she helped could have been in danger of imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, torture or extrajudicial execution if returned to El Salvador (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
In November more than 2,000 Cuban nationals held in Atlanta Penitentiary and another Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) facility in Louisiana rioted and seized hostages in protest at an agreement reached by the US Government with Cuba to return some 2,500 detainees to Cuba. The disturbances ended after the US Attorney General agreed to a moratorium on deportations pending a full review of each case. The Cuban detainees had arrived in the USA in 1980 as part of a mass evacuation from Cuba known as the "Mariel boatlift". They included some 300 people detained as excludable aliens since their arrival in the USA and others who, after their initial release on parole into the US community, had been redetained following parole violations.
In July Amnesty International wrote to
THE AMERICAS / UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Ihe US Attorney General expressing concern about the conditions under which the Cubans were held in Atlanta Penitentiary, which a 1986 congressional report had described as "brutal and inhumane". Amnesty International also expressed concern about the circumstances under which the Cubans were detained; many had been in INS custody for several years after having had their parole revoked for only minor offences or misdemeanours, without any review of their cases. Amnesty International said that, although it did not oppose the detention per se of excludable aliens, it believed that both the conditions and the circumstances under which the Cubans were being held might amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. It urged the authorities to take steps to review their cases with a view to paroling those found not to be a security risk. No reply was received.
Following the announcement of the agreement with Cuba to return the detainees, Amnesty International called on the US authorities to seek assurances from the Cuban Government that no Cuban nationals returned to Cuba would be imprisoned on account of their peacefully held political views.
Three women convicted of politically-motivated criminal offences were held in a High Security Unit (HSU) in Lexington prison. Kentucky, in conditions which could amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The women (later joined by two other female prisoners) could associate together at certain times of the day but were isolated from all other inmates and subjected to a specially controlled environment which included 24-hour camera surveillance. They were not allowed to participate in the training, rehabilitative or recreation programs afforded other long-term prisoners; correspondence and visits were restricted; and they were strip-searched whenever they left the outdoor exercise yard, which they were permitted to use for one hour a day under constant supervision.
Amnesty International wrote in May to the Federal Bureau of Prisons about these conditions. It pointed to a 1979 study in which it had found that prisoners held in long-term small-group isolation in the Federal Republic of Germany suffered from pathological disorders caused by their conditions of confinement. Amnesty
International noted that the conditions in Lexington HSU had reportedly already begun to have a detrimental effect on one prisoner who complained of headaches and a loss of ability to concentrate. Amnesty International also expressed concern that confinement to the unit was based on general security considerations rather than the inmates' own behaviour and was apparently of indefinite duration (all the women in the unit were serving very long prison sentences).
The Federal Bureau of Prisons replied in June, stating that the women were treated humanely and that the unit was designed for inmates who may be subject to rescue attempts by outside groups. Amnesty International reiterated its concerns on 6 October. In a further letter in October the Bureau of Prisons said that some modifications to conditions in the unit had been made and that a new high security female prison under construction would allow for more flexible conditions.
In March Amnesty International made public a report on an investigation into allegations of ill-treatment made by inmates of Marion Penitentiary, Illinois. The report reviewed federal court hearings in 1985 which examined allegations that prisoners had been beaten by prison guards during the imposition of a "lock-down" in the prison in November 1983 (see Amnesty internationoi Report 1986 and 1987). Amnesty International had found serious inadequacies in the measures taken to investigate the allegations and recommended that the authorities hold a full, independent and impartial inquiry.
In October the US Supreme Court refused to grant leave to appeal in the case of Leonard Peltier, a leading member of the American Indian Movement (AIM) convicted of murder in 1977. Leonard Peltier had sought a retrial on the grounds that important ballistics evidence had been withheld from the defence during his trial. Amnesty International had issued a statement in 1985 saying that it believed the interests of justice would best be served by granting him a new trial (see Amnesty InternationoJ Report 1986 and 1987).
