PANAMA
Beginning in June, successive waves of arrests led to the short-term detention of hundreds of demonstrators peacefully protesting against senior military officials' alleged human rights violations and other illegal practices. Police and security forces reportedly used excessive force against demonstrators, resulting in at least one apparent extrajudicial execution, and hundreds of injuries. Those arrested were held in harsh conditions. Some were reportedly tortured or ill-treated. A disturbing development was the emergence of clandestine paramilitary groups apparently linked to the government. They were said to have been responsible for violent attacks on a number of government opponents and for extrajudicial executions.
The protests against the government were sparked off by public accusations of Colonel Roberto Diaz Herrera, formerly the second-in-command of the Armed Forces, that Brigadier General Manuel Noriega, the Commander-in-Chief, had been involved in illegal activities including the murder of Dr Hugo Spadafora. Dr Spada-fora, a former Vice Minister of Health, had been found decapitated just over the border in Costa Rica on 14 September 1985, the day after he was reportedly detained by the Panamanian military. Shortly before his detention, he had publicly accused top military officials of corruption and involvement in drug-trafficking. Those responsible for Dr Spadafora's murder have never been identified.
In response to the protests, the government declared a state of emergency in June. Emergency provisions were lifted at the end of the month and more than 100 people arrested under the provisions were released. Colonel Diaz Herrera and a num-
ber of his relatives and supporters were detained on 27 July, after the security forces assaulted his home with submachine guns and tear gas while military helicopters hovered overhead. According to reports of eye-witnesses, several bodies were subsequently removed from the house but the authorities did not disclose the names or number of those who were apparently killed.
After his arrest. Colonel Diaz Herrera was reportedly held in solitary confinement and denied access to legal counsel to force modification of his original accusations. including those regarding Dr Spadafora's murder. In late December he and a number of his supporters were convicted of "crimes against the internal security of the state". Colonel Diaz Herrera was then expelled into exile abroad.
Several other opposition leaders were reportedly subjected to death threats or attacks on their homes or businesses, and some of them left the country. Others were arrested with hundreds of their supporters after further large-scale demonstrations in July, August and October. In some cases, those detained, including children, alleged that white handkerchiefs, which had become the symbol of support for the opposition, were "planted" on them by the military or police to justify their arrest. Others were reportedly arrested without warrant for selling opposition literature or participating in protest vigils.
Many of those detained alleged that they were beaten immediately after arrest and that once transferred to Modelo Prison in Panama City, they were stripped of their clothing and beaten with sticks, fists, rifle butts and rubber hoses by squads of guards. They also stated that they were deprived of food and water for several days and held in severely overcrowded and insanitary ceils, as well as threatened with "disappearance" if they told anyone of the conditions at Modelo Prison. Some of those held also complained that they were denied access to legal counsel. Some lawyers who went to Modelo Prison to inquire about their clients were also reportedly subjected to short-term arrest.
In July President Eric Delvalle wrote to General Noriega, asking for an investigation into allegations of torture and substandard conditions at Modelo Prison. General Noriega asked Attorney General Carlos Augusto Viilalaz, a presidential
THE AMERICAS / PANAMA / PARAGUAY
appointee, to conduct the inquiry. On 21 July General Noriega stated in a letter to President Delvalle that in general, those arrested in the July demonstrations had been held under "acceptable" conditions and had been allowed food and legal advice. However, prominent church figures expressed concern that the inquiry had been conducted by government appointees.
Other demonstrators were injured and at least one was extrajudicially executed, according to reports, during excessive use of force by the security forces. By August Panamanian doctors who had treated the wounded estimated that more than 1,000 people had suffered "significant" injuries, the majority of them caused by beatings or shootings by riot police. The one confirmed death resulting from security force action occurred in July when, according to eye-witnesses, Eduardo Enrique Carrera was shot and killed by police after he shouted an anti-government slogan.
During other demonstrations, protestors were reportedly attacked by armed men in plain clothes who were believed to be acting on behalf of the authorities. Some of these attacks took place in full view of police and military forces, who either took no action or assisted the assailants. For example, in September one person was killed and some 10 others were reportedly wounded when unidentified men opened fire on demonstrators marking the anniversary of Dr Spadafora's killing. According to witnesses, the armed men had waited for several hours for the rally to begin, openly displaying their weapons. Military personnel who were present in a patrol car left shortly before the shootings began and returned one hour later.
Witnesses to attacks on demonstrators by armed groups have reportedly identified police or military personnel, as well as prominent members of the ruling party, among the assailants. Moreover, since no investigations into their illegal acts were known to have been carried out by the authorities, their activities may have been officially condoned.
In August the government ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the large number of arrests which began in June and continued in the following months. The
organization urged that those held be protected from ill-treatment, that they be permitted access to family and lawyers, and that they be released unless charged with a criminal offence and tried. Amnesty International also expressed its concern about reports that opposition leaders had received death threats and that detained demonstrators might have died in custody.
In December Amnesty International sent a memorandum to President Delvalle, recommending several measures to prevent further violations of human rights. The recommendations included appointment of an independent investigator to examine all arrest records and inspect all detention centres for the purpose of ensuring that all political detainees had been accounted for. The organization also recommended that security forces be issued with clear instructions to refrain from use of excessive force and to observe the requirements of the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials when seeking to maintain public order.
