MAURITANIA
A number of people, mostly critics of the dominance of members of the Arab-Berber community in the government, were arrested, and some were tried and sentenced to prison terms. Among them were several prisoners of conscience. Other political prisoners sentenced after a seriously defective trial in 1986 were held throughout 1987, as were the former head of state and several former govern-ment officials who were kept under house arrest. The first executions since the government took power in 1984 occurred in December, when three army officers were shot a few days after being convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government.
The government maintained its ban on political parties, and the right to freedom of association remained strictly circumscribed by laws requiring official registration and approval for all associations, whatever their aims. Tension continued between the Arab-Berber community and the black population of the south, particularly the Toucouleur ethnic group, after unrest in 1986.
Seventeen alleged supporters of a Ba'athist political party were arrested in September but most were released uncharged within a few weeks. Six, however, were convicted of belonging to an unauthorized organization and given suspended sentences. Some of them had previously been imprisoned from 1981 to 1984 for attempting to establish a Ba'athist political party in Mauritania.
Seventeen political prisoners who had been sentenced to prison terms followed
by internal exile on 25 September 1986 after a seriously defective trial (see Amnesty International Report 1967) remained in prison. They had been convicted after they published a manifesto alleging discrimination by the predominantly Arab-Berber military government against the country's black population. It was believed that a number were ill-treated in police custody. Their appeal to the Supreme Court was dismissed in February. Family visits were denied them throughout the year. In late 1987 the 17 prisoners were transferred to a remote prison in Oualata, some 1,400 kilometres from the capital, Nouakchott.
There were a number of trials between September 1986 and April 1987 arising from protests which followed the verdict of the 25 September 1986 trial. At least 40 people were sentenced to prison terms ranging from eight months to five years. In two trials in March and April, 19 people were convicted of arson after being detained incommunicado in police custody for long periods. They were convicted primarily on the evidence of statements they had made in custody, some of which were alleged to have been made under duress. Among those convicted in March and sentenced to five years' imprisonment were Abdoul Aziz Kane, an agronomist, and Saidou Kane, a student; both were held for three months in police custody and were allegedly tortured. Arson charges were reportedly not brought against those convicted in April until just before the trial, allowing the defendants insufficient time to prepare their defence. Violence, including arson, did take place in late 1986, but no substantial evidence appeared to have been produced at these trials to prove that the defendants had been involved. The real reason for their arrest was believed to be their support for those convicted on 25 September 1986. The outcome of appeals to the Supreme Court by those convicted in the two trials was not known to Amnesty International.
Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla, the former head of state, remained under house arrest throughout the year, as did five members of his government detained following the coup of December 1984. One, Moulaye Hachem Ould Moulaye Ahmed, escaped in December 1986 from S6libaby, where he was held, and sought asylum in Senegal, claiming that he had been denied adequate medical treatment while under
AFRICA/MAURITANIA
house arrest. He was returned to Mauritania on 10 May under an extradition order issued on the grounds that he had been charged in 1984 with embezzling public funds. He was not brought to trial, however, but was reportedly returned to house arrest in Sélibaby. He and the other former officials under house arrest were allowed family visits in May for the first time since their arrest. There were reports that two of them were seriously ill during the year.
On 6 December three armed forces officers were executed after being convicted by a special state security court. They were among 51 members of the black community. all but four of them serving military. personnel, who were arrested in late October and accused of plotting to overthrow the government. They were held incommunicado in police custody and allegedly deprived of sleep for long periods while being interrogated. They were tried under a special summary procedure on the grounds that they had been caught in the act of committing an offence. Their defence lawyers were denied access to them until the morning of the trial, which took place at Jereida Barracks from 18 November to 3 December. Eighteen of those convicted were sentenced to life imprisonment, nine to 20 years in prison, and others to shorter or suspended prison terms; seven were acquitted. None of those convicted had a right of appeal and the three officers sentenced to death were executed only three days after their conviction.
Following the executions, some members of the black community who protested publicly were briefly detained and interrogated. There were reports that some were ill-treated in police custody and remained in detention at the end of the year.
In January an Amnesty International delegate visited Nouakchott to seek further information about arrests during the second half of 1986 and the 25 September 1986 trial. He met government ministers, other government officials and lawyers. In April Amnesty International summarized its concerns in a letter to the head of state. Colonel Maaouya Ould Sid' Ahmed Taya. It drew attention in particular to the lack of evidence produced at the September 1986 trial that the defendants had used or advocated violence and to serious deficiencies in pre-trial and trial procedures. In June the Minister of Justice replied, claiming that the trial had been fair. He cited an
AFRICA / MAURITANIA / MAURITIUS / MOZAMBIQUE
opposition group's document as evidence of the defendants' advocacy of violence and referred to violent incidents, although the document was not used as evidence at the trial and the violence took place after the trial. Amnesty International continued to investigate whether the 17 still imprisoned were prisoners of conscience.
