ECUADOR
Numerous people were arrested for political reasons and held in secret detention centres where many were reportedly tortured. They included students, leaders of Indian communities, children and members or supporters of armed opposition groups. The authorities failed to account satisfactorily for five people who "disappeared" from custody in 1985 and 1986, although they sought to exonerate police from responsibility for one of the '*dis-appearances". In a disturbing development, there were attacks on demonstrators and opponents of the government by
groups of armed men in civilian clothes who appeared to be acting on behalf of or with the acquiescence of the security forces.
In January President Leon Febres Cor-dero was abducted by paratroopers at Taura Air Force Base. They released him only after he agreed to honour an amnesty granted by Congress to an air force general who had led two unsuccessful military rebellions in 1986. Those responsible for the President's abduction were subsequently arrested and court-martialled.
During the year Congress, the judiciary and the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees (TGC) sought to investigate human rights violations committed by the security forces, to press the government for action against those responsible and to introduce human rights safeguards. The government, however, persistently denied that abuses had taken place.
In September Congress brought impeachment proceedings against the Interior Minister, Luis Robles Plaza, who was accused of responsibility for extrajudicial executions, torture and "disappearances" committed by the police under his authority since 1984. Shortly before the proceedings began, Diego Delga-do, a Socialist Party representative who was scheduled to question the Minister in Congress, was abducted and assaulted by a group of heavily armed and hooded men wearing civilian clothes. He was clubbed, forced into a car and driven to an isolated spot where he was again beaten. His assailants broke one of his arms and fractured his skull. Diego Delgado later alleged that his attackers were government agents and said that they had accused him of arranging the Minister's impeachment, as well as stealing from him documents relating to government opponents who had "disappeared". An official investigation failed to identify those responsible for the attack.
Evidence of more than 100 extrajudicial executions. 180 cases of torture and some 200 other human rights violations committed by police since 1984 was submitted to Congress during the impeachment proceedings. One former detainee, Hilda Astudillo Gavilanez, testified that she had been tortured in August 1985 while held for interrogation by the National Police Criminal Investigation Service in Guayas. She alleged that she was held blindfold for
THE AMERICAS/ECUADOR
12 days, hung upside down by her toes, beaten with gun butts and burned with cigarettes.
The impeachment proceedings against Interior Minister Robles led to a congressional motion of censure, which held that he should accept responsibility for the extrajudicial executions, torture and "disappearances" committed by the police. Under the Constitution, a censured government minister is required to resign. The Interior Minister, however, refused to do so. Subsequent calls for his dismissal by both the Supreme Court of Justice and the TGC were rejected by President Pebres. Nationwide protests ensued, and a general strike was called for 28 October. On the eve of the strike, the government declared a state of siege and more than 60 people were arrested, including members of the workers' confederation Frente Unitario de Trabajadores, which had called the strike. The detainees were released without charge after the state of siege was lifted on 29 October.
There were new reports that prisoners, including children, had been tortured or ill-treated. Alberto Alarcón, a child of eight, was reportedly tortured, together with his father and members of a neighbouring family, in May by soldiers of the Batallón Selva No. 56 Tungurahua, in Napo province. The soldiers apparently entered the victims' homes in the community of Santa Cecilia to investigate the theft of a rifle. They allegedly pushed a gun into the boy's mouth and threatened to shoot him before throwing him over a roll of barbed wire, beating him and submerging his head in water until he nearly drowned. A subsequent medical examination found injuries on his neck and body consistent with his allegations of torture.
In March one of the 94 paratroopers court-martialled in connection with the abduction of President Febres alleged that he and others had been tortured with electric shocks, beatings and burnings by military intelligence officers. Other defendants retracted confessions which, they said, had been extracted under torture. To the knowledge of Amnesty International, the courts martial did not investigate the allegations. In luly 58 paratroopers were sentenced to prison for periods of six months to 16 years for treason and desertion and 36 were acquitted of the charges.
Further evidence of torture by the Servi-
cio de inteligencia Militar del Ejército (military intelligence service) was revealed during TGC investigations of several cases of arbitrary arrest and torture. In one case, the TGC found that five men detained in March in connection with the death of an army conscript had been arrested illegally and held for 20 days in a clandestine detention centre where they were interrogated and tortured before transfer to police custody. In October the TGC decided to censure the head of the military intelligence service for human rights violations committed by men under his command.
The conditions under which 18 political prisoners were held in the Penitenciaría del Litoral, a prison in Guayaquil, appeared so harsh as to constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The prisoners, mostly alleged members or supporters of guerrilla groups, were reportedly subjected to beatings, allowed few family visits and denied exercise, adequate medical treatment and a proper diet. In March, 10 of the prisoners went on hunger-strike to demand better treatment and more prompt processing of their cases by the courts. The hunger-strike lasted for more than a month and was called oif only after the prison director gave an assurance that conditions would improve.
Amnesty International continued to press for a thorough investigation by the authorities into reported cases of torture and the "disappearance" of five people following their arrests in 1985 and 1986. The only case in which developments were reported was that of Consuelo Benavides Cevallos, who "disappeared" after her arrest in Quinindé, Esmeraldas province, in December 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
Despite evidence from eye-witnesses that she had been arrested by military personnel, an oft'icial investigation examined only the role of the police in her arrest and detention and concluded that the police had not been involved. The investigation appeared to have scrupulously avoided any suggestion of military involvement in the "disappearance".
THE AMERICAS / EL SALVADOR / GRENADA
There were arrests of suspected government opponents, some of whom were reportedly tortured, subjected to severe psychological pressure or extrajudicially executed and some of whom "disappeared" while in custody. Victims included trade unionists and members of cooperatives; human rights workers; former prisoners; refugees who had voluntarily returned to El Salvador, particularly from Honduras; and church and relief workers assisting them.
The so-called "death squads" — official personnel acting in plain clothes under the direction of superior officers — re-emerged in the course of the year. They issued public lists threatening particular individuals with death and claimed responsibility for the "disappearance" and killing of a number of suspected critics or opponents of the government.
Some 400 political prisoners, many of whom had been held in long-term detention without trial, were released under the terms of an October amnesty. It provided unconditional amnesty for those who had been implicated in political offences and related common crimes, including those not yet charged. Also released were a number of the few officials imprisoned for human rights violations, including two soldiers serving 30-year terms for the murder in January 1981 of two United States labour advisers and the head of the Salvadorian Institute of Agrarian Reform. Sixteen prisoners known to have remained in custody were believed to be political prisoners. According to the government. however, these prisoners had been implicated in common rather than politically-motivated crimes. In a few of these cases, technical factors such as officials losing legal documentation
apparently were responsible for detainees' continued imprisonment.
The amnesty was promulgated in partial fulfilment of the Central America Peace Agreement, signed by El Salvador in August (see entry on Guatemala). The agreement specifically called for an amnesty for political prisoners in furtherance of its announced aim of achieving peace in the region, including EI Salvador, where the government of President José Napoleón Duarte continued to face armed opposition from the Frente Fara-bundo Marti para Ja Liberación Nacionai (FMLN), Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front. There were reports that the FMLN was responsible for human rights abuses. including abductions and execution-style killings, but it was not possible independently to verify these allegations. The FMLN was also accused of breaching internationally accepted standards for conduct during armed conflict not of an international character by using landmines to kill specific civilian targets. However, investigation into a number of landmine deaths by international human rights monitoring groups did not produce evidence that the victims had been specifically targeted.
A stale of siege, in force almost continuously since March 1980, and implementing emergency legislation. Decree 50 of February 1984, lapsed at the beginning of the year for reasons unrelated to human rights issues. However, hundreds of people detained under their provisions remained in prison until released in November under the October amnesty. They included two brothers, José Vladimir Centeno and Jaime Ernesto Centeno, both of whom had been held without trial since their arrest in November 1985. They maintained that they had been tortured and drugged to extract a confession to the kidnapping of a government official. Their "confession" was then broadcast on television, apparently to justify their imprisonment. In May an investigative judge appointed by the Supreme Court to examine their case filed a petition for their release on the grounds that there was no longer a legal basis for their imprisonment. However, the Supreme Court did not rule on this petition before the brothers were released under the October amnesty.
Earlier, in August, José Vladimir Cen-
THE AMERICAS / EL SALVADOR / GRENADA
teno was seriously injured in an attack on La Esperanza Prison by unidentified gunmen. The prison, in Mariona, is the main detention facility for male political detainees in the capital area. Three political and two common law prisoners were wounded in the attack, which the authorities said was carried out by armed members of the opposition. According to local human rights monitors, the attack appeared to have been conducted by members of the security forces colluding with prison guards. Following the attack, the authorities first said that no prisoners had been injured. Subsequently, they admitted that José Vladimir Centeno and other prisoners had been wounded but said the injuries had occurred during an escape attempt.
The safety of those released under the October amnesty, including the Centeno brothers, was uncertain. A number of prisoners freed prior to the amnesty had "disappeared" or were apparently extrajudicially executed. For example, Rolando Alberto Borja Trinidad, an activist in a Christian grass-roots community, told friends and local human rights groups after his release that he was constantly being followed and feared for his life. He was shot dead in mid-January on the day that he had initiated steps to obtain a visa to emigrate.
The lifting of the state of siege at the beginning of the year and the lapse of Decree 50 should have resulted in the reinstatement of a 72-hour limit on administrative detention, as provided in El Salvador's ordinary code of criminal proceedings. However, the security forces, and particularly the military, failed to observe the limit. During the year they repeatedly failed to either release suspects or place them within the jurisdiction of the regular courts and transfer them to officially recognized places of detention within the legal time limit. Military units sometimes siihp-ly denied that a detention had occurred or arbitrarily executed the detainee, abandoning the body in an apparent attempt to suggest that the victim had been killed by an unknown "death squad".
On 14 June, for example, local residents found four peasants from different hamlets in the jurisdiction of La Laguna, Cha-latenango, suffering from deep stab wounds to the throat. Three of the victims were taken to hospital in San Salvador, where
they testified that armed soldiers from the Fourth Infantry Brigade had arrested them on the previous day, beaten them, slashed their throats and left them for dead.
The military were also apparently responsible for the killing in June of losé Pilar Rivera Romero, Cristino Machado, Santiago Coreas, Candido Rodriguez and Andrés Mejía Roque, all of them peasants from the department of San Miguel. Although the armed forces initially claimed that the victims had died during combat, extensive evidence, including testimony by eyewitnesses to the young men's arrest and a forensic doctor's report, suggested that they were taken into custody by troops of the Arce Battalion, tortured and shot at close range before their bodies were thrown down the well from which they were recovered.
Other killings or "disappearances" which local human rights groups attributed to the government were carried out in "death squad" style by heavily armed men in plain clothes who abducted their victims in the presence of witnesses or shot them in the streets. Herbert Anaya Sanabria, coordinator of the non-governmental Comisión de Derechos Humanos de El Salvador (no-gubernamenfaJJ (CDHES), Human Rights Commission of El Salvador, was shot dead by unidentified men with silencers on their guns in October as he prepared to take his children to school. The government announced that the killing would be fully investigated and would be one of the only two politically-motivated crimes not covered by the October amnesty. (The other was the murder in March 1980 of Archbishop Oscar Romero by a gunman reportedly acting on behalf of a "death squad" linked to the military.)
Herbert Anaya had been detained in May 1986, along with several members of the CDHES and other human rights workers whom the government accused of collaborating with the armed opposition. He was released without trial in February 1987. His killing followed a wave of threats and abuses directed against human rights workers and their families in the preceding months, some from official sources and others from so-called "death squads".
Reports of the torture of detainees indicated increasing reliance on severe psychological pressure, including prolonged sleep deprivation. There were also continued reports of the physical torture of detainees.
THE AMERICAS / EL SALVADOR / GRENADA
In one case, Gerardo Hernández Torres, a baker, died on 16 December at La Esperanza Prison. He had been detained by soldiers of the Atlacatl army counter-insurgency brigade on 12 December. On the following day he was transferred, along with two other prisoners, first to the barracks of the First Infantry Brigade in the department of San Salvador and then to National Police Headquarters in San Salvador, the country's capital city. According to the testimony of the other two prisoners, Hernández Torres was severely beaten at both locations and forced to take pills which induced hallucinations and incoherent speech. On 15 December he was transferred to La Esperanza Prison and died there the following day. Hernández Torres' death, the apparent result of torture, was the first such death known to have occurred for several years in an acknowledged detention centre in El Salvador.
In March new legislation established procedures for cases of suspected political offenders in the event that a new state of siege was declared. The legislation. Decree 618, included provisions for prolonged pre-trial detention and for the admission of extrajudicial declarations — that is, statements made to the security forces during interrogation — as evidence during trials. Such practices had been features of previous state of siege legislation and were believed to have facilitated the torture of prisoners.
In March Amnesty International sent a mission to El Salvador and expressed concern to the government about the continuing detention without trial in harsh conditions of many prisoners charged with politically-motivated crimes. Amnesty International also expressed concern that detainees continued to be tortured and forced to sign extrajudicial statements. In addition, the organization addressed the failure of the judiciary to ensure that the cases of people accused of political offences are completed within the time prescribed by law and that government agents accused of responsibility for human rights violations are brought to justice.
The organization was particularly disturbed that little progress had been made by various special commissions announced by President Duarte after he assumed office in June 1984 to inquire into specific human rights violations. Members of the commissions with whom Amnesty International
representatives spoke professed to be ignorant of information long in the public domain. For example, a member of the Special Commission on Investigations, established by the President in August 1984 to look into inter aJia the murder in December 1980 of John Sullivan, a journalist from the United States, maintained that the body had never been identified. Amnesty International had itself made known to both the current and previous administrations that a US forensic expert had concluded in February 1983 that a corpse recovered in El Salvador and returned to the US for burial was that of John Sullivan "beyond ail reasonable doubt".
Following its mission. Amnesty International expressed concern to the Salvadorian authorities on a number of occasions that regular military and police personnel continued to be implicated in human rights violations. The organization also asked that the safety of those publicly threatened by the "death squads" be guaranteed.
Amnesty International summarized its continuing human rights concerns in El Salvador to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February. In December the organization communicated these concerns to Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, Secretary General of the UN and Secretary Protemporary of the International Commission of Verification and Follow-up, in order to assist in the Commission's monitoring of the Central America Peace Agreement. Amnesty International also expressed its concern that the terms of the October amnesty could encourage perpetrators of past abuses to believe they were immune to prosecution, thereby contributing to a climate conducive to further violations. It explained its view that relatives had the right to know the circumstances in which tens of thousands of people had "disappeared" or had been extrajudicially executed in El Salvador in recent years.
