MAURITIUS
Eshan Nayeck became only the second person since independence in 1968 to be executed in Mauritius. The first two death sentences were imposed under the Dangerous Drugs Act 1986, and two other prisoners were also under sentence of death at the end of 1987.
Eshan Nayeck was hanged at Beau Bas-sin Prison on 10 October after being convicted of murder. He did not exercise his right to appeal. His case, like all those involving the death penalty in Mauritius, was reviewed by the Commission on the Prerogative of Mercy, which advises the Prime Minister. At the end of 1987 two other prisoners, Anatole de Boucherville and Poonoosamy Pongavanam, were under sentence of death for murder. Their cases had been submitted to the highest court of appeal for Mauritius, which is the judicial committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom.
In December Mohammed Mukhtar Ali and Gulam Rassool were sentenced to death after being found guilty of drug-trafficking under the Dangerous Drugs Act 1986. They were the first prisoners to face the death penalty under this new law. Article 38 of the Act provides a mandatory
death sentence for trafficking in "dangerous drugs", including opium, heroin, cannabis and coca leaves. Unlike other serious offences in Mauritius, where the verdict is determined by a jury of nine, people charged with trafficking under the Dangerous Drugs Act are tried by a judge sitting without a jury.
Amnesty International appealed to Prime Minister Anerood Jugnauth for clemency in the case of Eshan Nayeck shortly before he was hanged. The organization also appealed on behalf of the other four prisoners under sentence of death and called on the government to amend the Dangerous Drugs Act to remove the death penalty. During the campaign leading up to the general election in August - which was won by Prime Minister lugnauth's ruling coalition - Amnesty International wrote to all the major parties asking them to commit themselves to abolition of the death penalty.
