CUBA
At least 600 people were known to be imprisoned, apparently for political reasons, but in most cases there was too little information to indicate whether they were prisoners of conscience. However, those held at the end of 1987 included at least 12 prisoners of conscience, most of whom were held on charges of "enemy propaganda" or for trying to leave the country illegally. Unofficial sources claimed that one prisoner died and many others were injured by guards during an incident in Combinado del Este Prison, Havana, in March, although the authorities subsequently denied the allegations. New information emerged about detention and trial procedures and prison conditions in previous years. Three people were executed and at least one other was sentenced to death.
In June the US Catholic Conference announced that it had reached an agreement with the Cuban Government, allowing 348 current and former political prisoners to leave Cuba and go to the USA. It appeared that they would include many of the so-called "pJantados hisidricos", "historical plantados" (political prisoners held since the 1960s and 1970s who refuse to obey certain prison regulations). The process was expected to start in September but had still not done so by the end of 1987.
In December the Minister of Justice announced the government's intention to abolish 63 of the 452 articles of the penal code. One effect would be to abolish the death penalty for all offences except certain crimes against state security, murder, rape and pederasty with violence.
In June rumours that exit visas could be obtained from the French Embassy in Havana led many people to flock there. Several dozen were arrested, reportedly
taken to La Cabafta Prison, and described as "anti-social and stateless elements" by the authorities who said they were being charged with provoking disturbances. However, it was not known if any were still held at the end of the year or if any had been charged or tried.
Several prisoners of conscience were released, including three leading members of the unofficial Comité Cubano Pro Derechos Humanos (CCPDH), Cuban Committee for Human Rights. Dr Adolfo Rivero Caro and Professor Enrique Ladislao Hernández Méndez were released on 6 February, and Professor Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz was released on 26 May. They had all been arrested on 25 September 1986 and detained without charge or trial at the headquarters of the Departamento de Seguridad del Estado (DSE), State Security Police, in Havana. The authorities gave no reasons for their detention, but they were arrested shortly after Professor Sánchez told foreign journalists about the situation of two other political prisoners. Dr Domingo Jorge Delgado Fernández, secretary and legal adviser to the CCPDH, who was serving an eight-year sentence for illegally entering the Ecuadorian Embassy in 1981, had recently been transferred to a punishment cell in Combinado del Este Prison. José Luis Alvarado, who had been conditionally released in May 1986 after serving four years of a six-year sentence imposed in 1982 for "enemy propaganda", had been rearrested. The authorities said that José Luis Aivarado, who had also talked to foreign journalists about political imprisonment, had been returned to prison for infringing the conditions of his release. Both he and Dr Delgado were believed to have been imprisoned on account of their activities in defence of human rights and to be prisoners of conscience. An extra year was said to have been added to José Luis Alvarado's original sentence Both men were held at Combinado del Este Prison at the end of 1987.
Dr Alfredo Samuel Martinez Lara, a psychiatrist who had been detained without trial by the DSE since September 1986, was also released in February. In May two other possible prisoners of conscience were freed: Sebastián Arcos Bergnes, who had served over five years of a six-year sentence imposed for attempting to leave the country illegally; and Felix Agudo Escudero, who had served three years of a
THE AMERICAS/CHILE
10-year sentence imposed for sabotage. In June Edmigio López Castillo, a prisoner of conscience, was also released a few months before the expiry of an eight-year term imposed for "enemy propaganda".
At least 12 prisoners of conscience were held at the end of 1987. They included Ariel Hidalgo Guillén, Andrés Solares Teseiro. Rafael Lanza, Julio Vento Roberes and Gregorio Peña Estrabao (see Amnesty InfernationaJ Report 1987), all held on charges of "enemy propaganda", and Rafael González Rodriguez and Osvaldo Riverón Gort, serving sentences of two and three years respectively, imposed in 1986 for trying to leave the country illegally. Eduardo Crespo Govea, an evangelist minister, was serving a six-year sentence imposed in 1984 for organizing an opposition group "with the aim of changing the economic, political and social régime of the Socialist State". Us illegal activities were said to have included printing a book considered to distort the nature of the Cuban Revolution and sending a letter to the Pope and the UN Secretary General criticizing Cuba's links with the Soviet Union. While serving his sentence, Eduardo Crespo Govea is reported to have been punished for preaching in prison. Between August and December, he undertook a series of fasts in protest at being held with criminal prisoners and at being asked to agree to stop his activities as a preacher in exchange for release. He reportedly suffered a perforated ulcer as a result.
Pablo Andrés Betancourt Ramos was another prisoner of conscience still held at the end of 1987. He was serving a lO-year term imposed following his arrest in 1980 for painting counter-revolutionary slogans deemed to be "enemy propaganda". He was among the group of "new plantados" held in Combinado del Este Prison (political prisoners convicted in the 1980s who refuse to obey certain prison regulations).
Gustavo Arcos Bergnes, a possible prisoner of conscience, was reported to be in poor health and held alone in a punishment cell at Combinado del Este Prison. He had been sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in 1982 after he and his brother attempted to leave the country illegally.
In April three children of a former political prisoner now living in exile were arrested and imprisoned under a section of the penal code called Del Estado Peligroso
y de las Medidas de Seguridad, On the Dangerous State and Security Measures. This permits people thought likely to constitute a potential danger to society to be arrested and interned in a "therapeutic" or "re-educational" establishment, or to be "supervised by crime prevention bodies" for up to four years. Marcelo and Marcos Amor Minsal were both sentenced to four years' imprisonment. Their sister, Maria Alejandra Amor Minsal, also received a four-year term but this was later reduced on appeal to one year. They had all been held previously on criminal charges. The three were all held in penal rather than re-educational establishments and may not have received a fair hearing. It appeared that they might have been-imprisoned because of their father's continued opposition to the government.
Several prisoners were reported to have been injured and one criminal prisoner killed as a result of assaults by guards in Combinado del Este Prison on 21 March. A group of political prisoners reportedly banged on the bars of their cells to demand medical treatment for one of their number during a visit to the prison hospital by senior government and prison officials. Prisoners already receiving attention at the hospital had earlier been moved elsewhere to accommodate some 300 prisoners requiring treatment for alcohol poisoning after an accident at Quivicán Prison. Prison guards armed with blunt instruments and using dogs were reportedly responsible for assaults on a number of prisoners, some of whom subsequently required medical treatment. The same day Ramón Lance Ortega, a criminal prisoner, was allegedly beaten unconscious by guards and then kicked, causing internal injuries from which he was said to have died. In response to inquiries from Amnesty International about the incident, the Minister of the Interior denied that force was used to quell the disturbances that took place on 21 March and said that no prisoner was beaten or required medical attention. He said that a man called Ramón Lance Ortega had been released from prison on 24 March but he had not been held at Combinado del Este Prison and had no connection with the incidents.
At the end of 1987, some 65 "historical plantados" were held in Combinado del Este Prison. Those held in Boniato Prison, Santiago de Cuba, had been transferred
THEAMERICAS/CUBA/DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
there in May. Many had been denied family visits or correspondence for years at a time, although there had been some improvements since 1985 relating to exercise, access to books, and their dress. In August it was reported that "historical plantados" were being allowed monthly visits. However, no changes were known to have occurred in conditions for the "new plantados", believed to number between 30 and 40.
New information emerged which indicated that at least some prisoners who were tried by the Court of Crimes against State Security in previous years did not receive fair trials. For example, Raúl Pérez Ribalta was released in 1986 after serving seven years of a 20-year sentence imposed for espionage. He said that he had been detained incommunicado and in a small dark cell by the DSE for six weeks after his arrest in early 1979. Later, he was allowed family visits, but he was not permitted direct contact with his lawyer until the day of his trial in August 1980. The lawyer was allowed access to the lengthy prosecution case only minutes before the trial, which lasted half a day, was due to start.
It was announced that three people were executed for murder during 1987, and at least one other person, Arturo Suárez Ramos, was sentenced to death. He was convicted in September on charges related to an attempt in March to hijack an aircraft while in flight, in which a fellow-hijacker was killed and passengers seriously injured. However, he had not been executed by the end of 1987. It was not known whether his sentence had been confirmed by the Supreme People's Tribunal. which reviews all death sentences, or by the Council of State, which can grant clemency.
Throughout 1987 Amnesty International appealed to the Cuban authorities to release the 12 prisoners of conscience and sought information about several other political prisoners who might be prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International also addressed the authorities about the March disturbances in Combinado del Este Prison and urged them to consider abolition of the death penalty when revising the penal code in December.
In November 1987 the secretary general received a personal invitation from Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez to visit Cuba.
