TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
At the end of the year there were some 30 prisoners under sentence of death, which is the mandatory penalty on conviction of murder. Several had been on death row for more than 10 years and had exhausted all their legal appeals. There were no executions - the last execution took place in 1979.
In July the High Court annulled death sentences imposed on Andy Thomas and Kirkland Paul in 1975 after they were convicted of murder. The decision was made in response to a motion filed by their lawyers in December 1985 which argued that several provisions of the Constitution would be violated by their execution. This motion had been filed after warrants for the prisoners' execution within 24 hours had been issued against the two men on 4 December 1985. Stays of execution had then been granted and both prisoners had remained on death row. The High Court ruled that the prolonged incarceration of the two prisoners on death row in conditions of "appalling barbarity", and the reading of death warrants to them only hours before their executions were due to take place, constituted "cruel and unusual punishment" in violation of the Constitution. The Court also ruled that the circumstances in which the death warrants had been issued had violated the prisoners' constitutional rights to due process and equality before the law.
Both men were released from prison on 31 August when eight criminal prisoners, including five others who had originally been sentenced to death, were freed under an amnesty marking the 25th anniversary of independence.
Kitson Branche, who was also released under the amnesty, had been under sentence of death for nearly 15 years. He had been sentenced to death for murder in 1972. Doubts about his guilt had subsequently emerged as a result of new evidence, which was submitted to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London in 1980. The Committee, however, declined to consider the new evidence on the grounds that it should have been presented at his trial {see Amnesty internationai Report 1987).
Following the election to power of the
THEAMERICAS/TRINIDADANDTOBAGO/UNITEOSTATESOFAMERICA
National Alliance for Reconstruction in December 1986, Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Arthur Robinson in January to call for all existing death sentences to be commuted and to urge abolition of the death penalty.
During the year Amnesty International also appealed for clemency to be granted to Lalchan Nanan, who was sentenced to death in July 1977, after being convicted of murdering his wife. However, he remained on death row at the end of 1987 although there were doubts about the circumstances of his conviction: after the trial the jury foreman reported that he had misunderstood the meaning of "unanimous" and that the jury had in fact been divided eight to four in its verdict (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
