BANGLADESH
Thousands of people, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience, were detained in connection with a series of strikes and demonstrations organized by opposition political parties. Some non-combatant villagers in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, an area where there is armed opposition to the government, were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by security forces early in 1987, but reports of such incidents were far fewer than in 1986. Allegations that criminal suspects were tortured in custody persisted. Legislative provision for the death penalty was extended and at least 11 people were sentenced to death and an unknown number executed.
A slate of emergency was proclaimed on 27 November during protests by parliamentary and extra-parliamentary
opposition parties calling for the resignation of President Hossain Mohammad Ershad and his government. The Special Powers Act (SPA) of 1974 was widely used to detain supporters of the opposition without formal charge or trial. President Ershad dissolved Parliament on 6 December and general elections were scheduled for 1988.
A new wave of opposition to the government emerged in July, when a bill was passed in Parliament enabling military personnel to be involved in rural administration. A 54-hour protest general strike starting on 22 July was called by the major opposition party in Parliament, the Awami League (AL), and seven other parties allied with the AL, a seven-party alliance led by the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), and a third alliance of five left-wing parties.
Dozens of opposition party members involved in organizing the strike were arrested in the days preceding 22 July and placed in preventive detention. They included Motia Chowdhury of the AL, and Mohiuddin Ahmed and Abdur Razzak, President and Secretary General respectively of the Bangladesh Krishak Sramik Awami League (BAKSAL). Further arrests occurred during the general strike and during demonstrations, when at least 10 people were reported to have been shot dead by police. Some people were arrested after the end of the strike, including Nir-mal Sen and Mainuddin Khan Badal, two leaders of the alliance of five left-wing parties, who were arrested on 26 July. Kazi Arif Ahmed and Sharif Nurul Ambia, leaders of a faction of the Jatiya Samajtontrik Dai (JSD), the National Socialist Party, which belongs to the five-party alliance, were also detained a few days later.
Many of those arrested were detained for relatively short periods. On 26 July, 167 people were released in Dhaka, the capital. Motia Chowdhury, Mohiuddin Ahmed and Abdur Razzak were freed on 3 August, when 303 prisoners, including an unspecified number of prisoners held in administrative detention, were released on the Muslim holiday of Eid-uI-Azha. However, Nirmal Sen, Mainuddin Khan Badal, Kazi Arif Ahmed and Sharif Nurul Ambia were still in detention at the end of the year. They were held under Section 3 of the SPA.
The SPA empowers local authorities to detain without formal charge or trial for
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC/BANGLADESH
up to 30 days anyone alleged to have committed a "prejudicial act" likely or intended "to endanger public safety or the maintenance of public order". However, detention orders under the SPA may be renewed indefinitely if approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
In mid-September the three main opposition alliances, as well as the /amaot-e-Isiami, Party of Islam, announced a succession of rallies and meetings culminating in a "siege of Dhaka" on 10 November, when mass processions would converge on the capital. On 17 October police arrested retired army Brigadier Hanan Shah, a national leader of the BNP. More leaders and members of opposition parties were arrested in late October, following a 48-hour strike called by the trade union federation, Sromik Kar-machari Oikya Parishad (SKOP), to press workers' demands. During the night of 25/26 October dozens of people were arrested under one-month detention orders under the SPA. including two AL members of Parliament, Rashed Mosharraf and A.K.M. Feroze. Mass arrests occurred across the country throughout the remainder of October and early November. Some demonstrators were arrested during violent clashes with law enforcement officers, but many were detained solely because of their involvement in peaceful political protests.
On 8 November the Dhaka Police Commissioner imposed a ban on gatherings of more than five people in an attempt to prevent the opposition protests planned for two days later. However, the processions went ahead on 10 November. There were clashes between police and demonstrators which resulted in several deaths -three according to the authorities, more than 10 according to the opposition. Begum Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina Wajed, leaders of the BNP and AL respectively, were put under house arrest the following day. Other government opponents were also arrested and served with detention orders under the SPA, including Shamsul Huq Chowdhury, President of the Supreme Court Bar Association. There were further strikes and processions during the rest of November, and continuing arrests and detentions.
On 1 December the Minister of Home Affairs announced that 4.832 people had been taken into custody over the previous
two months, half of whom had been arrested under the SPA. One of those detained under the SPA was Ataus Samad, a journalist working for the British Broadcasting Corporation. Police officials said he was arrested because of government concern about his reporting of the opposition's protests, although he was not formally notified at the time of his arrest of the grounds for his detention. He was released on 8 December.
From the end of November there were phased releases of detainees. Four senior political leaders were released on 3D November and five more a few days later. Sheikh Hasina, Begum Zia and 17 others were freed on 10 December and a further 341 people held under the SPA were freed on 16 December, a national holiday. It was not clear whether all those freed on 16 December had been detained in connection with the recent opposition protests. Despite these releases, many hundreds of government opponents were still detained throughout the country at the end of 1987, including Shamsul Huq Chowdhury, retired Brigadier Hanan Shah, Rashed Mosharraf and A.K.M. Feroze.
In the Chittagong Hill Tracts, killings of law enforcement personnel and others by the armed tribal opposition the Shanti Baiiini (Peace Forces), continued. In late 1986 and the opening weeks of 1987 there were renewed reports of human rights violations there in the course of intensive security force operations in the northern districts. For the remainder of the year, however, there were markedly fewer of these reports than during the preceding 12 months.
According to reports received early in the year, some 40 members of the security forces, accompanied by non-tribal civilians, surrounded a tribal village on 29 December 1986 and set fire to the huts of tribal people. Several women from Bouri-para village, in Panchari sub-district, were reportedly raped by non-tribal men while the security forces looked on. and two of the tribal men were alleged to have been killed. Some others were reported to have been beaten and two to have been hung upside down from a tree where burning wood was producing a choking smoke. One woman related that she witnessed her husband's death: she said he was beaten and then stabbed by a member of the security forces.
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / BANGLADESH / BRUNEI OARUSSALAM
The conflict in the Chittagong Hill Tracts resulted in thousands of tribal villagers crossing into India in 1986 and early 1987. By mid-February, Indian officials were estimating their number at some 40,000 and the Bangladesh Government at approximately 25,000. The two governments discussed procedures for their formal repatriation but without result by the end of the year, although a small number of tribal villagers were reported by the Bangladesh news media to have returned voluntarily.
National newspapers reported several deaths in custody of criminal suspects, allegedly as a result of torture. As in previous years, when such incidents gained public attention, the authorities announced that they had established investigations either by police officials or by a magistrate. However, information on the findings of the investigations and action taken after them was not made publicly available. A number of cases brought against the police by relatives of people who had died in police custody were understood to be waiting to be heard by the courts.
In January the Council of Ministers announced that the SPA, which provides for trials by special tribunals for certain offences, would be amended to introduce the death penalty for smuggling. Following increasingly frequent bomb explosions, in May the Explosive Substance Act of 1908 and the Explosives Act of 1884 were also amended to provide the death penalty as the maximum punishment for causing an explosion likely to endanger life.
At least 11 people were sentenced to death during the year. All were convicted of murder. The number of executions was not known. In July the Minister of Home Affairs announced in Parliament that 25 people had been hanged in 1986 and 11 in 1985, a considerable increase over the previous two years.
Amnesty International wrote to the Bangladesh Government on a number of occasions, and following the arrests in July, October and November called for the release of those arrested on account of their non-violent political activities, expressing concern at the widespread use of administrative detention provisions. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of all death sentences and expressed
regret at the increased number of executions in 1986.
Amnesty International took up with the government human rights violations in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and asked whether they had been the subject of official investigation. In September Amnesty International made statements on these violations to the United Nations Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. Before the end of the year, the government agreed that an Amnesty International delegation should visit Bangladesh in 1988 to discuss human rights in the Chittagong Hill Tracts with relevant ministers and officials.
