CHILE
The harassment of government critics by clandestine groups linked to the security forces intensified in 1987, and torture by the official security forces continued in spite of measures taken by the govern-ment which should have given detainees increased protection. Many political opponents of the government, trade union leaders, journalists and others were detained for short periods and three opposition leaders were banished administratively to remote parts of the country. Judicial irregularities in the trials of pol-
THE AMERICAS/CHILE
itical prisoners were reported, and little progress was made in investigating human rights abuses. Three political prisoners were sentenced to death and five new "disappearances" were reported.
The government took preliminary steps to pave the way to a restricted form of civilian government. It prepared for a plebiscite, to be held in 1988 or 1989, opened electoral registers and passed a new law allowing the establishment of non-Marxist political parties. Large numbers of exiles were allowed to return to Chile. The state of siege was not renewed when it lapsed in January and a curfew which had been in force almost continuously since 1973 was lifted. However, the "state of danger to internal peace" and a state of emergency remained in force.
Several steps were taken by the government to protect human rights. In June a new law required the closure of detention centres run by the Central NacionaJ de in/ormaciones (CNI), state security police, who had often been cited as responsible for torture. In September the government signed the United Nations Convention against Torture and the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
However, the intimidation and harassment of suspected opponents of the government by clandestine groups linked to the security forces intensified. The targets ranged from community leaders and local human rights activists in the pobiaciones (poor neighbourhoods) to bishops, actors, politicians and court officials. Chilean human rights groups said that by December they had received reports of over 1,000 cases. Death threats and surveillance were most common. Cats with their throats slit
were left outside the homes of some victims. Others had incendiary devices left at their homes, offices or under their cars. Some victims were abducted for up to 24 hours and interrogated either in a vehicle or in a secret detention centre. Many were beaten. Others were given drugs or electric shocks, burned with cigarettes or acid, or had letters or symbols scored into their skin.
The clandestine forces operated with impunity and the government took no effective measures to restrain their activities. despite evidence of the involvement of security forces personnel in some cases. In January, for example, after nearly two years of investigations into the abduction and murder of three Communist Party members in March 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986 and 1987), Judge José Canovas concluded that a police unit had been involved. He subsequently closed the case and said that it was impossible for him to proceed because of lack of cooperation from the security forces. In June, however, the investigation was reopened on appeal.
Torture by the official security forces continued. During the first half of the year, a number of political detainees were held incommunicado in CNl detention centres, where they were tortured and interrogated. After the introduction of new legislation in June, the CNI were required to hand over detainees to the regular police forces immediately. However, it emerged that political detainees were being tortured by CNl agents in police stations run by investigaciones (criminal investigations police). Some detainees also said they were taken by the CNl to other unidentified detention centres.
Following agreements reached in 1986, delegates from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) were able to visit detainees held by the CNl and investigaciones. However, according to detainees' testimonies, some had been tortured by the time the visit was allowed to take place. In a number of cases, injuries sustained in police custody were recorded by doctors from the Chilean Institute of Legal Medicine, who were asked by courts dealing with petitions for amparo (similar to habeas corpus) to examine detainees.
Some progress was made in judicial investigations into torture. Judge René Garcia Villegas, in whose jurisdiction lay
THE AMERICAS/CHILE
the main CNl detention centre in Santiago, was investigating about 40 official complaints of torture. He said that his work had led him to the conclusion that the CNI subjected detainees to "terrible tortures", but that the lack of police cooperation was making it impossible to identify those responsible.
Several hundred people were detained for a few hours or days for participating in peaceful political activities such as handing out leaflets and campaigning for free elections. Members of the Christian Democrat and Humanist Parties were arrested while canvassing for signatures to register as a political party under the new law.
Many others were arrested during a strike called on 7 October by the Comando Nacional de Traba/adores (CNT), National Workers Command, in support of a list of workers' demands including higher wages. Three CNT leaders and three leaders of the United Left opposition coalition were imprisoned and charged under the State Security Law for calling the stoppage. By 1 December all had been released on bail.
Restrictions on the right to freedom of expression continued, although four opposition magazines which had been suspended under the state of siege were allowed to resume publication in January. The government took an unprecedented number of legal actions against journalists and editors, as well as politicians and a human rights lawyer whose statements were published in opposition magazines. They were committed for trial on charges of slandering the President or the armed forces. Five journalists were imprisoned for up to two months on similar charges before being released on bail. Juan Pablo Cárdenas, director of the magazine Análisis, was sentenced to spend 541 nights in prison on similar charges: he had to report to prison each night and was released the following morning.
Many exiles were allowed to return from abroad but hundreds remained banned from Chile. Four political leaders challenged the ban by returning secretly and then presenting themselves to the courts. Three were immediately arrested and banished administratively for three months to remote parts of the country by the Interior Ministry, the first time the authorities had used this measure since 1985. After two months the banishment
order against former Communist Party Members of Parliament Julieta Campusano and Mireya Baltra was lifted but Clodomiro Almeyda. a Socialist Party leader, completed the three-month term. He was then imprisoned on charges of illegal entry to the country and being an "apologist for terrorism". At the end of 1987 he was still in prison, awaiting the outcome of appeals against two 541-day prison sentences imposed for each offence.
The courts consistently failed to lake into account evidence submitted on behalf of victims of human rights abuses. For example, in the case of Carmen Quintana and Rodrigo Rojas, who were burnt in July 1986, both the military prosecutor and the higher courts apparently ignored extensive medical and witness evidence that the two were arrested and set on fire by a military patrol. Instead, they accepted the army version that the two were burnt by accident when Carmen Quintana kicked over a bottle of inflammable liquid. Lawyers acting on behalf of Carmen Quintana complained that she and witnesses had been harassed and reported other procedural irregularities, for example, important witnesses not being called.
Efforts by a few civilian judges to pursue investigations were hampered by the police and military not cooperating or blocked by the transfer of cases to military courts. Some court officials, such as ludge René Garcia Villegas, received death threats. A new law modifying the Code of Military lustice passed in November gave the authorities further extensive powers to refuse to hand over information about police and the armed forces to the courts if they considered it to affect the security of the stale or of individuals.
Investigations into approximately 700 "disappearances" between 1973 and 1977 suffered a major setback when the Supreme Court upheld a 1986 Appeal Court decision to close an investigation into 10 "disappearance" cases. Judge Carlos Cerda, a member of the Appeal Court, had uncovered important information about the methods used by the police and military to eliminate political opponents of the government in the mid-1970s. He argued against the Appeal Court decision to apply an amnesty law passed in 1978 to the accused, on the grounds that his investigations were not finished.
Five political activists were reported to
THE AMERICAS/CHILE
have "disappeared" in September, leading to fears that the practice might be re-emerging. Alejandro Pinochet Arenas was last seen on 10 September being forced into a car in Santiago by several unidentified civilian assailants believed to be government agents. Human rights lawyers said that the circumstances surrounding the "disappearance" of Julio Muñoz, Manuel Sepulveda, José Peña and Gonzalo Fuenzalida also gave reason to believe that they had been abducted by government agents. The authorities denied holding them.
Long-term political prisoners being tried by military courts held a series of hunger-strikes to draw attention to irregularities in their trials and to protest against the death penalty. Their complaints included restrictions on the rights of the defence, the use of confessions extracted under torture, and long delays in trials. Human rights groups' statistics indicated that only a quarter of the approximately 450 political prisoners had been sentenced by the end of 1987. Some of those awaiting sentence had been in detention since 1984 or earlier.
Particular criticism was levelled against the Special Military Prosecutor. Fernando Torres. He was investigating the cases against approximately 100 defendants in four trials charged in connection with armed actions attributed to the Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodriguez (FPMR), Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front, an armed opposition group, including the September 1986 assassination attempt on President Augusto Pinochet. He ordered a number of the defendants to be held incommunicado for up to 40 days after their arrest without access to legal counsel, often after they had been tortured. Other defendants reported that he and his court officials threatened them. In his December report to the UN General Assembly, the Special Rapporteur on Chile criticized him for "a bias inappropriate in an official of his rank".
One of those charged by the Special Military Prosecutor was prisoner of conscience Dr Ramiro Olivares, a doctor working with the church human rights organization, Vicariate of Solidarity. He was accused of "assisting terrorists" after he gave medical treatment to a man, unaware that he had been injured in an attack on a shop. He was eventually released on bail
on 29 December after successfully petitioning the Supreme Court for the charges against him to be reduced (see Amnesty internationaJ Report 1987). It appeared that the case against Dr Olivares was intended to obstruct the work of the Vicariate by linking it to armed opposition groups.
Three political prisoners were sentenced to death in April after being convicted of participating in the killing of the military governor of Santiago in 1983. At the end of 1987 they were still awaiting the outcome of an appeal to the Military Appeals Court. One political prisoner, Carlos Garcia Herrera, had his death sentence commuted to life imprisonment in October when the Military Appeals Court failed to reach the unanimous verdict required by Chilean law to uphold a death sentence. However, the government then submitted a complaint to the Supreme Court, which was still pending at the end of 1987, against the one judge who had voted against the death sentence. It argued that he was at fault in voting not to uphold the death sentence.
Twelve alleged FPMR members were killed by the CNI on 15 and 16 June in circumstances suggesting that they were the victims of extrajudicial executions. In one incident, in which seven people died, there was evidence that all the shots were fired from the direction of the security forces and none from where the victims were. In another, it appeared that the victim was shot dead from a van as he was walking along the street near his mother's house.
Amnesty International urged the government to take action against clandestine forces and to give protection to those threatened. It called for further measures to be introduced to prevent torture and appealed to the authorities to permit detainees held incommunicado by police to be given access to lawyers and doctors. The organization called on the authorities to review the judicial procedures in the trials of political prisoners which fell short of international standards for fair trials and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences. It also continued to press for full investigations into all human rights abuses, including "disappearances". An Amnesty International delegation visited Chile in October and met officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, representatives of human rights organizations, pol-
THE AMERICAS / CHILE / COLOMBIA
ilical parties, the Archbishop of Santiago and other church representatives.
The year was marked by a dramatic increase in human rights violations. Hundreds of suspected opponents of the armed forces were detained, tortured or killed by "death squads" apparently composed of military personnel or civilians acting on behalf of the armed forces or with their acquiescence. The victims extended beyond those identifled with the left-wing opposition to include members of virtually any independent organization or profession considered to be critical of the armed forces' campaign against "subversion". Despite mounting evidence of the armed forces' involvement, the government continued to contend that the "death squads" were composed of independent groups of right-wing extremists whom the authorities could neither control nor disband. In certain areas, civilian defence squads organized and equipped by the armed forces to assist in their counter-insurgency activities were also alleged to have been responsible for torture and extrajudicial executions of civilians.
There was increased activity by armed opposition groups and a rise in the number of reported clashes between the armed forces and the largest such group, Fuerzas Armadas RevoJucionorias de Colombia (FARC), the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, although formally the FARC remained within a peace process initiated in 1984. There were new reports that the FARC and other armed opposition groups had
summarily executed a number of their captives.
In December Colombia ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture.
The area most affected by the upsurge in political violence in 1987 was Antioquia department in northeast Colombia. In the banana plantation region of Uraba, more than 50 people, mostly agricultural workers. their union leaders and advisers, were killed in the first half of 1987 against a background of protracted pay negotiations between the major unions and the plantation owners. The killings were carried out by heavily armed men in civilian clothes believed to be employed by landowners acting with the complicity of the armed forces. Extensive counter-insurgency operations made Urabà one of the most heavily militarized zones in Colombia, yet the killers were able to operate with impunity, passing freely through military controls.
There were further "death squad" killings in Medellin, the capital of Antioquia department. Scores of people including trade unionists, students, university professors and human rights activists were killed, particularly during the second half of the year, by groups operating under names such as "Amor a MedeJIin", Love for Medellin, and "Muerfe a RevoJucion-arios del Nordeste", Death to Revolutionaries of the Northeast. Civic leaders and human rights activists responded by organizing demonstrations demanding the right to life. On 13 August over 3,000 people participated in a "march for life" through Medellin. led by the Comité de Defensa de los Derechos Humanos (CDDH), Medellin Committee for the Defence of Human Rights. The demonstration was in protest against recent "death squad" killings of five students and four lecturers at the University of Antioquia. Some of the victims had been tortured before being shot. The local police said that they saw the killings as isolated incidents, without apparent political motivation. However, seven of the nine victims, it was later established, had been members of a new political group Frente Popular, Popular Front, and had been arrested previously by military personnel during a demonstration on 1 May. They were said to have been held in the headquarters of the army's Fourth Brigade and to have been photographed and fingerprinted before they were released uncharged after a few hours.
