MALAWI
Three prisoners of conscience whose identity was known and many other political prisoners who might be prisoners of conscience remained in Malawian pris-ons at the end of 1987. Some had been convicted after unfair trials in the traditional courts. Those held reportedly included Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned
for their religious beliefs and activities. Prison conditions were reported to be harsh and prisoners were believed to have been systematically denied adequate food over long periods.
Under the Public Security Regulations 1965, the President may, "if he considers it to be necessary for the preservation of public order so to do, make an order against any person directing that he be detained". Detention may be for an indefinite period, although the President is required by law to review detention orders every six months. The same security regulations make it an offence, punishable by up to five years' imprisonment, to publish anything which is likely "to undermine the authority of or public confidence in the government".
Malawi's best known poet. Jack Mapanje, was arrested in Zomba on 25 September. Police took him to his office at the university, where he is head of the department of language and literature, and seized papers and copies of his book of poetry, O/ Chameleons and Gods. Jack Mapanje was held incommunicado either at Zomba Central Prison or nearby Mikuyu Prison, where he remained at the end of the year. The government did not say why or under what law he was held, despite appeals from a number of international literary figures, including the last two winners of the Nobel Prize for Literature, Joseph Brodsky and Wole Soyinka. Unconfirmed reports suggested that he might have been charged with sedition.
Freedom of speech and artistic expression remained very limited. All publications had to be submitted to an official Censorship Board before they could be circulated within the country. At about the time of Jack Mapanje's arrest, the Censorship Board banned Of Chameleons and Gods, which had been published in 1981 and was previously allowed limited circulation in Malawi. However, his arrest may have been related to a forthcoming volume of poems, which some observers suggested might have been seen as critical of the government.
Orton and Vera Chirwa, both prisoners of conscience, were convicted of treason after an unfair trial in a traditional court in 1983. They were initially sentenced to death, but these sentences were commuted in 1984 after international appeals on their behalf. In January 1987, President Banda
AFRICA/MALAWI/MALI
made a speech in Blantyre in which he accused Orton Chirwa, who was leader of the exiled opposition Malawi Freedom Movement, of continuing his political activities in prison and of circulating critical leaflets from his prison cell. The President is reported to have said that Orton and Vera Chirwa did not deserve the clemency that had been shown them and that the Malawi Young Pioneers, a paramilitary youth brigade composed of members of the ruling party, would "do a job" on them. However, President Banda apparently later gave assurances that the Chirwas had not been threatened. During 1987 Orton and Vera Chirwa were transferred from Mikuyu Prison to Zomba Central Prison, where conditions are poor. During an earlier period of imprisonment at Zomba, Orton Chirwa was manacled for long periods each day and handcuffed to an iron bar at night. Although he could lie down to sleep, he could not move freely even in his own cell. In these conditions Orton Chirwa, who is in his mid-60s, suffered increasingly bad health. Vera Chirwa's health had been poor for some years and also suffered a deterioration in prison.
In September police Special Branch officers arrested Goodluck Mhango, a 32-year-old veterinary doctor employed at the agricultural wing of the Malawi Young Pioneers in Lilongwe. He was reported to have sustained serious injuries to his head after beatings by police prior to his detention at Maula Prison in Lilongwe. It was reported that the reason for his arrest was his relationship to his brother, a journalist resident outside the country whose political writings about Malawi had displeased the government. Amnesty International was investigating whether Dr Mhango was a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International received confirmation of the release from Mikuyu Prison of two political detainees, Francis Pollock Mhango, a journalist held since 1981, and Ferndo Mfipa, a former civil servant. Another political detainee, Ulemi Mson-thi, a farmer and son of a former Cabinet Minister, was released from Maula prison where he had been held uncharged since 1984.
Members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society (Jehovah's Witnesses) apparently continued to be imprisoned because of their conscientious refusal to join the sole political party, the Malawi
Congress Party. The sect is banned under a section of the penal code which makes individuals liable to imprisonment if they further the aims of an "unlawful society" — that is, any group considered to be "dangerous to the good government of the Republic". Several dozen Jehovah's Witnesses were believed to be detained without trial at Dzeleka Prison Farm and Maula Prison.
Throughout the year Amnesty International continued to appeal to the Malaw-ian Government for the release of prisoners of conscience. In particular, the organization sought assurances concerning the safety of Orton and Vera Chirwa after President Banda's Blantyre speech in January, as well as pressing the government for prisoners of conscience to be held in humane conditions. Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of a number of possible prisoners of conscience.
