SWAZILAND
Several members of the Royal Family and a former Prime Minister were among more than a dozen people held under renewable 60-day detention orders. Eleven of them were tried in November before a special tribunal, which sits in camera. Defendants appearing before the tribunal are denied legal representation and right of appeal. At least two people were sentenced to death but it was not known if there were any executions. Several political opponents of the South African Government were killed and at least one opponent was reportedly abducted. South African security agents were believed to have been responsible for the killings and abduction.
Prince Bhekimpi Dlamini, who was replaced as Prime Minister in 1986, and 11 other prominent Swazis were arrested in
AFRICA / SWAZILAND / TANZANIA
May and placed under 60-day detention orders signed by Prime Minister Sotsha Dlamini. One detainee was subsequently tried and convicted of a criminal offence but detention orders imposed on the others were renewed immediately upon expiry in July. With the exception of one detainee who was released because of ill-health, all of them remained in detention until November, when they were brought to trial on charges of high treason and sedition. These charges arose from their alleged participation in the deposing of Queen Regent Dzeliwe, then the acting Head of State, and her replacement by Queen Regent Ntombi, mother of King Mswati III, in 1983. In addition to Prince Bhekimpi Dlamini, the accused included Chief Mfa-nawenkhosi Dlamini, other former members of the disbanded Liqoqo (Supreme Council of State) and Robert Mabila, formerly Swaziland's Ombudsman.
The 11 defendants were brought to trial before a special tribunal established by royal decree in November to prosecute people charged with offences against the Ngwenyama, or King, and the Ndiovukazi, or Queen Mother. The proceedings of the tribunal do not satisfy international standards of fair trial. The tribunal sits in camera, defendants are not permitted legal representation and must defend themselves and there is no right of appeal. The tribunal may sentence people to prison for up to 20 years and is authorized to make its own rules of procedure. The trial of the 11 was still in progress at the end of the year.
In May Philip Dacre, a pastor of the Rhema Church, was detained under a 60-day order. A few days earlier he had been arrested, charged with sedition and released on bail. He allegedly insulted the King and government by publishing remarks critical of traditional Swazi customs. Three others connected with the Rhema Church were also charged, although they were not detained prior to their trial. Three of the four, including Pastor Dacre, were convicted but none were jailed. Pastor Dacre, a British national, was then deported.
At least two people were sentenced to death after conviction of murder. It was not known if there were any executions.
Several South African exiles resident in Swaziland were killed. It appeared likely that South African security agents carried out the killings for political reasons. Three
members of the African National Congress (ANC), which is banned in South Africa, were killed in two separate incidents by unidentified gunmen. The first occurred in May, when an ANC member was among three people shot dead. In July two members of the ANC's National Executive and a third person were killed shortly after arriving in Swaziland from Mozambique. Grace Cele, one of several people abducted from Swaziland by South African forces in 1986, was permitteij to return to Swaziland from South Africa in February. Another woman. Sheila Moipone Nyanda, was allegedly taken by force to South Africa in May and detained there. It was not known if she was released by the end of the year.
Amnesty International was concerned during the year about the trial of Prince Bhekimpi Dlamini and others before a special tribunal, which employed proceedings falling short of internationally recognized standards. The organization was also concerned about use of the death penalty.
