GUINEA BISSAU
About 40 political prisoners sentenced in July 1986 after an unfair trial remained in prison throughout 1987. Other alleged opponents of the government were detained without trial for long periods. One prisoner was alleged to have died in cus-tody as a result of torture but the government attributed his death to suicide.
Rafael Barbosa, a former long-term political prisoner, was detained without trial throughout 1987. He had previously been imprisoned or restricted in colonial times and between 1975 and early 1985 (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1986J. He was rearrested in June 1985 after two of his relatives had been detained for writing anonymous leaflets criticizing the government but he was not charged.
Emilio Costa, an army captain, was also believed to have been detained without trial throughout 1987. He was arrested in December 1985 when he returned to the capital, Bissau, after studying in Portugal. He was apparently suspected of being in
AFRICA / GUINEA BISSAU / KENYA
contact with supporters of Paulo Correia, the former Vice President, who was convicted in July 1986 of conspiring against the government and was executed with five co-defendants. He was not reported to have been charged or tried although he was held with prisoners tried with Paulo Correia who were sentenced to prison terms. The government gave no reasons for his detention, despite the code of penal procedure which requires detainees to be brought before a judge promptly, and either charged or released. One other long-term detainee, José Manuel Buscardini, an official in the Ministry of Agriculture, was released early in 1987. He had been arrested at work in January 1986, apparently for political reasons, and held incommunicado for at least four months of his detention.
At least six of the 46 political prisoners sentenced to prison terms in July 1986 after an unfair trial (see Amnesty International Report 1987] were believed to have been released during 1987 after completing their sentences. The others, who received sentences of three to 15 years, were still imprisoned at the end of the year.
In February it was reported that Mandu Fati, a bank officia! from Bissau, had died in custody, bringing the number of known deaths of political prisoners since November 1985 to seven (see Amnesty International Report 1987).He had apparently been arrested after a pistol was found in his possession and was suspected of intending to commit a political offence, but was not formally charged. The authorities said that he had committed suicide, but unofficial sources alleged that he had been tortured while being interrogated. However, it was not possible to confirm either the cause of death or the reason for his arrest.
In August Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government detailing its concern about the long-term detention without trial of suspected government opponents, allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, deaths in custody and the use of the death penalty. It called for the provisions of the code of penal procedure to be enforced to ensure that detainees would be brought promptly before a judge and either charged and brought to trial or released. The memorandum also urged the authorities to ensure that detainees were informed of the legal
basis and reasons for their imprisonment and that they could use the habeas corpus provisions in the code of penal procedure to contest their detention.
Amnesty International also called for the limits on incommunicado detention stipulated by law to be strictly followed in order to safeguard detainees against torture or ill-treatment, and for detainees to be granted access to legal counsel promptly after arrest and during the period of pre-trial investigation. It also urged the government to ensure that all complaints of torture or ill-treatment of prisoners were impartially investigated and that any statements extracted under torture were not admitted as evidence by the courts.
Amnesty International also called on the government to introduce legislation establishing a right of appeal to a higher court against both conviction and sentence for all defendants in political cases, and urged the abolition of the death penalty.
By the end of 1987 Amnesty International had not received a response to its memorandum from the government.
