SIERRA LEONE
REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE
Head of state and government: Ah mad Tejan Kabbah Death penalty: retentionist UN Women's Convention: ratified Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: signed
Furtherconsolidation of the peace process resulted in improvements in the human rights situation. Progress was made to address impunity for past human rights abuses committed by both government and armed opposition forces during the conflict. The trial of some 90 former combatants charged w/ith murderand otheroffenceswas repeatedly postponed and international fairtriai standards were not met Some 20 others associated with the formerarmed opposition remained in long-term detention without charge or trial.
Background information
Consolidation of the peace achieved in 2001 after a decade of conflict continued. Government authority was re-established throughout the country but concerns about the capacity of the army and police were heightened by instability in neighbouring Liberia. Liberian armed groups made incursions into Sierra Leone, particularly in Kailahun District. In addition, a significant number of former Sierra Leonean combatants were reported to be fighting in both Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire. Deployment of security forces, supported by the UN Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), along the border with Liberia was increased. However, a peace agreement and subsequent deployment of a UN peace-keeping operation in Liberia in October augured a reduced threat from Liberia.
Training and restructuring of the army and police by the International Military Advisory and Training Team and UN civilian police officers continued. There was gradual withdrawal of UNAMSIL military personnel with complete withdrawal anticipated by late 2004.
Reintegration of former combatants remained a priority and, despite a shortfall in funds, was near completion at the end of the year. However, government commitments in 2002 to disband the Civil Defence Forces (CDF), which had supported the government during the conflict, remained unfulfilled.
Ninety-eight per cent of over 7,000 registered former child combatants and separated children had been reunited with their families. The Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict visited Sierra Leone in February and called for continuing international support to sustain progress made so far in the protection of war-affected children.
The government made efforts to increase control of diamond-mining areas, inhibit unregulated mining and tackle potential insecurity in Kono and Kenema Districts.
On 13 January there was an unsuccessful armed attack on the armoury at Wellington barracks, on the outskirts of Freetown. Johnny Paul Koroma, an elected member of parliament and also former leader of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRO which came to power following a military coup in 1997 and which subsequently allied itself to the armed opposition Revolutionary United Front (RUF), was implicated in a plan to destabilize state authority but evaded arrest.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone
There was significant progress in addressing impunity for gross human rights abuses committed during the conflict. Thirteen people were indicted by the Special Court for Sierra Leone, nine of whom were in custody at the end of the year. The Special Court had been established in 2002 to try those bearing the greatest responsibility for crimes against humanity, war crimes and other serious violations of international humanitarian law committed after 30 November 1996.
The first seven indictments, against members of all parties to the conflict, were announced on 10 March. Charges included murder, rape and other forms of sexual violence, sexual slavery, conscription of children, abductions and forced labour. Those indicted included former RUF leader Foday Sankoh, RUF commander Sam Bockarie, Johnny Paul Koroma and Samuel Hinga Norman, Minister of Internal Affairs and former National Coordinator of the CDF.
All but Sam Bockarie and Johnny Paul Koroma were arrested and detained, Sam Bockarie, who was closely associated with then Liberian President Charles Taylor and was in Liberia when indicted, was killed in May. Although the Liberian government claimed that he had died in a confrontation with government forces, the circumstances remained unclear and suspicions surrounding his death were compounded by the reported murder several days later of his mother, wife and two children in the Liberian capital, Monrovia. It appeared that Sam Bockarie had been killed to prevent him giving evidence to the Special Court which would implicate President Taylor. Johnny Paul Koroma remained at large; reports that he too had been killed in Liberia remained unconfirmed. The case against Foday Sankoh was adjourned because of serious ill-health; he died in July.
On 4 June an indictment against President Taylor was announced as he attended the opening of negotiations to end Liberia's conflict in Accra, Ghana, under the auspices of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The charges were based on his active support to the RUF and AFRC in order to destabilize Sierra Leone and gain access to diamond resources. Despite an international arrest warrant and an appeal by Al that he be arrested by the Ghanaian authorities, he was allowed to return to Liberia the same day.
President Taylor announced his willingness to relinquish power in the interests of peace. On 11 August he left Liberia for Nigeria with implicit guarantees from the Nigerian government that he would be neither prosecuted in Nigeria nor surrendered to the Special Court. Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo argued
74
Amnesty International Report 2004	74
AFRICA
that he was acting in the interests of peace in Liberia. A! protested strongly that the Nigerian government had violated its obligations under international law but calls to either surrender Charles Taylor to the Special Court or open an investigation with a view to determining whether to pursue criminal or extradition proceedings in Nigerian courts were ignored. AI called for all ECOWAS and other governments to cooperate fully with the Special Court. In early December, Interpol allowed worldwide circulation of the arrest warrant against Charles Taylor with a view to extradition.
From late October the Appeals Chamber of the Special Court considered preliminary defence motions, including in relation to the denial of the right of appeal against decisions on preliminary motions challenging the jurisdiction of the Special Court, and the applicability of amnesty provisions in the 1999 Lomé peace agreement. AI urged that the right of appeal be ensured; the Appeals Chamber, however, rejected this motion. AI also argued that international law prohibited amnesties or other impunity measures for crimes against humanity, war crimes and other serious violations of international law. The indictment against Charles Taylor was challenged on grounds of "sovereign immunity" and extraterritoriality. The Prosecutor submitted motions seeking to join existing cases into two combined indictments: those of RUF and AFRC members and those of CDF members. Decisions on these motions had not been reached by the end of the year. Trials were expected to begin in March or April 2004,
A severe funding crisis, threatening the Special Court's continued operation beyond the end of 2003, was partially alleviated by additional contributions and bringing forward funds for subsequent years.
Further measures needed to end impunity
The Special Court for Sierra Leone was expected to try only a small number of people; others responsible for serious crimes throughout the conflict, which began in 1991, continued to benefit from the amnesty provided by the peace agreement and subsequently passed into law. AI called for this legislation to be repealed. It also stressed the importance of the Special Court's contribution to strengthening the national justice system so that it could in future assume responsibility for ending impunity for such grave crimes.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
Despite a shortfall in its budget, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) made progress towards providing a historical record of human rights abuses during the conflict and promoting reconciliation. More than 7,500 statements were collected, including from Sierra Leonean refugees in other West African countries. Public hearings throughout the country, involving victims, witnesses and perpetrators, were completed in August. Particular attention was given to the experiences of women and children. The mandate of the TRC. scheduled to end in October, was extended and its report was anticipated in early 2004.
High Courttrial of former combatants
The trial of some 90 former combatants charged with murder, conspiracy to murder and other offences was repeatedly adjourned and failed to advance. The defendants included Foday Sankoh, other former RUF members and renegade soldiers known as the "West Side Boys". Most had been arrested in May 2000 following the deaths of about 20 people and injuries to many others when RUF members fired on civilians protesting outside Foday Sankoh's Freetown residence. Foday Sankoh was transferred to the Special Court's custody after his indictment.
None of the defendants benefited from legal representation, violating international fair trial standards. Concerns about lack of legal representation were exacerbated by the fact that the defendants, if convicted, could face a death sentence. They continued to be denied family visits.
Treason trial
Following the attack on Wellington barracks, more than 100 people were reported to have been arrested. While most were subsequently released, 17 people, including soldiers on active duty, former members of the "West Side Boys" and some civilians, were charged in March with treason and related offences; they included a boy believed to be 15 years old who was held with adult prisoners in the Central Prison, Pademba Road, in Freetown. One of those charged was subsequently indicted by the Special Court and transferred to its Jurisdiction. The trial was continuing at the end of the year.
Political detention without charge or trial
Twenty-three detainees, all military personnel, remained held without charge or trial in Pademba Road prison. Most had been arrested in mld-2000, although one had been held since February 1999. There was no legal basis for their continued detention and they were denied all access to lawyers and family members.
Prison conditions and deaths in custody
Notwithstanding some improvements, conditions of detention in police stations and prisons frequently failed to conform to international standards as a result of overcrowding, unhealthy conditions and inadequate medical attention.
in April, prison authorities agreed to investigate the death of a prisoner held in Magburaka Prison, Tonkolili District, who was reported to have died from injuries sustained as a result of beatings by prison officials, but there was no further progress. The precise cause of death of a prisoner who died in Pademba Road prison in August 2002, officially described as "psychosis", remained unclear.
Strengthening national institutions
Despite some progress in rehabilitating the national justice system, serious problems persisted in the effective administration of justice. There were few incentives for qualified lawyers to become judges. Although magistrates' courts were restored to all 12
Amnesty International Report 2004
75
AFRICA
districts, lack of magistrates remained a major constraint. Justices of the peace were trained and deployed to help reduce lengthy backlogs of cases. Criminal suspects continued to be held in police custody beyond legal limits, often because of lack of legal representation, especially in the provinces. There was lax implementation of international standards in respect of separation of categories of prisoners, for example juveniles and women. Serious inadequacies in the juvenile justice system remained and overall lack of access to the judicial process, including in cases of gender-based violence, continued. There was further delay in establishing a permanent National Human Rights Commission, anticipated in the peace agreement, despite assistance in preparing draft legislation to establish the Commission from UNAMSIL and the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, in consultation with civil society organizations. Although presented to the government in September, legislation had not been submitted to parliament by the end of the year.
Refugees and internally displaced people
Refugees continued to return from Guinea and Liberia, although lack of basic amenities in areas such as Kailahun and Kono Districts impeded voluntary return of some refugees and internally displaced people to their place of origin. Emergency repatriation of Sierra Leonean refugees by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) from Monrovia was temporarily suspended as the security crisis in Liberia deepened in June and July, and humanitarian agencies were forced to withdraw. Some 14,000 Sierra Leonean refugees remained in Liberia.
As conflict in Liberia intensified, more than 9,000 Liberians, including deserting combatants, crossed into Sierra Leone during the first three months of the year. UNHCR, UNAMSIL and security forces along the border and in refugee camps attempted to identify combatants and separate them from civilians. Liberian former child soldiers benefited from an accelerated integration program in refugee camps.
UN Mission in Sierra Leone
The UNAMSIL human rights section continued to monitor the human rights situation, including in relation to police stations, prisons, the justice system and national institutions. It also continued to document human rights abuses during the conflict. Additional regional offices were opened.
The human rights section also carried out training in international human rights and humanitarian law for UNAMSIL peace-keeping troops, members of the judiciary, law enforcement officials, and civil society organizations, including human rights groups.
Al country reports/visits Report
• Sierra Leone: Special Court for Sierra Leone-denial of right to appeal and prohibition of amnesties for crimes under international law (AI Index: APR 51/012/2003)
Visit
AI delegates visited Sierra Leone in May and met officials and staff of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the TRC as well as senior government officials and members of UNAMSIL.
