UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Head of state: Al-Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahyan Head of government: Al-Sheikh Maktum bin Rashid Al-Maktum
Death penalty: retentionist
UN Women's Convention and its Optional Protocol: not
signed_
Scores of political detainees continued to be held without charge or trial for more than two years in the context of measures taken by the authorities to combat "terrorism". Death sentences were imposed or upheld for murder and drug offences, but no executions were known to have been carried out A man was reportedly sentenced to hand amputation.
Background
In January the authorities declared an amnesty from prosecution for all those staying in the country illegally. Illegal residents were given four months to leave or face imprisonment and a fine. The amnesty was extended by a further two months and by June up to 80,000 people were said to have left the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Thousands who did not comply were reportedly arrested and expelled from the country.
In January, the judiciary announced plans to establish juvenile courts throughout the UAE. It was not known whether these had been established by the end of the year, nor whether their procedures complied with the UAE's obligations as a state party to the UN Children's Convention.
Amnesty International Report 2004
305
MIDDLE EAST/NORTH AFRICA
In April the Emirate of Dubai announced the establishment of district councils, with council members to be elected by popular vote.
In June, the ruler of Ras al-Khaimah, one of the seven emirates in the UAE federation, removed his eldest son from his position as Crown Prince. During demonstrations against this move, at least one person was reported to have been shot and wounded by the police.
!n August the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs announced a draft law for the creation in 2004 of a national labour union. Full union membership was reportedly to be restricted to UAE citizens. The Ministry pledged its commitment to implement International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions on healthy working environments and accommodation for workers-
In November, the UAE's "National Strategy for the Advancement of Women" was launched. The project, formulated with the UN Development Programme and Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), aims to develop women's productivity and skills as well as their participation in the private and public sectors.
In November the President, Al-Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahyan, ordered the release of 365 prisoners serving sentences in connection with financial and criminal offences. Al received information that at least one of the 365 remained in detention as he was unable to pay a fine.
Political detainees
Scores of people, all UAE nationals said to be former military or police personnel, remained in detention without charge or trial. They had been arrested in the aftermath of the 11 September 2001 attacks in the USA and continued to be held incommunicado, reportedly in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi. Others who had been arrested with them and released were said to have suffered various forms of torture, including beatings and the use of electric shocks to the genitals, during interrogation.
Possible prisoner of conscience
A Philippine national, the Reverend Fernando Alconga, was arrested in Dubai in November 2002 for handing out material on Christianity to a Muslim man in a public place. He was released on bail after being detained for more than a month. In April he received a suspended prison sentence of one year and was deported to the Philippines injuly.
Death penalty and other cruel judicial punishments
Several death sentences were passed but no executions were known to have been carried out.
In January, three Indian nationals, Humaid Sufi Muhyeddine, Sulaiman "Abdul Rahman Ibrahim and Sebastian Corian, had their death sentences upheld for drug trafficking. In October, four Indian nationals were sentenced to death by a court in Dubai in connection with the murder earlier in the year of an Indian national. Four Pakistani nationals were sentenced to death in November by a court in Dubai for the murder in
2002 of a Pakistani national. The Supreme Court in Dubai upheld the death sentences of two Iranian nationals reportedly convicted of attempting to smuggle 8ookg of cannabis into the Emirate in November 2002. The UAE introduced the death penalty for drug trafficking in 1995 but no execution for the offence is known to have been carried out.
In April a court in Ras al-Khaimah reportedly sentenced a 2o-year-old Pakistani national to hand amputation after he was convicted of stealing US$70. It was not known whether the sentence was carried out.
