MYANMAR
UNION OF MYANMAR
Head of state: SeniorCeneral Than Shwe
Head ofgovernment: General Khin Nyunt (from August)
Death penalty: retentionist
UN Women's Convention: ratified wiith reservations
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed
On 30 May, while travelling in Upper Myanmar, leaders and supporters of the National League for Democracy (NLD), the main opposition party, including General Secretary Daw Aung SanSuu Kyi, were attacked by pro-government supporters. At least four people were killed and scores of government critics were arrested. Many of those arrested after 30 May were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment Discussions between the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC), the military government, and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi did not progressduringtheyear. Ethnic minority civilians continued to suffer extensive human rights violations, including forced labour, in SPDC counter-insurgency operations in parts of the Shan, Kayin, Kayah, and Mon States.
Background
During the early part of the year Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and other NLD leaders travelled to many areas of the country to meet supporters and reopen NLD offices. After the 30 May attack, all NLD offices were shut by the SPDC and remained closed at the end of the year.
In August, in a cabinet reshuffle, General Soe Win was appointed to the post of SPDC Secretary 1. Also in August General Khin Nyunt announced a seven-point "roadmap" for transition from military rule to democracy.
In August the SPDC announced that the National Convention, which had not met since March ¡996, would be reconvened. The SPDC had established the National Convention in 1992 to draft principles for a new Constitution, to replace the 1974 Constitution abrogated when the military reasserted power in September 1988. The SPDC established two committees to organize the National Convention but, by the end of 2003, the list of participants in the Convention itself had not been made public. Some ethnic minority ceasefire groups agreed to participate, but it was unclear whether the NLD, which won over 82 per cent of the seats in the 1990 general election, would participate in the National Convention.
In February parts of the private banking sector collapsed, increasing economic hardship in the country.
As in previous years, the army was involved in skirmishes with the Karen National Union (KNU), the Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP), and the Shan State Army-South (SSA-South), and small armed opposition groups in the Mon State. In December the
SPDC held cease-fire discussions with the KNU and the KNPP The SPDC also agreed a truce with the KNU in December, but low-level fighting was still reported.
Death penalty
In August the Supreme Court upheld the death sentences against three grandsons and the son-in-law of General Ne Win, who headed the military government from 1962 to 1988. Nine others, including journalists and political activists, were sentenced to death in November for high treason after unfair political trials. No executions were reported.
30 May events and aftermath
The 30 May attack on NLD leaders and supporters occurred at night near Depeyin in a remote part of Sagaing Division. The SPDC stated that four people were killed and 50 injured. Opposition sources reported much higher casualties. As the SPDC did not permit an independent investigation, it was not possible to establish the numbers of casualties.
The assailants beat NLD supporters with iron bars and bamboo staves, in some cases with fatal results. Several women were badly beaten and had their clothes ripped.
Of the scores of NLD supporters arrested the same night, 24 were still detained in Kalay Prison at the end of 2003, including NLD Vice-Chairman U Tin Oo, aged in his late 70s. Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, under effective house arrest, was permitted to see only her physician and personnel from the UN and the International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC). She told the UN Special Rapporteur on Myanmar that she refused to be released until others detained during or after the 30 May attack were also released.
Political arrests and imprisonment
Over 1,350 political prisoners, scores of whom were prisoners of conscience, remained imprisoned. Q At least 24 people remained in administrative detention under the 1975 State Protection Act, which provides for up to five years' detention without charge, trial or recourse to judicial review. Elderly prisoner of conscience U Kyaw San. elected as a member of parliament for the NLD in the 1990 elections but never allowed to take up office, had his detention order extended by one year in September. In December Democracy Party leaders and prisoners of conscience U Htwe Myint and U Thu Wai, both elderly and in frail health, had their detention orders extended for another year.
Q Buddhist nuns Ma Than Than Htay and Ma Thin Thin Oo were arrested in January for staging a peaceful demonstration in Yangon. In June they were sentenced to i5years' imprisonment under the 1950 Emergency Provisions Act, most frequently used to criminalize peaceful dissent, and under the Burma Immigration (Emergency Provisions) Act for illegally leaving and entering Myanmar.
Before the 30 May events, the SPDC released only 30 political prisoners, a much lower number of releases than in the previous three years.
176
Amnesty International Report 2004	176
ASIA/PACIFIC
Q Dr Salai Tun Than, a 75-year-old academic and prisoner of conscience from the Chin ethnic minority, was released in May-
Some of those arrested during the 30 May violence and then released were rearrested in December. Arbitrary arrests by Military Intelligence of peaceful political opposition activists accelerated after 30 May. At least 52 people arrested after 30 May remained in prison; many of them were subsequently sentenced to long prison terms.
Q Maung Maung Lay and Ne Win, two NLD members from Yangon, were arrested in June and received a seven-year prison sentence in October for distributing information about the 30 May violence. Q Daw Tin Tin Nyo, an NLD member from Dallah, Yangon Division, was arrested in June and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in September for writing a letter to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi about the poor quality of education.
Q Phone Aung, an NLD member and former soldier, was arrested in September for a solitary demonstration at Yangon City Hall calling for the release of all political prisoners. In December he was sentenced to five years' imprisonment under the 1950 Emergency Provisions Act.
More than 30 members of parliament-elect were held at the year's end, including ¡3 arrested in the context of the 30 May violence,
Q Prisoner of conscience and NLD member of parliament-elect U Saw Naing Naing continued to serve a 21-year sentence for condemning arrests and restrictions on the NLD in September 2000.
The ICRC continued to visit prisons and labour camps throughout the country. Food and medical care for political prisoners were inadequate, and those injured and arrested on 30 May were not given proper medical treatment. The military continued the widespread use of criminal convicts from prisons and labour camps as porters and to clear landmines by walking across suspected minefields.
Pre-trial political detainees were held incommunicado in solitary confinement, which facilitated torture and ill-treatment during interrogation. Political trials fell far short of international fair trial standards: detainees were often denied legal counsel, and long sentences were handed down solely on the basis of statements by Military intelligence or police personnel.
Ethnic and religious minorities
The army reportedly continued to confiscate, without adequate compensation, large tracts of land owned by civilians and to take civilians for forced labour. The use of forced labour was reported in Ye Township, Mon State; Yebyu township, Tanintharyi Division; parts of the Rakhine, Kayin, Kachin and Shan States; and ceasefire zones or locations where there was no armed conflict.
Q Members of the Rohingya Muslim ethnic minority in northwestern Rakhine State were reportedly used as forced labour on road works between Rathedaung and Maungdaw township. Rohingya civilians continued to be subjected to severe restrictions on freedom of
movement and denied citizenship. Some 3,000 Rohingya refugees were repatriated from Bangladesh to the Rakhine State amid widespread reports that many of them were coerced into leaving refugee camps.
During October and November communal violence by Buddhists against Muslims was reported in Mandalay and Yangon Divisions, Muslims were killed and their property destroyed.
International Initiatives
The UN Secretary-General's Special Envoy visited the country twice in attempts to renew dialogue between the NLD and the SPDC and to facilitate the release of political prisoners. The UN Special Rapporteur on Myanmar visited the country in March and November. He cut short his March visit after he discovered a covert listening device when he was interviewing prisoners.
In April the UN Commission on Human Rights adopted by consensus its 12th resolution extending the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on Myanmar for another year. In December the UN General Assembly adopted by consensus a resolution deploring the 30 May violence, subsequent arrests and continuing human rights violations against ethnic minorities. It called for "enhanceldj cooperation with the UN Secretary-General's Special Envoy and the UN Special Rapporteur" by the SPDC,
In July the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) publicly criticized a fellow ASEAN member, for the first time in its history, when it issued a statement calling on the Myanmar government to release Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, The European Union (EU) Common Position, which provided for some sanctions on Myanmar, was renewed in April and strengthened after the 30 May violence. The USA increased economic sanctions in August,
In May the International Labour Office (ILO) Liaison Office in Yangon agreed a Plan of Action with the SPDC, providing for the appointment of an independent facilitator to assist victims of forced labour to obtain redress. However, after the 30 May violence, the ILO decided not to implement the Plan because a climate of "uncertainty and intimidation" did not provide an environment for victims to safely approach the facilitator.
Al country reports/visits
Reports
■ Myanmar: Justice on trial (AI Index; ASA 16/019/2003)
•	Myanmar: Violent attack on political party members - Independent investigation must take place (Al Index: ASA 16/028/2003)
•	Myanmar: Amnesty International's second visit to Myanmar-Official statement (Al Index; ASA 16/037/2003)
Visits
During Al's first ever visits to Myanmar in January and February, delegates met government officials, political prisoners and members of civil society. During a longer visit in December, Al delegates carried out research into political imprisonment and the administration of justice, interviewing 35 political prisoners in three prisons.
Amnesty International Report 2004
177
