CONGO
(DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OFTHE)
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
Head of state and government: Joseph Kabila
Death penalty: retentionist
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed
Following extended peace negotiations, a transitional government of national unity was sv/orn in, comprising representatives of the former government, major armed groups and civil society. In practice, however, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) remained underthe fragmented control of different armed forces. Conflict and grave human rights abuses continued in eastern DRC. Abuses in the east included mass unlawful killings of civilians, rape and the extensive use of child soldiers. Torture, arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions persisted throughout the country. Death sentences continued to be passed and executions resumed. By the end of 2003 around 3.4 million people remained internally displaced, in many cases in areas inaccessible to humanitarian assistance.
Background
A plan for a power-sharing coalition government, to end the conflict since 1998 that has claimed an estimated three million lives, was agreed in December 2002 in Pretoria, South Africa, in peace talks between the Kinshasa government and rebel and unarmed opposition groups. In July 2003 a transitional government led by President Kabila was established. Four Vice-Presidents were drawn from the former government, the unarmed political opposition and the two major armed political groups, the Mouvement pour la libération du Congo (MLC), Movement for the Liberation of the Congo, and the Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-Goma (RCD-Goma), Congolese Rally for Democracy-Goma. Ministerial posts were appointed from these groups, other armed groups and civil society, in October, the UN Special Rapporteur on the DRC noted that individuals involved in mass human rights violations had been appointed to the government.
Amnesty International Report 2004
27
AFRICA
The transitional government was mandated under the peace accord to hold free and fair national elections within 24 months and to form a unified national army. It must disarm, demobilize and reintegrate into civilian life scores of thousands of combatants who will not be integrated in the new army. A joint military command was established, but the armed groups continued to control large areas of the country.
The transitional Constitution established a number of civil institutions to support progress towards democracy, including a National Human Rights Observatory and a Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Both institutions lacked sufficient independence, proper resources and a clear mandate. One individual suspected of involvement in human rights abuses was appointed to the executive committee of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
In eastern DRC, mass killings took place in May in Ituri district of Oriental province, where antagonism between the Hema and Lendu ethnic groups since 1999 had been manipulated by armed political groups and Ugandan government forces for political and economic gain, in May, as the situation deteriorated, the UN authorized the deployment oían Interim Emergency Multinational Force (lEMF) to Bunia, capital of Ituri. The Force largely restored security inside the town, but did not deploy to surrounding areas where killings continued. It withdrew in September and was replaced by a reinforced brigade of peace-keepers from the UN Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). By the year's end the brigade had begun to deploy outside Bunia.
On 28 July the UN Security Council authorized MONUC forces to use "all necessary means" to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence in Ituri district and the Kivu provinces, and imposed an arms embargo on the same areas.
Human rights abuses in other crisis zones, notably in North- and South-Kivu provinces, continued at a high level, despite the installation of the new government. Widespread sexual violence, unlawful killings of civilians and recruitment of children into armed forces persisted. A redeployment of MONUC forces to the Kivu provinces was planned but not substantially implemented by the end of 2003. MONUC troops in the DRC numbered around 10.500 by the end of 2003,4,800 of them deployed in Ituri.
Impunity for the perpetrators of human rights abuses remained widespread. The European Union and UN took steps towards rebuilding and reforming the judicial system, which included a review by international and national experts. In July the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court indicated that his office would undertake a preliminary examination of alleged atrocities in Ituri.
Exploitation of natural and economic resources continued to drive the conflict. In October the UN Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the DRC submitted its final report to the UN Security Council. Previous reports had named a number of international
companies as engaged in resource exploitation that contributed to funding the DRC conflict. The final report referred 40 companies for further investigation by their own governments. Part of the report was not made public and allegedly accused Rwanda and Uganda of continued exploitation in the DRC and of breaking the arms embargo. The Panel was disbanded at the end of October. The majority of its recommendations remained unimpiemented. Reports continued of Rwandese and Ugandan involvement in eastern DRC after their forces had officially withdrawn, allegations denied by both governments.
Unlawful killings
Ituri
Ituri district saw a dramatic escalation of violence. In March Ugandan government forces seized control of Bunia and other areas after dislodging the Hema-dominated armed group, the Union des patriotes congolais (.UPC). Union of Congolese Patriots, their former allies. The fighting in Bunia claimed many civilian lives.
On 6 May Ugandan government forces withdrew from Ituri. Immediately afterwards, inter-ethnic killings of civilians by Lendu and Hema militia or the UPC resulted in more than 400 reported deaths in Bunia and further killings outside the town, including of two MONUC observers in Mongbwalu. MONUC forces present did not protect civilians adequately The arrival of the lEMF in June and a reinforced MONUC brigade in September calmed the situation in Bunia, although insecurity persisted for the remainder of the year.
Massacres of civilians, however, continued in other areas of Ituri. Most of the several hundred killed were women and children, attacked with machetes, homemade weapons and small arms. Hundreds of thousands fled the violence, and at the year's end were internally displaced, often inaccessible to humanitarian aid because of continuing violence, or living as refugees in precarious circumstances. Q Massacre sites included Nizi, where 22 civilians were killed on 7 July; Tchomia, where over 300 people were reported killed on 31 May and at least 80 on 15 July; Fataki, where at least 60 were killed in July and early August; and Katshele, where on 6 October 65 civilians were kil led, 42 of them reported to be children. Mambasa
In February the MLC. faced with international condemnation, tried 27 soldiers by military court for their part in large-scale killings, torture, including rapes, and other abuses by MLC and RCD-National forces in and around Mambasa, in Oriental province, in late 2002. However, by the end of the year, many of the soldiers had reportedly been released. The victims were mainly from the Nande ethnic group, who were targeted for their presumed support of a rival armed group, the Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-Mouvement de libération (RCD-\Al). RCD-Liberation Movement, and the Twa community. South-Kivu
In South-Kivu province, scores of unarmed civilians were killed in fighting between various armed groups or
3 0
Amnesty International Report 2004
AFRICA
in unlawful killings by all the forces involved. The fighting created massive waves of displacement. Combatants extensively looted and destroyed homes, schools, medical and nutritional centres, and religious institutions.
In the Ruzizi plain, they committed systematic abuses against civilians they accused of supporting the "enemy". In October an agreement to cease hostilities between the Congolese mayi-mayi miUxia and the RCD-Goma was signed after mediation by MONUC.
The Hauts-Plateaux region, home to a large Banyamulenge (Congolese Tutsi) population, was the scene of a continuing rebellion by a former RCD-Goma commander. RCD-Goma forces struggled to control the rebellion and reportedly used excessive, indiscriminate violence against civilians, particularly Banyamulenge. Large numbers of civilians were killed in the fighting, and up to 30,000 were displaced. Q In April scores of unarmed civilians were reported to have been killed in Uvira, Walungu and Bukavu in fighting between the RCD-Goma and mayi-mayi.
Child soldiers
All armed forces in the DRC used children as soldiers. In the east, armed political groups actively recruited children, who reportedly constituted more than 40 per cent of their armed forces in some instances. Child soldiers, boys and girls, sometimes as young as seven, were typically subjected to ill-treatment during their training; in some camps, children died from the harsh conditions. They were often sent into combat or used as sex slaves. Some were forced to kill their own families; others were made to engage in cannibalistic or sexual acts with enemy corpses. Girl soldiers were raped and some died as a result. Child soldiers detained for breaches of discipline were tortured and ill-treated.
None of the commitments to demobilize children given by the various armed forces proved genuine, and little effort was made to support reintegration of former child soldiers into civilian life. In the east, the small numbers of children who were officially demobilized were at constant risk of re-recruitment. During visits to the DRC. AI delegates heard testimony from former child soldiers of the torture, ill-treatment and other abuse of child soldiers by combatants. Q A child soldier, recruited at the age of 13 by the RCD-Goma, lost the use of his legs as a result of beatings to his spine in Mushaki training camp, North-Kivu province.
Q A child soldier, aged 12, who was first forcibly recruited aged seven, witnessed fighters cutting off his commander's head in fighting in Ituri. The boy was wounded in the arm and was not given proper treatment for his injury or trauma. Q A former child soldier from South-Kivu, recruited when she was 12 by the RCD-Goma, was repeatedly beaten, whipped and raped by other soldiers. She had a baby as a result of these rapes.
Violence against women
Sexual violence against women of all ages, including very young girls, was used as a weapon of war by most
of the forces involved in the conflict. In many cases rape was followed by the deliberate wounding or killing of the victim. Thousands of women and girls were abducted and forced to remain with armed groups as sexual slaves. The prevalence of HIV/AIDS among combatants added to the trauma and social stigma faced by these women, who feared being ostracized by their families or communities. Medical and psychological treatment appropriate to the needs of the victims was rare. Leaders of armed groups have taken few meaningful steps to protect women and girls against rape by their fighters, and few of those responsible have been brought to justice. Q In South-Kivu, the UN estimated that some 5,000 women had been raped between October 2002 and February 2003, an average of 40 a day. Q On (6 May a soldier forced his way into the house of Kavira Muraulu, from Mangangu near Beni, North-Kivu, and raped her. After reporting the rape to the district governor, she was attacked again at her home by the alleged rapist and other soldiers, who beat her and stabbed her with a bayonet.
Torture and illegal detention
People suspected of links with opposing armed political groups were targeted for torture and illegal detention. Human rights defenders and journalists engaged in legitimate investigation and criticism were also beaten, threatened and unlawfully detained because of their reporting on the human rights situation.
Torture techniques typically included systematic beatings or whippings of detainees, stabbing with bayonets or electric shocks. Torture was facilitated by the widespread use of private and unofficial detention centres - including underground pits (cachots souterrains), freight containers and the homes of security officials—particularly in areas of eastern DRC under the control of armed political groups.
Arbitrary detentions remained frequent across the DRC and virtually none of those detained were known to have had their arrest ordered or reviewed by an independent judicial official. Many spent long periods in detention without charge or trial. Q Two men, Paul Mbonabihama and Ndibwami Nyanga, died as a result of torture in RCD-Goma detention in Bunagana, North-Kivu province, in January. At least three other men were also tortured. They had a hot iron pressed on their backs and heavy weights attached to their testicles, and were suspended upside-down for long periods. A woman detainee reportedly had gunpowder set alight close to her breasts and her thumbnails ripped out. No action was taken against the perpetrators. Q Donatien Kisangani Mukatamwina, a member of the non-governmental human rights organization Solidarité-Echange pour le Développement Intégral, Solidarity-Exchange for Integrated Development, based in Uvira, South-Kivu, was arrested by the RCD-Goma in June. RCD-Goma officials detained him without charge for 13 days on the pretext that he was linked to the mayi-mayi, and allegedly beat and threatened to kill him.
Amnesty International Report 2004
27
AFRICA
Q Human rights defender N'sii Luanda Shandwe was released on 26 January, having spent nine months as a prisoner of conscience at the Centre pénitentiaire et de rééducation de Kinshasa, Kinshasa Penitentiary and Re-education Centre. He was detained because of his human rights activism, but was not formally charged with a criminal offence.
Death penalty
On 7 January, 15 people were executed in secret in Kinshasa, the first executions known to have taken place since December 2000 and the first following the government's suspension in September 2002 of a moratorium on the death penalty. The 15 detainees were reportedly executed at a military camp close to Kinshasa's international airport, and the bodies were buried in a common grave nearby.
The Military Court, which had conducted unfair trials and sentenced to death large numbers of people, including civilians, was abolished by presidential decree in April. Other courts continued to sentence prisoners to death.
Al country reports/visits Reports
•	Democratic Republic of the Congo: On the precipice - The deepening human rights and humanitarian crisis in Ituri (AI Index: AFR 62/006/2003)
•	Democratic Republic of the Congo: "Our brothers who help kill us" - Economic exploitation and human rights abuses in the east (Ai Index: AFR 62/010/2003)
•	Democratic Republic of the Congo: Ituri - How many more have to die? (Al Index: AFR 62/030/2003)
•	Democratic Republic of the Congo; Ituri - A need for protection, athirstfor justice (AI Index: AFR 62/032/2003)
•	Democratic Republic of the Congo: Children at war (Al Index; AFR 62/034/2003)
•	Democratic Republic of the Congo; Addressing the present and buildinga future (Al Index; AFR 62/050/2003)
Visits
In January, February and March Al delegates visited Kinshasa, Goma in North-Kivu, and Bukavu and Uvira in South-Kivu- In July Al delegates visited Bunia and Beni in Ituri province and western Uganda. In October Al's Secretary General travelled to the DRC, Rwanda and Uganda to meet senior government and UN officials, survivors of human rights abuses, human rights activists and international humanitarian agencies.
