MALAYSIA
MALAYSIA
Head of state: RajaTuanku Syed Sirajuddin
Head of government: Abdullah Ahmad Badawt
(replaced Mahathir Mohamad in October)
Death penalty: retentionist
UN Women's Convention: ratified with reservations
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: notsigned
Six opposition activists were released after two years in detention without trial under the Internal Security Act (ISA). Scores of suspected Islamist activists were arrested under the ISA. Attempts to legally challenge the alleged grounds for ISA detentions remained ineffective. Opposition figures, journalists, students and other members of civil society had their rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly curtailed through the selective application of an array of restrictive laws. Reports of unlawful killings, torture and ill-treatment of criminal siispects by police continued. Undocumented migrant workers, asylum-seekers and others were at risk of ill-treatment and poor conditions while detained in camps prior to deportation. At least seven people were sentenced to death. Hundreds of convicted prisoners, including undocumented migrant workers and asylum-seekers, were caned.
Background
The United Malay National Organization (UMNO)-led Barisan NasionaKi^ationai Front) ruling coalition continued to dominate a stable political scene. In October Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad retired after 22 years in office. He was replaced by his deputy Abdullah Ahmad Badawi.
The government continued to justify detention without trial under the ISA as a means to counter the threat of "terrorism". It also put before parliament additional "anti-terrorism" measures, including amendments to the Anti-Money Laundering Act, which were passed in November, and amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code giving public prosecutors additional investigative powers in "terrorism"-related cases. In November the Penal Code was amended to impose criminal penalties, including imprisonment of up to 30 years, on lawyers, accountants and others aiding or facilitating "terrorist" activities. There were concerns about the broad definition of "terrorist" acts in the amendments, and about the extension of capital punishment to "terrorist" acts resulting in deaths.
Detention without trial under the ISA
The ISA allows detention without trial for up to two years, renewable indefinitely, of any person considered by the authorities to be a potential threat to national security or public order. Those arrested are at risk of aggressive interrogation methods, at times amounting to ill-treatment or torture, particularly during an initial
Amnesty International Report 2004
171
ASIA/PACIFIC
6o-day incommunicado investigation period. In April the National Human Rights Commission iSuhakam) issued a report recommending the repeal of the ISA and its replacement by a comprehensive law balancing national security concerns and respect for human rights. Legal safeguards proposed by Suhakam included the provision of precisely defined offences, limited periods of custodial investigation, the right of effective judicial review, and a guarantee that detainees be charged or released after a maximum detention period of three months. The government had not responded to the recommendations by the end of the year.
Opposition activists
Injune the Minister of Home Affairs chose not to renew the two-year ISA detention orders of six reformasi (reform) activists, most of them leading members of the opposition PartiKeadilan Nasional(PKH). National Justice Party. They were detained in 2001 for allegedly planning to overthrow the government by "militant" means, including by organizing mass demonstrations. No evidence to support the allegations was made public. The detainees -Saari Sungib, Tian Chua, Hishamuddin Rais, Mohamad Ezam Mohamad Nor, Badrul Amin Baharom and Lokman Noor Adam - who were all prisoners of conscience, were released without ISA orders restricting their freedom of expression or movement. However, most of them continued to face criminal proceedings related to charges filed previously under other restrictive laws.
Alleged Islamist activists
Scores of people were reportedly arrested under the ISA for alleged involvement in domestic or regional Islamist "extremist" groups including Kumpulan Mujahidin Malaysia (KMM), Malaysia Mujahldin Group, and a southeast Asian network Jemaah Islamiah (JI) reportedly linked to the 2002 Bali bombings and al-Qa 'ida. A total of at least 90 alleged members of these groups had reportedly been issued ISA detention orders since 2000.
Attempts by ISA detainees to challenge the lawfulness and alleged reasons for their arrest continued to prove ineffective. In July, Ahmad Yani Ismail and Abdul Samad Shukri Mohamad, arrested in 2001 for alleged membership of JI, filed habeas corpus applications before the Kuala Lumpur High Court on the grounds that their arrest and detention had been illegal and conducted in bad faith. Hopes for their release were undermined in August by a ruling of the Federal Court (Malaysia's highest court) in a similar ISA habeas corpus petition. The Federal Court, on the basis that the courts should not review the decisions of the executive in matters of national security, upheld an appeal by the Attorney Genera! against a High Court order in 2002 to release ISA detainee Nasharuddin Nasir. The High Court had found that the police had failed to provide any evidence to support claims that he was a member of the KMM. On his release Nasharuddin Nasir was immediately rearrested under the ISA. Q Thirteen students, aged between 17 and 21, were detained under the ISA in September immediately after
being deported from Pakistan where they attended universities- Police stated they wished to investigate suspected links with JI or al-Oa'ida. In December, five of those detained were given two-year ISA detention orders- The remainder were released, four of them with restriction orders curtailing their freedom of movement.
Selective application of restrictive legislation
Opposition figures, journalists and other members of civil society remained at risk of politically motivated prosecutions and application of legislation imposing unjustified restrictions on their rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly. In August 5u/?a/cam recommended a review and repeal of sections of the Official Secrets Act (OSA) and the Printing Presses and Publications Act (PPPA) to ensure greater protection of freedom of expression and information. The government had not responded by the end of the year.
Q In a blow to the work of human rights defenders, Irene Fernandez, the director of the women's nongovernmental organization (NGO) Tenaganita, was convicted in October under the PPPA for "maliciously publishing false news". Sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment, she remained free on bail pending the outcome of an appeal. The charges against her were filed in 1996 following Tenaganlta's release of a report highlighting alleged patterns of ill-treatment, abuse and deaths from preventable diseases in camps for detained migrant workers, Q The granting of police permits for public assemblies, and the policing of demonstrations, remained inconsistent. In March, two separate rallies opposing war in Iraq took place in Kuala Lumpur. The larger demonstration, organized by government-backed groups, was facilitated by police. A smaller demonstration, organized by opposition parties, was blocked by police, who ordered participants to disperse. When the demonstrators refused, police fired tear gas and arrested 12 people. In August the NGO All Women's Action Society lodged a complaint with Suhakam against the rejection by the police, for "security reasons", of their application to hold a rally in July to protest against an increased incidence of rape's In July the trial resumed of seven students arrested in 2001 and charged with illegal assembly for allegedly participating in a peaceful anti-ISA demonstration. Under the Police Act, assemblies of more than three people without police permission are prohibited. The students faced up to a year's imprisonment and remained suspended from their colleges. Q An ISA detention order against PKN youth leader Mohamad Ezam Mohamad Nor expired in June. However, he was not immediately released because of his 2002 conviction under the OSA for reading out at a '999 press conference documents regarding investigations by the Anti-Corruption Agency into senior government ministers. He was subsequently released on bail, pending his appeal against the OSA conviction.
172
Amnesty International Report 2004	172
ASIA/PACIFIC
Q In January police searched the offices of the independent on-line news service Malaysiakini and confiscated computers. The raid followed a complaint lodged by UMNO's youth branch that a letter carried on the website that questioned affirmative action in favour of Malays was seditious. Publication of the news service was disrupted, but no charges under the Sedition Act had been filed by the end of the year. Q In April the Court of Appeal rejected the appeal of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim against a nine-y.ear prison sentence for sodomy imposed in 2000, and turned down his bail application. The Court also rejected the appeal of Anwar Ibrahim's co-accused, Sukma Darmawan Sasmitaat Madja, revoked his bail and ordered him to begin serving a six-year prison sentence and receive four strokes of the cane. Al believes that these prosecutions were politically motivated and that the trials failed to meet international standards of fairness. The organization considers that Sukma Darmawan was prosecuted solely to secure a conviction against Anwar Ibrahim, and is gravely concerned that Sukma Darmawan's complaints of ill-treatment, threats and sexual humiliation by police to force a confession have not been fully and independently investigated, and that the suspected perpetrators have not been held to account. Both men are prisoners of conscience.
Treatment of migrant workers and asylum-seekers
Reports of ill-treatment in detention camps for undocumented migrant workers and asylum-seekers continued. There were concerns that conditions, including provision of adequate medical care, failed to meet international standards. Asylum-seekers and refugees remained at risk of detention and forced deportation. In August police erected roadblocks around the Kuala Lumpur office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and arrested individuals, mostly from Myanmar and Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam in Indonesia, seeking to lodge asylum claims. They detained over 235 people and transferred them to detention camps. UNHCR expressed alarm at this "unprecedented action" and urged the authorities to release those who were detained and to respect the principle of non-refoulement However, at least 170 of those detained were reported to have been deported by the end of the year. In November, eight detained asylum-seekers were reportedly ill-treated physically and psychologically after refusing to return "voluntarily".
Police brutality and deaths in custody
There were repeated reports of excessive use of force and unlawful killings during arrests of ordinary criminal suspects by police, and of assaults, ill-ireatment and lack of adequate medical care by police and prison staff in police cells and Jails. In October, the Home Ministry announced an increase in the average number of deaths in custody from 19 to 26 per month in the first half of the year.
O Injuly, HoKwai See, a coconut trader arrested on suspicion of drugs offences, died in prison a week after
his arrest. He had been held for most of the week in police cells. Attempts by his family to challenge initial post-mortem findings after seeing bruises on his body were unsuccessful.
In October, the Home Ministry revealed that 27 people had been shot dead by police since January. Human rights groups said that many of the killings were unlawful.
Q In October police shot dead three men whom they claimed were known robbers who had opened fire after reportedly refusing to surrender. The family of 19-year-old V, Vikenes, one of those killed, disputed this version of events and claimed that bruises suggested that he had been assaulted before being shot. They lodged a complaint against police for allegedly suppressing evidence.
Death penalty and corporal punishment
At least seven people were sentenced to death, mostly for drug trafficking offences. Caning, a cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment, was carried out throughout the year as an additional punishment to imprisonment. Hundreds of migrant workers, including asylum-seekers, found guilty of breaches of thejmmigration Act were also caned. In January Suhakam recommended that the mandatory penalty of caning for illegal immigrants be reviewed.
Al country reports/visits
Visits
Al delegates visited Malaysia in May and September.
Amnesty International Report 2004
173
