BULGARIA
Two prisoners of conscience were tried and sentenced for espionage but later released. A number of ethnic Turks remained imprisoned until late December in connection with their resistance to the enforced assimilation of the ethnic Turkish minority from 1984 to 1989. A moratorium on executions was introduced.
In January an amnesty affecting 31 people was announced for those imprisoned after 1 January 1984 under specified articles of the criminal code for opposing the assimilation campaign against the ethnic Turkish minority (see Amnesty International Reports 1986 to 1990). The assimilation campaign was officially recognized as having been illegal, although no prosecutions for the attendant large-scale human rights abuses, including loss of life, were undertaken (see Amnesty International Report 1990}. In March parliament passed legislation which allowed ethnic Turks and other Bulgarian Muslims, whose names had been forcibly changed in past assimilation campaigns, to use their
original names. Also in March, legislation was introduced which reorganized the judicial system and guaranteed the right to defence in all phases of the legal process.
Elections held in June to a new parliament, the Grand National Assembly (gna), an assembly empowered to rewrite the Constitution, were won by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (bsp) - the former Communist Party - with 211 of the 400 seats. The main opposition, the Union of Democratic Forces (udf), won 144 seats. In July President Petar Mladenov resigned after it was revealed that he had suggested calling in tanks to disperse anti-government protesters in December 1989. In August the gna elected udf leader Zhelyu Zhelev President. In September President Zhelev pardoned 314 prisoners, including 17 ethnic Turks sentenced for espionage during the assimilation campaign. In November, following major demonstrations and strikes, the bsp government led by Prime Minister Andrey Lukanov resigned. In December a coalition caretaker government was appointed until new elections could be held.
In late December another amnesty was annoimced for all those sentenced for "treason and espionage". All remaining detainees convicted of political offences were subsequently released.
After the January amnesty over 60 ethnic Turks remained imprisoned for opposing the assimilation campaign, many of them having been convicted of espionage under Article 104 of the criminal code. Some of these prisoners had reportedly been charged with espionage after they attempted to give foreign observers information about human rights abuses which had occurred during the assimilation campaign.
In Februeiry an ethnic Turkish medical doctor, Enver Ahmedov Hatibov (whose "Bulgarian" name was Belchin Perunov Perunov), was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment under Article 104. He was accused of identifying undercover agents of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to two Turkish citizens, including Yusuf Mutlu, an ethnic Turk who emigrated from Bulgaria to Turkey in 1978. The ministry had been responsible for human rights abuses against the ethnic Turkish minority during the assimilation campaign. Yusuf Mutlu was arrested while on a trip to Bulgaria. He was tried with Enver Hatibov and
BULGARI/VBURKINA FASO
sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment. However, both were released early; Enver Hati-bov was freed in May and Yusuf Mutlu in September. Early releases of ethnic Turks imprisoned for opposing the assimilation campaign occurred throughout the year.
In July the gna introduced a moratorium on executions. In August President Zhelev commuted the sentences of the 11 people on death row to 30 years' imprisonment. They had all been convicted of murder. No executions were carried out in 1990.
In February an Amnesty International delegation visited the country and discussed its concerns with officials in the Foreign Ministry. The organization called for the release of Enver Hatibov and Yusuf Mutlu, and throughout the year sought further information on ethnic Turks imprisoned during the assimilation campaign. The Bulgarian Government made information available on a number of cases. Amnesty International called for a civilian, non-punitive alternative service to be introduced for conscientious objectors to military service. It welcomed the moratorium on the death penalty and called on the gna to abolish it completely.
