AUSTRIA
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody continued. Those who made criminal complaints about ill-treat-ment risked criminal prosecution or investigation. Two conscientious objectors to military service served prison sentences; both were considered prisoners of conscience.
In June the government announced the implementation of interim measures to combat ill-treatment of detainees held in police custody. It said the measures included improved training of police officers, unannounced visits by police doctors to police stations to make on-the-spot examinations of detainees, the distribution to every detainee of a paper outlining the detainee's rights, and the establishment of an expert panel to examine proposals to prevent ill-treatment.
The Interior Minister stated in January that between 1984 and 1989 he had received 2,622 allegations of ill-treatment
AUSTRIA
by the police, of which 1.142 had resulted in criminal complaints against officers leading to 33 convictions, He said that disciplinary investigations were carried out concerning 120 officers and disciplinary measures were taken against 26 of them.
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody continued. A number of the alleged victims were reluctant to make complaints, or allow their names to be ublished, for fear of prosecution for defamation.
An 18-year-old Yugoslav was arrested on 16 January on suspicion of attempted theft and taken to Himberg police station for interrogation. He alleged that five or six police officers made him undress, secured his hands behind his back, pushed sharp objects under his fingernails, burned him with a cigarette and beat his genitals with a ruler. He said that this treatment lasted for several hours and that as a result he agreed to sign a confession.
Three days later the investigating judge at the Vienna Juvenile Court ordered a medical examination which was carried out the same day. Doctors noted six sec-ond-to-third-degree burns on the man's back and signs of bleeding beneath the nails on two fingers of his left hand. A bruise and swelling were found on his penis, which the doctors said were the effects of being beaten with a blunt instrument. The doctors found that the injuries were at least three days old and could have occurred while he was held in police custody. A police officer testified that the man had not had these injuries when he arrived at the police station.
The Vienna Juvenile Court rejected the man's signed confession because it regarded the allegations of torture as a
"possibility [which] could not be excluded". As there was no evidence apart from the confession, the man was convicted only of those offences to which he admitted in open court.
The court also refused to accept the Public Procurator's application to extend the indictment to include the accusation that the man had committed "defamation" by making the allegations of torture. However, the Public Procurator was allowed to pursue this accusation in separate proceedings: the prosecution was later withdrawn owing to lack of evidence. An investigation started by the Public Procurator into the allegations of torture had not been concluded by the end of the year.
In March the Vienna Public Procurator dismissed a criminal complaint lodged by Mustafa Ali against the police about his ill-treatment in police custody in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). His complaint to the Constitutional Court had not been heard by the end of the year.
A 19-year-old woman lodged a formal complaint in June about sexual acts forced upon her at the Karlsplatz police station in Vienna in May. The woman said that she had been detained by two police officers, who forced her to have oral sex with them at the police post and "rewarded" her with drugs in the form of tablets. A third officer was said to have known that the sexual assault was taking place, but failed to intervene. The two police officers were suspended from duty, and the officer who failed to intervene faced disciplinary charges.
Martin Dengscherz and Christian Schwarz served prison sentences for refusing to perform military service on conscientious grounds. The Vienna Higher Alternative Service Commission rejected their applications to be recognized as conscientious objectors, on the grounds that they had not presented their beliefs in a credible manner. Both men were subsequently convicted of refusing to perform military service. Christian Schwarz was released from prison in July after serving a three-month sentence and Martin Dengscherz was released in November after serving a one-month prison sentence.
In January Amnesty International published a report, Austria: Torture and Ill-treatment, which focused on allegations of unwarranted and deliberate physical violence, sometimes amounting to torture.
AUSTRIA/BAHAMAS/BAHRAIN
in police custody. The organization pressed for additional safeguards during the initial detention period, an effective and impartial complaints mechanism, and full implementation of the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture. The organization called on the government to ensure that complainants were not discouraged from reporting police abuse through fear of being charged with a criminal offence.
The government responded inter alia that a decree of September 1989 required allegations of police ill-treatment to be promptly investigated by a judge unless they were manifestly unfounded. The decree also contained guidelines for public procurators and courts on observing the un Convention against Torture's prohibition of the use of evidence obtained through torture. The government said that the lodging of counter-complaints, such as defamation, was the exception rather than the rule.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of both prisoners of conscience.
