VENEZUELA
Prisoners were allegedly tortured and ill-treated. At least one "disappearance" was reported. There were new reports of arbitrary kilhngs by police officers, particularly in poor urban neighbourhoods. Investigations into human rights abuses in previous years continued to make little progress. The bodies of several people reportedly killed by the security forces in 1989 were exhumed fi'om an immarked mass grave.
Demonstrations took place throughout the year in response to the government's
economic policies. In February one person, Italo Alberto Vargas, was fatally wounded and others were injured during clashes between police and trade union demonstrators in Caracas. Approximately 39,000 prisoners all over the country went on hunger-strike in March demanding better prison conditions and an end to overcrowding. Over 200 prisoners who were involved in organizing the hunger-strike were sent in April to the remote jungle camp of El Dorado, where conditions were reportedly harsh. At the end of July President Carlos Andrés Pérez announced an increase in public transport fares and petrol prices, which led to widespread protests, with some outbreaks of violence. Hundreds of people who had reportedly not engaged in violence suffered arbitrary arrest, and scores were injured by the security forces in the context of such demonstrations.
In July Venezuela signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty. In September Venezuela signed the protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights to abolish the death penalty.
Amilcar Rodriguez, a political prisoner, and at least nine other detainees allegedly suffered torture or ill-treatment during and after their transfer from different prisons to the remote jungle prison camp of El Dorado. The prisoners reported that following transfer to the prison camp, prison wardens beat them with peinillas, large blunted sabres, which were covered with excrement so that the resulting wounds would become infected. Amilcar Rodriguez was allegedly tortured, in the presence of two medical doctors, with electric shocks, blows with a baseball bat. and kicks. Ten prisoners, including Amilcar Rodriguez, were transferred to another prison in the state of Guárico in August, following a visit to El Dorado by three state attorneys and a forensic doctor who reportedly found the prisoners in poor physical condition.
At least one person "disappeared" after detention by members of the security forces. Fidel José Jiménez Fuentes was reportedly detained in March by the state police in Anzoátegui and taken to the local police station. His father went to the police station two days later and was told that his son was not being held there. The police
VENEZUELA
subsequently said that Fidel Jiménez had been abandoned in a remote area because he had suffered a nervous breakdown. He was still missing at the end of the yeeir. Seven police officers were arrested and accused of "abandoning a disabled person in a solitary place". A few days later, however, a judge ordered the seven to be released pending trial. The Attorney General's Office appealed against this decision.
There were renewed reports of arbitrary and unprovoked killings by police officers, particularly in the poor urban neighbourhoods of Caracas or in small provincial towns. José Gregorio Díaz, aged 15, and Jefferson Padilla, aged 16, were reportedly abducted in Caracas in broad daylight by officers from the Policía Metropolitana, metropolitan police, in January. Their bodies were found 13 days later. Both youths had been shot in the head. Four police officers were charged with the murders.
In June Pedro Muñoz Vásquez was intercepted in the streets of Caracas by three metropolitan police officers. According to witnesses, he was held by two of the officers while the third shot him at close range. A judge ordered the exhumation of Pedro Muñoz Vásquez's body in August and an autopsy confirmed the cause and manner of death reported by the witnesses. Arrest orders against the three officers were subsequently issued. No further information about the case was known at the end of the year.
Most investigations by military and civilian courts into alleged arbitrary killings by police and military personnel during previous years continued to make little progress. In June, however, the Supreme Court upheld the decision of a lower military court to bring charges against 19 members of a military and police patrol allegedly responsible for the deliberate killing of 14 fishermen in El Amparo in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). All 19 had been briefly detained in 1989, until the military court of appeal dropped the charges against them (see Amnesty International Report 1990). In August, following the Supreme Court's decision to reinstate charges, 15 of them were rearrested. In November it was announced that President Pérez - in his capacity as commander-in-chief of the armed forces - had ordered the investigations into this case to continue. The trial had not concluded by the end of the year.
Most complaints of alleged human rights abuses committed during the February to March 1989 protests remained before the military courts (see Amnesty International Report 1990). No new prosecutions or convictions were reported in connection with these cases. In November, however, a civilian judge investigating irregularities in the disposal of the bodies of many of those killed in Caracas during the 1989 protests ordered the exhumation of unmarked mass graves believed to contain the remains of victims.
Two police officers charged with killing two students - Yulimar Reyes and Juan Carlos Celis Pérez - during the February
1989	protests, were released in May pending trial after the charges against them were reduced from murder to manslaughter. Their trials were continuing at the end of the year.
In September criminal charges were brought against 16 members of the Policía Técnica Judicial (ptj), criminal investigations police, accused of torturing six detainees in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). One of the detainees, Nelson Arvelo Ceballo, who was unconditionally released in 1989, sought refuge in the Attorney General's Office in March
1990	following a series of threats ft'om members of the ptf. Nelson Arvelo Ceballo died in August; the police said he was killed in a road accident. His family claimed that his body appeared to have a bullet wound in the head. The state attorney in charge of the case ordered the exhumation of the body to determine the cause of death, but this had not been done by the end of the year.
In March Amnesty International published a report, Venezuela: Reports of Arbitrary Killings and Torture: February/March 1989, which reiterated concerns expressed in a letter sent to President Pérez in January. The organization called for the publication of the official list of those who had died in the 1989 protests. It also called for the exhumation of all bodies buried in common graves, and requested information about any measures taken to prevent further arbitrary killings and ill-treatment. The government acknowledged Amnesty International's letter but no substantive reply was received. In March Amnesty International wrote to the President requesting information about the death of Italo Alberto Vargas following a trade
VENEZUELA/VIET NAM
union demonstration in February; no response was received. In November a forensic anthropologist visited the country on behalf of Amnesty International to monitor the exhumation of unmarked graves in Caracas reportedly containing the remains of several of those killed in February and March 1989.
