UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
233
The ussr parliament continued to implement reforms aimed at bringing some laws closer to international standards on human rights. The number of known prisoners of conscience continued to drop, as some 14 benefited from early release and fewer arrests were reported. At the end of the year at least 30 known or suspected prisoners of conscience were believed to be imprisoned, or forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals. Hundreds of people seeking to exercise their human rights were detained for short periods during the year. Some alleged that they were ill-treated. Proposals to restrict the death penalty, first published in 1988, had still not come before parliament. Fifty-five death sentences came to light and at least four people were executed. At least one person seeking political asylum was forcibly repatriated.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
In March Mikhail Gorbachev was elected by parliament to the newly created post of executive President of the ussr. Elections in a number of union republics reflected a desire for increased autonomy; by the end of the year all 15 republics had passed declarations of sovereignty or independence. Some asserted the primacy of their laws over those of the ussr. The ussr Constitution was amended to remove the Communist Party's monopoly on power. Hundreds of people were killed in the southern republics as violence continued between ethnic and national groups, and troops were deployed to maintain order.
The ussr parliament continued to implement reforms intended to give Soviet citizens more of the human rights guaranteed by intemational standards. In January a law establishing a Committee for ussr Constitutional Supervision came into force. It appeared to provide, for the first time, a mechanism for systematically translating international standards into domestic law.
Religious believers were granted new rights under a Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations which came into force in October. The law enabled religious groups to apply to become legal entities, which could then own property, establish religious and charitable institutions and engage in publishing, printing and manufacturing activity. The law also removed the requirement that congregations register (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
At least 14 prisoners of conscience benefited from early release. They included Bohdan Klymchak, imprisoned since 1978 for trying to leave the country without official permission and possessing "anti-Soviet" literature. He was released from his 20-year sentence of imprisonment and intemal exile in October. Fewer arrests of prisoners of conscience were reported than in 1989. At least 30 people were believed still imprisoned, or forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals, at the end of the year for peacefully exercising their human rights.
Most prisoners of conscience were conscientious objectors to military service, serving up to three years' imprisonment for "evading regular call-up to active military service". At least 16 new cases of imprisoned conscientious objectors came to light during the year: almost all concemed people sentenced before 1990. They
included Vladimir Osipov from the Moldovan Republic, who was sentenced to three years' imprisonment in October 1988 for refusing his call-up papers. He had already served a three-year sentence on the same charge. Both refusals were based on his religious convictions. He was released early in November. In March the Soviet authorities gave a public assurance that they would not prosecute for "desertion" 30 Lithuanian soldiers who had left their units and had been arrested earlier that month, apparently because of their conscientious refusal to continue serving in the Soviet army. None of them appeared to have been charged with desertion by the end of the year. A number of republics adopted provisions for an alternative service for conscientious objectors. However, it was unclear how these regulations were to be applied, as the ussr authorities continued to assert the primacy of their laws, under which there is no legal provision for alternative service. In April the Estonian Republic abolished articles in its criminal code providing punishments for refusal to perform regular and refresher military service, and rehabilitated those convicted under these laws.
Hundreds of supporters of the Popular Front of Azerbaydzhan were reportedly arrested after troops moved into the republic's capital, Baku, following violent disorders in January. Many were apparently charged with "inciting racial hatred" and "organizing mass disorders". Most appeared to have been released, possibly pending trial, by the end of the year. As in other areas of ethnic conflict, a state of emergency and curfew made it difficult to obtain corroborative information on arrests and to investigate allegations that some people may have been detained for their peaceful opposition to official policies rather than for participation in violence.
Short-term detention and administrative measures (see Amnesty International Report 1990) were used against hundreds of people seeking to exercise their human rights. Valéry Terekhov, for example, was placed under "administrative arrest" for the maximum 15-day term in Febmary for carrying a placard in Leningrad calling for elections to be boycotted. Others were detained, sometimes repeatedly, for displaying nationalist symbols, distributing informal periodicals or, in one case, giving a religious sermon. Some detainees alleged
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
that they were beaten. Leonid Zelenin is said to have received injuries, including a fractured lower jaw, when beaten in police custody in Moscow. He was detained from 9 to 11 April for distributing two informal publications and copies of the usa's Constitution.
Administrative procedures were also used to forcibly confine at least six people in psychiatric hospitals on what were believed to be political grounds. Nikolay Nosik and Pyotr Rikalo in the Ukraine and Kurbanberda Karabalakov in the Turkmen-ian Republic were held for distributing leaflets for opposition political groups. Artur Shtankov from Murmansk was allegedly confined after seeking to emigrate and renouncing his Soviet citizenship. He is said to have staged a hunger-strike in protest at his confinement and forcible medical treatment At least five people believed confined in psychiatric hospitals on political grounds before 1990 were thought still held at the end of the year. They included Balazhon Boyev, a Muslim from the Tadzhik Republic, reportedly confined as a result of his religious activities. A draft law on psychiatry, said to include the principle that each compulsory confinement should be subjected to a judicial review, had not been debated in parliament by the end of the year. Existing appeal provisions introduced in 1988 had been widely criticized as inadequate (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990).
Although most known prisoners of conscience were serving their terms in less severe conditions than in previous years, those held in a corrective labour colony for political prisoners in the Urals - Perm 35 -alleged they were still subject to arbitrary punishment for continuing to express their beliefs. Prisoner of conscience Bohdan Klymchak, for example, was given a second term in the punishment cell in January after going on hunger-strike to protest against the confiscation of his mail following the visit of a usa congressman in August 1989. The congressman had apparently received prior assurances that there would be no reprisals against prisoners who spoke to him about their cases and conditions of imprisonment.
In January at least 30 Armenians were murdered in what is reported to have hee'n a pogrom in the Azerbaydzhani capital of Baku. The official Soviet news agency tass said that Azerbaydzhani police and sol-
diers took no steps to protect the victims. During the year the findings of the ussr parliamentary commission investigating the killings of civilians in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi in April 1989 became available (see Amnesty /niernaf/ona/ Report 1990). The commission found that the army had used weapons and poisonous gas against demonstrators in violation of regulations. The commission's recommendations included legislation that would clearly define the procedures for introducing a state of emergency and martial law and for deploying riot troops and police to control public order disturbances. In 1990 parliament passed laws on procedures governing a state of emergency and> on the use of Interior Ministry troops in maintaining public order.
In August a number of Somalis attempted to seek asylum in Finland. While travelling from Moscow to Helsinki, they were reportedly stopped by Soviet officials at the request of the Finnish authorities. They did not have entry visas for Finland and were returned to Moscow. However, towards the end of the year other such asylum-seekers were said to be arriving in Finland via the ussr. Also in August a Chinese military pilot seeking asylum was sent back to China.
The first known group seeking abolition of the death penalty was formed during the year, but parliament again deferred discussion of the draft Principles of Criminal Law, which would significantly restrict the scope of the death penalty (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Three death sentences were reported, all believed to have been imposed in 1989, on people who would have been exempt if the proposed changes to the criminal law had been adopted: two women and a man aged over 60. At least 52 other death sentences and four executions came to light, and a further seven people were thought to have been executed after their clemency petitions had been rejected. Between early 1987, when the authorities first announced they were reviewing the use of the death penalty, and the end of 1990, at least 159 death sentences and 49 executions were reported. Death penalty statistics remained secret, however, and the real number of death sentences and executions was probably much higher. Information given during an interview in October by the head of the ussr's parliamentary clemency body, to which all
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICSAINITED ARAB EMIRATES
death sentences are referred, suggested that on average up to 360 death sentences are passed each year. He said the clemency commission recommends commutation in only three to five per cent of these cases.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to commute all death sentences and to impose a moratorium on the death penalty. It also appealed for the immediate release of all prisoners of conscience and for the restoration of their full civil rights, and sought information on others thought likely to be prisoners of conscience. The organization continued to urge the introduction of a non-punitive civilian alternative to military service, and a fair legal procedure for applying it.
Following the events in Baku in January, Amnesty International expressed concern that local authorities reportedly condoned the killings. It urged an immediate and impartial investigation into these allegations, and that the perpetrators of the killings be identified and brought to justice. By the end of the year Amnesty International had not been able to ascertain whether such measures had been taken.
In February Amnesty International wrote to the Chairman of the Committee on ussr Constitutional Supervision, welcoming its creation as it appeared to indicate increased respect for constitutional rights and the rule of law. It urged the committee to use its powers of legislative initiative to ensure that the laws and constitutions of the ussr are brought into line with internationally recognized standards. A report published by Amnesty International in July - USSR: First Steps Towards Reform of the Criminal Justice System - assessed recent legal changes in the light of international standards on human rights.
After participating states of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe agreed at the June Conference on the Human Dimension to make death penalty statistics public. Amnesty International wrote to the ussr Minister of Justice and other officials asking what steps were being taken to make such figures available.
In September Amnesty International urged the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to ensure that no Somali asylum-seeker would be returned to Somalia without full and detailed consideration of each case and of the risks asylum-seekers faced if returned. It also asked that visa requirements not be enforced in such a way as to
obstruct asylum-seekers from seeking protection. In October it expressed concern that the Chinese pilot returned to China might face human rights violations.
