LEBANON
Hundreds of people were arbitrarily arrested by government forces and armed militias. Some may have been prisoners of conscience, but few details were available. A few were released in prisoner exchanges, but the fate of most of them was not known. Among those arrested were scores of people who reportedly "disappeared" or were tortured. Others were extrajudicially executed.
A continuing lack of central govern-
mental control, together with violent conflicts between governmental and nongovernmental forces, made it particularly difficult to obtain accurate information about human rights violations. However, all sides were believed to have carried out abuses.
General Michel Aoun, appointed as interim prime minister in September 1988 by the then outgoing president Amin Gemayel. continued to challenge the legitimacy of President Elias Hrawi's government. In October, however, General 'Aoun's predominantly Christian militia were driven from their East Beirut base by Syrian forces and Lebanese Army units. The "Green Line" dividing East and West Beirut was then dismantled, and various armed militia forces reportedly withdrew from the city.
Syrian military forces maintained control of northern Lebanon, the Beka" Valley, southern and West Beirut, and the coastal region towards Si don. In October they extended their control to East Beirut and surrounding areas previously held by General 'Aoun's forces. Israeli military forces maintained control of the so-called "security zone" along the Lebanese/Israeli border.
Parts of the countrv remained under the control of four armed militias - the Lebanese Forces (lf), a Christian militia; the mainly Shi'a Muslim Amal Movement; the predominantly Druze Progressive Socialist Party (psp), and the South Lebanon Army (sla), a Christian militia which controlled a strip of territory in the south bordering on Israel. These groups all exercised effective control over particular areas and their populations, and thus had the means and responsibility to respect human rights. Other non-govemmental
LEBANON
groups also committed human rights abuses but lacked such extensive or effective territorial control. They included Hizbullah (Party of God), Islamic Jihad and various Palestinian factions.
Government forces and armed militias arrested both combatants and civilians. Among those arrested by Syrian military forces and Syrian-sponsored militias were an estimated 200 Christian supporters of General 'Aoun. Most were military personnel arrested in October in East Beirut and its suburbs: 24 were later released but others reportedly remained in prisons in Syria and at 'Anjar detention centre in the Beka' Valley (see Syria).
Hundreds of people, including civilians, were reportedly taken prisoner during armed clashes between the lf militia and General 'Aoun's forces between January and luly. The lf was said to have captured some 600 people, mainly combatants, from General 'Aoun's forces, of whom 89 were released in July and October. The fate of the others remained unknown. In May and June, 189 lf detainees held by General 'Aoun's forces were released. A further 300 lf detainees held in East Beirut were reportedly released in October after General 'Aoun's forces were ousted by Syrian forces and Lebanese Army units. At the same time, Syrian forces reportedly freed 23 Syrians and seven Lebanese nationals who had been held in Roumieh Prison in East Beirut.
The sla continued to detain without charge or trial an estimated 300 prisoners, including youths, women and old men, in Khiam detention centre in southern Lebanon. The majority of them were Shi'a Muslims ft-om villages inside the Israeli "security zone". Some had been held for up to five years. Among those detained was Salma Salam. an interpreter for the United Nations' Norwegian battalion in southern Lebanon, who was arrested in July 1989. The reason for her detention was not disclosed.
The sla released 73 detainees held in Khiam, including 40 who were freed on 1 October. Some had been held without charge or trial for two years.
The fate and whereabouts of an estimated 625 detainees reportedly arrested by Amal in previous years remained unknown (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Many of those held were said to be members or supporters of Hizbullah. In August
Amal announced that it had arrested a self-confessed participant in the kidnapping of a us citizen. Colonel William Higgins, in 1988, and that he would stand trial. However, it was not known whether the trial had taken place.
Former detainees at Khiam alleged that they had been tortured in sla custody, including with beatings and electric shocks. Muhammad Hussain Balhus, released in November 1989 after five years' detention without trial, reportedly suffered neurological and urological disorders as a result of his torture. Murtada Amin, a doctor released in June 1988 after 28 months' detention, said he was beaten and hung upside-down during interrogation.
Both the lf and the Sla were reported to have executed prisoners. The lf was said to have executed 16 of its militiamen in February, allegedly for refusing to fight against General 'Aoun's forces. In the same month 13 Sunni Muslim detainees held by the lf were also reportedly executed. In March the sla reportedly executed one of its members who had been accused of plotting to assassinate an sla officer.
Syrian government forces and Syrian-sponsored groups reportedly carried out scores of extrajudicial executions following the ousting of General 'Aoun's forces from East Beirut in mid-October. The victims included both military personnel and civilians (see Syria). Many others were also deliberately killed, apparently for political reasons, outside the immediate context of armed conflict, but there was insufficient information to attribute responsibility for these and other apparent extrajudicial executions.
Amnesty International sought information about those detained by the contending forces in Lebanon. In October it urged President Hrawi's Government to establish an impartial inquiry into alleged extrajudicial killings of General 'Aoun's supporters by Syrian troops. The organization also urged the government to ensure the physical safety of all those held by Lebanese and Syrian government forces, and to ensure that detainees were either given a fair and prompt trial, or released. The Lebanese authorities responded in November: they strongly denied the alleged extrajudicial executions, in particular that children had been extrajudicially executed, but expressed regret at the "possible loss of life" during "military action".
