SYRIA
Thousands of suspected opponents of the government, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained under state of emergency legislation in force since 1963. The majority were held without charge or trial, some for over 20 years. Others remained in prison after the expiry of their sentences. Some had been held incommunicado for long periods. Torture of political detainees continued to
be reported, in at least four cases allegedly resulting in death. At least four people were executed. Scores of people, both soldiers and civilians, were reportedly extrajudicially executed by Syrian forces in Lebanon (see Lebanon).
Many of those detained, including at least 286 prisoners of conscience, were members of prohibited political parties, such as Hizb al-'Ama! al-Shuyu'i, Party for Communist Action (pca); al-Hizb al-Shuyu'i al-Maktab al-Siyassi, Communist Party - Political Bureau (cppb); Ittihad al-Nidal al-Shuyu'i. Union for Communist Stmggle (ucs); al-Tanzim al-Sha'bi al-Nasiri, Popular Nasserist Organization (PNo); al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun, Muslim Brotherhood, and the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party. Others were members of professional associations arrested in 1980 and 1981 after publicly demanding improvements in human rights in Syria. Some detainees had been arrested in place of relatives being sought by the authorities. Hundreds of Palestinians, including many suspected supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo) and other Palestinian groups, were also still held.
Over 120 members of the cppb and 154 pca members, the majority of them prisoners of conscience arrested over the past decade, were among those who remained in detention without trial. They included Yusuf Ghaith, an engineering student, and Samir Haddad, a civil engineer, who were among 15 cppb members or supporters arrested by al-Amix al-Siyassi, Political Security, in Yabmd in March and April, after anti-government slogans had reportedly been written on walls in the town. Twelve of the 15 were released during the year, one died in custody in April, and two were still detained without charge or trial in 'Adra Civil Prison at the end of 1990.
Over 160 members of the medical and engineering professions, including at least 10 prisoners of conscience, were believed to be still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. They were arrested in 1980 and 1981 in connection with a one-day national strike in support of political reforms. One prisoner of conscience, Muhammad Nabil Salem, was held in 'Adra Civil Prison, but the whereabouts of most of those arrested with him remained unknown.
Other long-term political detainees included 18 Ba'th Party members, among
SYRIA
them former government ministers. Some had been held without charge or trial for over 20 years. Muhammad 'Id 'Ashawi, a former minister of foreign affairs arrested in December 1970, was reported in September to be in poor health and to have been denied urgently needed treatment in prison and transfer to hospital.
Suspected supporters of the pro-Iraqi Arab Socialist Ba'th Party also continued to be detained without charge or trial. Among them was Ahmad 'Abd al-Ra'uf Roummo, a teacher who was reportedly held incommunicado and tortured for six months after his arrest in 1975. He was held in al-Mezze Military Prison in Damascus.
Four members of Syria's Jewish community also remained in detention without charge or trial in 'Adra Civil Prison. The authorities indicated in late 1989 that two of them, Eli and Selim Swed, were the subject of investigation and would be tried "as soon as possible". They had been arrested in 1987. However, no trial was reported to have taken place by the end of the year.
Scores of people arrested in previous years in place of relatives sought by the authorities also continued to be held without charge or trial. They included two women, Shafiqa al-'Ali and Fatima 'Abbas, who were arrested in March 1986 and remained in detention although their wanted relatives were themselves arrested in 1987.
Some political prisoners continued to be detained after serving sentences imposed by the courts, without further charges being brought against them. Khalil Brayez, a former Syrian army officer who was abducted from Beirut in 1970 by Syrian security agents and tried in Syria, had been due for release in October 1985. He was instead transferred to an unknown place in Damascus and was believed to be still held. 'Adel al-Zu'bi. a Syrian asylum-seeker who was returned involuntarily from the Netherlands in April, was reportedly arrested upon arrival at Damascus airport. He was apparently detained without charge or trial and was believed to be still held at the end of the year, although his whereabouts were unknown.
In October Syrian forces in Lebanon reportedly took prisoner scores of supporters of General Michel 'Aoun after a joint assault on his Beirut stronghold which they mounted with Lebanese government
forces. The captives reportedly included 35 military officers loyal to General 'Aoun who were arrested at the Ministry of Defence in East Beirut and transferred to Syria. Most of these prisoners were reportedly held either in a prison at 'Anjar in the Beka' Valley in Lebanon or in prisons in Syria, including al-Mezze Military Prison.
Hundreds of other people arrested in Lebanon in previous years continued to be held. Some had been arrested by Syrian forces, others handed over to them by various Lebanese militias. They included Palestinians suspected of supporting plo leader Yasser 'Arafat; members of Harakat a!-T(iwhid al-lslami, Islamic Unification Movement (ium); members of various factions of the Christian Lebanese Forces; members of the Druze Progressive Socialist Party (psp), members of the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party; and other critics of the Syrian Government. One, Mahmud Baidun, a Lebanese lawyer and former member of the Ba'th Party in Syria, was abducted from Tripoli in 1971. He was still detained without charge or trial in al-Mezze Military Prison.
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of untried political detainees. At least four prisoners died in custody, allegedly as a result of torture. Munir Fransis, a civil engineer from Yabrud, died in custody in April, several days after being moved from detention to al-Muwassat Hospital in Damascus. His body was reported to have borne marks of torture when it was handed over to his family. Three Palestinians held in untried detention since 1985 were reported to have died in custody in Damascus during 1990. Among them was Ziad Musa Qatnani, whose body was returned to his family in July bearing marks of torture: one of his eyes had been gouged out, he had a broken skull, his nails had been extracted, and there were marks of torture by electricity. No official investigation into the causes of these deaths was known to have been carried out. Another political detainee, Samir Haddad, reportedly required intensive care in a Damascus hospital after his arrest in April when he suffered kidney failure following torture during interrogation. He was later moved to 'Adra Civil Prison, where he remained at the end of the year.
At least four people were executed; they were hanged publicly in Damascus in October after being convicted of smuggling.
SYRIA/TAIWAN
At least 200 people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by Sjrrian forces in October after the defeat of General Michel 'Aoun in East Beirut. The victims were said to include both military personnel and civilians, among them women and children. At least 30 of General 'Aoun's soldiers who had been captured were reportedly stripped, bound, lined up and shot in retaliation for an ambush in which Syrian soldiers had been killed. At least 14 men were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by Syrian forces in the village of Bsouss.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about new political arrests and the continued detention without charge or trial of hundreds of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners, as well as reiterating its unconditional opposition to the death penalty. Amnesty International renewed its proposal to visit Syria to discuss its human rights concerns with the government but received no response. Similarly, there was no response to the organization's call in October for an impartial inquiry into reported extrajudicial executions by Syrian forces in Lebanon and for assurances about the physical security of Lebanese captives being held in Syria.
In an oral statement delivered to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February. Amnesty International expressed its concern about continued reports of torture and deaths in custody.
