ANGOLA
Hundreds of suspected government opponents were arrested. Many political prisoners, possibly thousands, arrested in pre> vious years continued to be held without trial, ahhough the government announced the release of over 3,800. One prisoner was reported to have died as a resuh of torture, and others were ill-treated. Two people believed to have "disappeared" in 1977 emerged from hiding. At least one death sentence was passed. The armed opposition Uniào Nacional para a Inde-pendéncia Total de Angola (uNrrA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, held thousands of prisoners. Both sides were alleged to have forcibly conscripted civilians into their forces and to have deliberately killed prisoners.
The government and unita made some progress in talks to end the war, but did not reach agreement by the end of 1990. The conflict affected all parts of Angola and intensified in the northern provinces. Hundreds of civilians were killed. Cuban troops assisting government forces continued to withdraw in accordance with an international agreement (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Hunger caused by war and drought affected several million people and many died as a result.
Legal reforms introduced included the creation in April of a Supreme People's Court, which President José Eduardo dos Santos described as the first practical step towards establishing the independence of the judiciary. In October President dos Santos announced plans to introduce a multi-party political system. A committee began planning constitutional amendments
ANGOLA
which were to include increased protection of human rights.
Few details about prisoners, both those held from previous years and those arrested in 1990, were released by the government or unfta. Restrictions on freedom of movement increased the difficulty of obtaining information from areas affected by conflict.
The majority of political prisoners were uNrrA combatants or people suspected of assisting unita. Others were members or supporters of groups fighting for the independence of Cabinda, an Angolan enclave between Congo and Zaire, and government soldiers suspected of politically motivated offences. Detainees were held without trial in prisons and detention centres in various provinces. They apparently had no opportunity to challenge the legality of their imprisonment: a few, however, reportedly obtained their release through bribery. Some were thought to be imprisoned solely on suspicion of sympathizing with unita or opposing government policies, but it was impossible to obtain sufficient information to determine whether they were prisoners of conscience.
Government forces announced the capture of some 200 unita combatants during the year. Seven people, including an Evangelical Church pastor, were paraded publicly in May shortly after their arrest: they were accused of planning to plant bombs in Huambo city in central Angola. The pastor was accused of forging identity cards for unita members.
There were no trials reported during the year of anyone arrested for political reasons or captured in 1990 or previous years. However, over 3,800 prisoners, mostly former unita members, were released, according to official sources.
Among those held without trial were members of Cabinda opposition groups. Joao Mateus Fuca Baluarte, a member of the Frente da Libertagao do Estado de Cabinda (flec), Cabinda State Liberation Front, who was reportedly arrested in Cabinda in 1987 and tortured by security police, was apparently still held in Ben-tiaba prison in Namibe province. Andre Gimbi Nzungu, a member of the Uniao Nacional de Libertagao de Cabinda, National Union for the Liberation of Cabinda, who was arrested in Cabinda in 1989, was also apparently still held.
One prisoner was reported to have died
as a result of torture. In February officials reported that Marcolino Nduvale Faustino, a former unha officer, had hanged himself in Luanda's high security prison known as Catete Road Prison. Various other sources, however, suggested that he had died as a result of torture. Officials said he had surrendered to the authorities in 1989 and was then allowed to go free until early 1990 when he was arrested as a suspected unita spy. According to unita sources, however, he was captured in battle in mid-1988 and had been held continuously since then. No inquest into his death was known to have been held by the end of 1990.
Numerous reports were received of prisoners being beaten by soldiers and police in various parts of the country.
In January two people believed to have been arrested after an unsuccessful coup attempt in May 1977 and listed among many hundreds who then "disappeared" relumed to Luanda. No action was taken against them by the authorities. They had apparently evaded arrest in 1977 and had been living in hiding elsewhere in Angola. Although about 200 prisoners arrested in connection with the coup attempt were freed in December 1979, the authorities never accounted for hundreds more who "disappeared" in detention and are believed to have been killed.
On several occasions uniia alleged that government troops had deliberately killed civilians and government army deserters. Government sources alleged that uniia had deliberately killed civilians. Neither side provided detailed accounts and it was impossible to obtain independent corroboration of the alleged killings.
At least one death sentence was imposed: in January José Pedro da Silva Martins, a former soldier, was convicted by the Luanda Military Court of murdering a Swedish diplomat in September 1989. He appeared to have no right of appeal. At least three people sentenced to death in previous years remained under sentence of death - two pilots convicted in 1989, and Moisés André Lina, an opposition leader convicted in 1987 (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 and 1990).
Opposition groups also held prisoners. unita reportedly held up to 10,000 prisoners, many of whom were believed to be government soldiers. Tito Chingunji and Wilson dos Santos, former untta representatives abroad, reportedly remained
ANGOLA/ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA/ARGENTINA
restricted in Jamba, unita's headquarters in southeast Angola. Former unrra members compiled a list of about 20 UNrrA members who, they alleged, had been deliberately killed by unfta in previous years (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990).
Both UNrrA and flec abducted foreign nationals as part of their campaigns for international recognition. A French oil worker captured in northwest Angola in February died from illness or exhaustion in unfta custody, flec abducted over 12 people: all but one were subsequently released.
Amnesty International investigated the cases of possible prisoners of conscience, including the two prisoners from Cabinda. It also sought information from the government about the number and identities of released prisoners, and about the death in custody of Marcolino Nduvale Faustino, but without response. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death sentences.
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
One death sentence was imposed. There were no executions; the last execution was carried out in 1989. Flogging was introduced for rape.
Everette Byers was sentenced to death in April for murder. He was one of two prisoners reportedly under sentence of death at the end of the year.
In Jime Parliament approved an amendment to the Corporal Punishment Act introducing a sentence of flogging, in addition to a prison sentence, for convicted rapists.
In November Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Vere C. Bird Sr,
noting that flogging constitutes cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment and as such is prohibited by internationally recognized standards. The organization urged that the punishment of flogging be abolished, and that no flogging sentences be carried out.
