SINGAPORE
Two prisoners of conscience were conditionally released from detention without charge or trial while a third who was released in 1989 remained confined at night to an offshore island. Criminal offenders continued to be sentenced to caning, which constitutes a cruel, inhuman or degrading form of punishment. The national media reported that 10 people were sentenced to death and three people were executed.
Vincent Cheng and Teo Soh Lung, both of them prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1990], were released in June from detention under the Internal Security Act (isa). However,
SINGAPORE/SOMALIA
restrictions were imposed on their freedom of movement, expression and association but they were not confined to hve in any designated locality. In January the High Court had rejected Vincent Cheng's habeas corpus application challenging the legality of his detention. The Court of Appeal had rejected a similar application by Teo Soh Lung shortly before she was released.
Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament who was released into internal exile in May 1989 after being detained without trial under the isa since October 1966. continued to be regarded as a prisoner of conscience. He was exiled to the small island of Sentosa, off the main island of Singapore, on being released from prison. In September 1990 his restriction order was changed to permit him to visit and remain on the main island between 6am and 9pm daily and to seek a job with the approval of the Director of the Internal Security Department. At night he continued to be exiled to Sentosa.
Caning remained a mandatory punishment for around 30 crimes including attempted murder, armed robbery, rape, illegal immigration and drug-trafficking. Under amendments to the immigration law effected in March and August 1989, about 12 illegal workers from Thailand were reported to have been caned between November 1989 and March 1990. In January Mustaffa Ahmad was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment and 15 strokes of the cane after being convicted of drug-trafficking. His three accomplices were sentenced to 12 years in jail and 10 strokes of the cane.
Ten people were reported to have received death sentences, of which eight were for drugs offences, one for murder
and one for armed robbery. Three people were reported to have been executed, all for drugs offences.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the unconditional release of and lifting of restrictions on Chia Thye Poh, Vincent Cheng and Teo Soh Lung. It also called for the commutation of all death sentences and for an end to executions.
