BURKINA FASO
Nineteen alleged government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held throughout 1990 following their arrest in December 1989. Eight others arrested at the same time were released and four were officially said to have escaped: one of these, however, was reported to have died in detention under torture. More than 40 other people were
arrested for political reasons. Most were released uncharged but at least 12 were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year, including eight students who had been forcibly conscripted into the armed forces. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees, two of whom were said to have died as a result.
A new draft constitution to replace the constitution suspended in 1980 was prepared by a government-appointed commission and submitted to President Blaise Compaor6 for approval in October. It was scheduled to come into force after a referendum in 1991. It allows for political parties but excludes any based on particular religious denominations or regions of the country, and those considered "pro-imperi-alist". Presidential and legislative elections were scheduled for 1991.
Nineteen people arrested in December 1989 in connection with an alleged conspiracy against the government were detained throughout the year without being brought to trial. In all, 31 people had been arrested, most of them associates of former president Thomas Sankara, who was killed in the coup in October 1987 which brought President Compaor6 to power. They included Raymond Train Poda, a former minister of justice, Guillaume Sessouma, a university lecturer, and Moumouni Traore, an economist, all members of the Union de lutte communiste-reconstruite (ulc-r). Union of Communist Struggle-Reconstructed, which had supported the Sankara government. The 31 also included former soldiers, some of whom had previously been detained without trial for almost two years following the 1987 coup.
Four of the 31, including Guillaume Sessouma, were said by the government in January to have escaped from detention. However, there were persistent reports suggesting that Guillaume Sessouma had died under torture: later in the year, Amnesty International received information which confirmed this, although the government continued to maintain that he had escaped. Eight of the prisoners had been released by September, four of them provisionally, but the others remained in custody. Their cases had been referred to the courts and pretrial judicial proceedings began in March, but no trial date had been set by the end of 1990. They were permitted access to lawyers but were denied family visits until
BURKINA FASO/BURUNDI
August. Neither Raymond Train Poda nor Moumouni Traoré had been formally charged by the end of the year: it appeared that they, and possibly others, might be prisoners of conscience.
Further political arrests occurred in March and May. Lambert Ouedraogo and Aboubacar Traoré were detained without charge for five days in March at security police headquarters in the capital, Ouagadougou. They were questioned about the distribution of documents produced by the Parti communiste révolutionnaire voltaïque (pcrv). Revolutionary Communist Party of Upper Volta (Burkina Faso was called Upper Volta before 1984).
Over 40 students were arrested by pohce in May after demonstrations at the University of Ouagadougou calling for improved conditions and permission to hold meetings of the Association nationale des étudiants burkinabé (aneb). National Association of Burkinabé Students. Among those arrested was aneb's President, Seni Konanda. At least 12 students were still held illegally without charge or trial at the end of the year. Eight of them were forcibly conscripted into the armed forces and confined to barracks in Pô, Dedougou and Koudougou, In July the government denied that any students were being detained and said that the eight were undertaking obligatory military service. At least four others, however, were held incommunicado in detention centres in Ouagadougou: one, Boukary Dabo. a medical student, was reported in October to have died in detention, possibly as a result of ill-treatment. No inquest had been held by the end of the year.
Several of the detainees arrested in December 1989 were reported to have been tortured or ill-treated. Tibo Ouedraogo, an army officer, was said to have been kept handcuffed throughout the year. Following reports of their torture, the government sought to allay fears about the prisoners' safety: in January, representatives of a local human rights organization were invited to see them and in November they were presented to the local press.
During their detention in March, Lambert Ouedraogo and Aboubacar Traoré were reportedly blindfolded, beaten on the back, stomach and genitals, and denied food and water while under interrogation. Aboubacar Traoré was also allegedly taken into a courtyard and told that he was to be
shot. Some of the students arrested in May were also said to have been tortured, although no details were available.
The cases of seven people sentenced to death for criminal offences in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990] were referred to the Court of Appeal in Ouagadougou for a retrial. The outcome had not been reported by the end of the year.
Amnesty International sought information from the government about those arrested in December 1989. The authorities said they would be tried according to the law, but did not respond to the organization's repeated inquiries about the charges against them. Amnesty International also pressed for the unconditional release of the students arrested in May, including those forcibly conscripted into the armed forces.
Amnesty International called on the authorities to treat all prisoners humanely and to protect them from torture, in particular by ending the use of prolonged incommunicado detention. In October it called for an investigation into the death in detention of Boukary Dabo and the death under torture of Guillaume Sessouma, but without response.
