HONDURAS
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the army and police were frequently reported. Charges against some political detainees were reportedly based largely on statements extracted under torture. Two trade unionists and a student leader were killed in circimistances suggesting that they had been extrajudicially executed by groups allegedly linked to the armed forces. Several criminal suspects may have been extrajudicially executed by police. The fate of approximately 150 people who had "disappeared" following arrest under previous governments remained imclarified.
In January Rafael Leonardo Callejas took office as president following his election in November 1989. Although the President emphasized the importance of safeguarding human rights in his inaugural speech, human rights violations persisted.
Some actions attributed to armed opposition groups were reported, including attacks on United States military personnel based in Honduras.
In May Honduras signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty; it had not ratified this treaty by the end of the year.
Detainees were often arrested without warrant and held beyond the 24-hour constitutional limit before being taken before a judge. Political and criminal suspects were reportedly tortured or otherwise ill-treated while held incommunicado in the detention centres of the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (dni), the investigative branch of the national police force, or in military barracks. Methods of torture included food and water deprivation; suspension from the ceiling by a rope passed through the detainees' handcuffs, which were fastened behind their backs; electric shocks to hands and feet; near-suffocation in the capucha, a rubber hood sometimes impregnated with lime [cal); beatings; and death threats against detainees' families.
Manuel Castillo Reyes was among five people arrested in April and accused of smuggling weapons to the armed opposition in El Salvador. He was reportedly held incommunicado for almost five weeks before being transferred to prison. During his first 15 days in custody he was reportedly beaten repeatedly, subjected to the capucha, and suspended by his feet. He said that military personnel lit fires around him in the middle of the night and threatened to bum him alive. He was released after several months in prison, but two others held with him, who also alleged they were tortured, remained in prison at the end of the year. In an exceptional move, a judge hearing the habeas corpus petition presented on Manuel Castillo's behalf began an investigation into his claims of illegal arrest.
Lawyer Julio Francisco Lagos Holman, arrested in Tegucigalpa in May by members of the dni, was taken to different centres belonging to the Fuerza de Seguridad
HONDURAS
Pública (fusep), the Public Security Forces, who accused him of arms possession. He claimed he was beaten, kicked and given electric shocks by fusep agents. He was released without charge on 8 June.
The circumstances of the detention and interrogation of other political detainees led to fears that their right to a fair trial may have been undermined, particularly as it was alleged that charges had been based mainly on confessions extracted under torture. Five prisoners arrested in 1989 and accused of arms-trafficking were reportedly charged on the basis of statements extracted under torture. Some said they had been held without legal representation for several months.
Physical attacks and other intimidatory acts were reportedly directed against trade unionists, government opponents, human rights activists and students. Honduran human rights groups attributed these abuses to clandestine groups allegedly linked to the armed forces. Former student leader Roberto Zelaya left Hondmas in April after being seriously injured in an attack the previous month. Three unidentified men had reportedly abducted him, beat him over the head and stabbed him in the stomach.
Several priests working with peasants, particularly near the border with El Salvador, were also among the victims. Father Felipe Quintanilla, for example, reported that shots were fired at his home from a passing car in May. Other priests received anonymous death threats.
Two trade unionists and a student leader were killed in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed. The cases were similar to other extrajudicial executions reported in previous years which were allegedly carried out by groups linked to the armed forces.
On 20 March Dennis Hernán Rodriguez Garcia, a member of the Organización Campesina de Honduras (och), Hondiuan Peasants' Organization, was abducted from his home in Talanga, Morazán province, by a man who reportedly identified himself as a member of the dni. The man told Dennis Rodriguez' wife that he was being taken to the headquarters of the Batallón Fuerzas Especiales, Special Forces Battalion. Dennis Rodriguez' body was found the next day on a road near Talanga, showing bullet wounds and signs of torture. The dni and the Special Forces Battalion
denied having arrested him.
On 31 May Francisco Javier Bonilla Medina, a leader of the Sindicato de Trabajadores del Instituto Hondureño de Seguridad Social (sitraihss), Union of Workers of the Honduran Social Security Institute, was shot dead in Tegucigalpa by an armed man in civilian clothing. The gunman also tried to kill Consuelo Valladares, a union colleague who was with Francisco Bonilla at the time. She and her husband subsequently received death threats. The incidents occurred in the context of strikes and other union activities in protest against government measures. President Callejas appointed an army commission to investigate Francisco Bonilla's killing. It concluded that student leader Martin Pineda had ordered the murder. Martin Pineda presented himself to a court, which found no evidence to incriminate him, and he was released without charge after six days in custody. The commission also accused three men of carrying out the murder, but they denied the allegations, saying they were forced to confess to the crime after being tortured.
The body of Ramón Antonio Briceño, student leader of the Frente de Reforma Universitaria (fru). University Reform Front, was found in June with 11 bullet wounds and signs of beatings. Shortly before he was killed, the Alianza de Acción Anticomunista (aaa), Anticommu-nist Action Alliance, painted the message "Briceño, you are dead" on the walls of the National University.
Investigations into these and other political murders which took place in previous years, such as the 1988 killings of Miguel Angel Pavón Salazar and Moisés Landav-erde (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990), made little progress. By the end of 1990, no one had been brought to justice for any of the killings.
Some criminal suspects were reportedly killed in circumstances suggesthig that they were victims of extrajudicial executions by police officers. In May Walter David Cruz Torres and Kemer Javier Andino López were arrested by four dni agents in Tegucigalpa and accused of stealing. They were reportedly interrogated, beaten and shot on a road near Olancho. Walter Cruz died instantly but Kemer Andino escaped.
Three Salvadorian tradesmen reportedly "disappeared" following their arrest
HONDURASAÍONG KONG
without warrant by Honduran soldiers in November, after they had crossed the border into Honduras to buy food and clothes. The army denied holding them. It was later reported that they had been deported to El Salvador in early December.
In a report presented to the Honduran Government in December 1989, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture made a series of recommendations for the prevention of torture in Honduras, including the creation of an office of public prosecutor within the Attorney General's Office, and the transfer of control of the police from military to civilian authority. To Amnesty International's knowledge, none of the recommendations had been implemented by the end of 1990, although some initial steps were taken towards the eventual creation of a judicial police.
In June Amnesty International wrote to President Callejas welcoming his declared commitment to human rights and urging him to take steps to ensure that human rights abuses, including killings, were fully investigated and those responsible brought to justice. The organization continued its appeals for clarification of the fate of approximately 150 detainees who had "disappeared" under previous governments.
In December the Minister of the Interior and Justice announced that the Honduran Government would investigate these "disappearance" cases. Amnesty International welcomed the announcement and requested further details of the proposed investigations. It also asked for clarification of the whereabouts of the three Salva-dorian tradesmen who "disappeared" in November. No reply was received,
Also in December the Honduran Government finally paid the compensation to the families of "disappearance" victims Angel Manfredo Velásquez and Saúl Godínez which had been ordered by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in 1988 and 1989 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990).
