HAITI
Colonel Neptune and accused of terrorist activities. Most of them were ill-treated by the security forces at the time of arrest or while in custody. Some were released shortly after arrest and others were deported without judicial proceedings. The remaining detainees were released in February, when the government declared an amnesty for those accused of crimes against the security of the state.
Political leaders Evans Paul. Jean-Auguste Meyzieux, Marino Etienne and Patrick Beauchard were among those who benefited from the February amnesty. They had been arrested in late 1989 and charged with plotting to assassinate President Avril and overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Arbitrary arrests by the security forces throughout the country continued to be reported. Victims included members of grassroots organizations and human rights groups, joiumalists and peasants. The Port-au-Prince police were reportedly responsible for the arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment of street children. There was also an increasing number of reports that local police and military authorities arrested civilians and held them for up to several days, sometimes with the acquiescence of local judicial authorities, with the aim of extracting money.
In March two directors of Radio Cap-Haïtien were arrested without warrant following the broadcast of a statement asking for President Avril's resignation. They were released uncharged several days later. In May radio reporter Tony Vergni-aud was arrested and beaten by soldiers in Port-de-Paix while investigating reports of a local judge's involvement in corruption. Arrested under the orders of the judge he was investigating, he was released the same day. In June Logique Paris and Narcisse Orellien, members of the peasant organization Tèt Kolle, Heads Together, were arrested by the local police chief in Mahotière, Northwest Department, and severely beaten after they protested against the arrest of two others. They were released three days later.
Ill-treatment and torture of detainees by the security forces was widespread. Methods of torture included severe beatings with fists and sticks on the soles of the feet, the genitals, the eyes and the head. At least four prisoners died in police or prison custody, apparently as a result of severe
beatings. In August Méhus Laroche was reportedly arrested without a warrant in Plaisance, Northern Department, and severely beaten at the police headquarters in Cap-Haïtien. He died nine days later at Cap-Haïtien penitentiary. Also in August farmer Michel Fontaine was arrested without a warrant in La Gonâve district and was reportedly severely beaten by a deputy rural police chief His body, later returned to his family, showed signs of severe injuries to the head, eyes and legs. The deputy police chief was subsequently arrested, but to Amnesty International's knowledge, he had not been charged or tried by the end of the year.
Prison conditions in the National Penitentiary, Saint Marc, Gonaives, Cap-Haïtien and other detention centres throughout the country continued to be extremely harsh, and many inmates were reportedly ill because of malnutrition, poor hygiene and lack of medical treatment.
As in previous years, the security forces ill-treated civilians during demonstrations and protests, as well as during disputes over land rights. In some of these incidents the security forces were said to have deliberately wounded or killed demonstrators and peasants. In April at least foiu? people were wounded when local military personnel reportedly opened fire to disperse a peaceful demonstration by the Mouvement des Paysans de Borgne, Borgne Peasant Movement. Also in April demonstrators in Cabaret threw stones after soldiers had fired warning shots in the air. The soldiers directed their fire on the crowd, and killed two civilians.
The security forces were allegedly involved in "death squad"-style killings. In June four gunmen, two of whom wore military uniforms, shot and killed Council of State member Serge Villard and trade unionist Jean-Marie Montés, and wounded politician Emmanuel Magni. In September a United States Federal Bureau of Investigation team arrived in Haiti to assist in the investigation. By the end of the year no findings had been made public. In July Mariano Delaunay, a teacher and member of the Saint Jean Bosco Roman Catholic Community, was killed by a gunman identified by witnesses as an army sergeant.
The government was not effective in bringing those responsible for human rights violations to justice, despite announcing inquiries into several cases
HAITI/HONDURAS
and arresting and dismissing some officials implicated in abuses. In April judicial proceedings were initiated against one of those allegedly responsible for the killings at the Saint lean Bosco church in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989), but by the end of the year no progress was evident. In July Roger Lafontant, a prominent member of the government of deposed President Jean-Claude Duvalier, and publicly accused of responsibility for gross human rights violations, returned to Haiti. The government issued warrants for his arrest which were not, however, based on alleged involvement in human rights abuses. The security forces did not enforce the warrants and Roger Lafontant remained at large at the end of the year.
Amnesty International wrote to President Avril and later to President Pascal-Trouillot raising cases of concern to the organization, requesting details of any inquiries and measures taken against officials implicated in human rights violations and expressing concern at the absence of investigations into past human rights abuses. No response was received.
