TOGO
Thirteen pro-democracy activists arrested in August appeared to be prisoners of conscience: at least four of them were tortured. Eleven were released uncharged a week later. The other two were sentenced to five years' imprisonment in October but then released. Dozens of villagers in northern Togo were reportedly detained and tortured by government soldiers.
On 5 October there were violent demonstrations in Lomé, the capital, after the security forces violently dispersed crowds who had gathered peacefully to call for multi-party democracy and the release of two pro-democracy activists. Government vehicles and some police stations were destroyed, several people were reportedly killed and at least 170 demonstrators were arrested. They were all released uncharged in late October.
Following the demonstrations, the government announced that a commissioii would review the Constitution and that a new draft constitution would be submitted to a referendum by the end of 1991.
President Gnassingbé Eyadéma later announced that the one-party state would be replaced by a multi-party political system.
In late November the security forces used excessive force to disperse demonstrations of striking taxi drivers in the town of Sokodé and elsewhere. As a result several people were reportedly killed and dozens of others injured. Students in Lomé who demonstrated against government policies were also violently dispersed in November. Dozens of students were severely beaten by soldiers.
Thirteen pro-democracy activists were arrested in Lomé on 23 and 24 August. A week later 11 of them were released uncharged. The other two, Doglo Agbelengo and Logo Dossouvi, were brought to trial and on 5 October sentenced to five years' imprisonment for slander and inciting the army to revolt against the government on the grounds that they had distributed leaflets calling for multi-party democracy. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience. However, they were released a week after sentencing by order of President Eyadéma.
At least four of those arrested in August were tortured with electric shocks, whipped and beaten while being held incommunicado in the custody of the Sûreté nationale, the national security police. One of the detainees, Komlan Aboli, was subjected to severe beatings and electric shocks. The National Commission of Human Rights, established by the government in 1987, confirmed after an investigation that four detainees had been tortured and publicly urged the government to destroy the equipment used to inflict electric shocks. The head of the security police was subsequently dismissed but those allegedly responsible for torturing the detainees had not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
Earlier in the year, dozens of villagers were detained and tortured by soldiers. This occurred in February as soldiers attempted to forcibly resettle villagers living near a national park in the north of the country. The victims, including a number of elderly inhabitants firom the villages of Koloware and Mparatao, were apparently accused of hunting in a wild game reserve. The National Commission of Human Rights carried out an investigation and submitted a report to President Eyadéma, which apparently confirmed that villagers
TOGOARINIOAD AND TOBAGO
had been unlawfully detained and tortured. As a result, President Eyad6ma reportedly ordered the release of two villagers who remained in detention, that some of the victims should be compensated, and that the officer in charge of the soldiers responsible should be demoted.
Amnesty International called for the release of Doglo Agbelengo, Logo Dossouvi and others arrested in August. The organization also investigated reports that villagers in the north were tortured by soldiers, and m-ged the government to investigate all other reports of torture, to make the findings public and to take immediate steps to prevent the use of torture.
