GHANA
At least 11 prisoners of conscience were held in detention without trial. About 40 soldiers and civilians suspected of plotting against the government remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1990, including some who had spent more than five years in custody. Ten other detainees were released in June. Twenty people were sentenced to death and nine executed.
Under pressure to allow debate on whether political parties should be legalized, the government organized seminars about democracy but harassed critics calling for a return to constitutional rule. Members of the new Movement for Freedom and Justice were briefly arrested and charged with spreading false information (the charges were later withdrawn), and were refused permission to hold public meetings.
Major Courage E.K. Quarshigah, whom the authorities accused of plotting to overthrow the government, remained in detention without charge or trial together with four other members of the security forces arrested in September 1989. Five other
GHW^A
military and security police officers were arrested in January in connection with the same case. One was subsequently released without charge and two were said to have escaped, but the two others remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1990. All the detainees were prisoners of conscience.
A board of inquiry set up to investigate the alleged conspiracy apparently found insufficient evidence to justify any prosecutions. A summary of its findings, published by the government, contained factual errors about certain detainees, apparently to attribute motives to them for joining a conspiracy. According to the summary, only two witnesses admitted to any conspiracy - Flight-Lieutenant William Kofi Domie, who died in security police custody in September 1989, and a soldier who was subsequently kept in incommunicado detention. No inquest was held into the circumstances of Flight-Lieu-tenant Domie's death (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Kweku Baah, a lawyer and former government minister, was arrested in June and detained for five weeks before being released without charge. No reason was given for his detention but it seemed to be in connection with plans to commemorate the murder in June 1982 of three judges and a retired army officer. Members of the military government were allegedly involved in the murder and leading members of the Ghana Bar Association were detained in June 1989 when they planned commemorative lectures (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990).
Two possible prisoners of conscience continued to serve prison sentences after unfair trials in 1983 in which they were convicted of involvement in a coup attempt in November 1982. Andrews Kwame Asare Pianim, an economist and former chief executive of the Cocoa Marketing Board, was serving an 18-year prison sentence, and Jacob Jabuni Yidana, a former senior police officer, an eight-year sentence (see Amnesty International Reports 1984 to 1987).
At least 40 political detainees - possibly more - were still held in administrative detention at the end of 1990. The majority of the detainees had been held since the first half of the 1980s on suspicion of involvement in conspiracies against the government. Most were detained imder the
Preventive Custody Law, pndc Law 4 of 1982, which allows the indefinite detention without charge or trial of anyone suspected of threatening the security of the state. Among them was Bombardier Mustapha Mohamed, a prosecution witness at the trial of those allegedly involved in the November 1982 coup attempt, who was not released after giving evidence. They included Corporal Daniel Dzane and Sergeant Nicholas Osei, held in connection with alleged coup attempts in 1983. Also held were at least 14 soldiers arrested in 1985, including Lance-Corporal Osho Kojo Ampah, some of whom were apparently suspected of planning to assassinate the head of state, Flight-Lieutenant J.J. Rawlings, in February 1985.
In Jime the release was announced of 10 political detainees who had been held for years without charge or trial. They included Kojo Adjei Brempong, detained since
1986.	whose release was previously announced in an amnesty in February
1987.	The others released were all believed to be former members of the security forces; five had been held since 1983 or 1984, the other four since 1985, 1986 and
1988.
Public Tribunals sentenced 20 prisoners to death for murder and armed robbery. Nine prisoners convicted of armed robbery in 1989 were executed in February, the first known executions since 1988.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Major Quarshigah and those detained with him, and urged a review of the detention or convictions of prisoners held for alleged involvement in coup attempts or conspiracies against the government. Amnesty International continued to call for an end to the use of the death penalty and appealed for the commutation of death sentences. In July Arrmesty International published a report, Ghana: Detention without Trial - the Quarshigah "Conspiracy", in which it detailed its concerns about the cases of Major Quarshigah and his co-detainees. In response, the government invited Amnesty International to visit Ghana to discuss its concerns: such a visit was expected to take place in early 1991.
