KENYA
Hundreds of people were arrested in connection with a campaign for multi-party democracy. Most were released within a short time but three out of six prisoners of conscience detained without charge or trial were still held at the end of the year, and at least six others were sentenced to prison terms. Some 30 people were await-ing trial at the end of the year on charges of treason, sedition or possessing prohibited publications. Some political prisoners were reportedly tortured or ill-treated. At least 40 people were sentenced to death but it was not known if there were any executions. Hundreds of refugees and asylum-seekers were arrested and several were forcibly returned to Uganda.
There were frequent arrests, interrogations and other harassment, including death threats, of government critics, particularly church leaders, lawyers and others advocating a multi-party political system. The government's response to a strengthening campaign for multi-party democracy in July was to detain the leaders or charge them with sedition, and arrest demonstrators. The government insisted on retaining one-party rule but proposed some reforms to the ruling party - the Kenya African National Union (kanu) - the electoral system, and the security of tenure of judges and the Attorney General.
In February Foreign Minister Robert Ouko was abducted, tortured and murdered by unknown people, who then burned his body. British police were brought in to help investigate amid suggestions that there might have been government involvement in his death. Their findings were not made public. A judicial commission of inquiry into the case was established in October and was still taking evidence at the end of the year.
A government minister resigned after the death of Anglican Bishop Alexander Muge in a car crash in August. The minister had made a public death threat against the bishop, who was an outspoken government critic.
In June over 50 people were arrested for selling or producing cassette tapes of popular songs criticizing the government. However, sedition charges against record producer Joe Mwangi Mathai and over 50 street vendors who were kept in custody for some weeks were later withdrawn.
The main leaders of the multi-party movement, Kenneth Matiba and Charles Rubia. both former government ministers, were arrested in July and detained under administrative detention orders. Four others were also detained in July under the same Public Security Regulations - Raila Odinga, son of former vice-president Ogin-ga Odinga, and three human rights lawyers, including John Khaminwa, who was arrested when he sought access to Kenneth Matiba. and Gitobu Imanyara, editor of the Nairobi Law Monthly. The lawyers were released after three weeks but the three others remained in indefinite detention without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Four former prisoners of conscience -George Anyona, a former member of parliament, Edward Oyugi, a university professor, Augustus Kathangu, a local politician, and Ngotho Kariuki, an accountant and former academic - were arrested in luly and charged with holding a "seditious meeting". If convicted of this offence, they could receive 10-year prison sentences, ludges rejected their bail applications and ignored their complaints of torture and ill-treatment. They had not been tried by the end of the year.
Over 1,500 people were arrested and over 30 were shot dead by police at a banned demonstration in July and in subsequent disturbances. Most of those
KENYA
arrested were eventually released but several were charged with public order offences, such as making a two-finger V-sign meaning "two parties" and shouting political slogans. At least two demonstrators received six-month prison terms.
At the end of the year over 20 people, some of whom had been released on bail, were awaiting trial on charges of possessing seditious or prohibited publications which were mostly non-violent. Some were held in connection with leaflets produced by the clandestine opposition organization Mwakenya [Muuangano wa Wazalendo wa Kukomboa Kenya, Union of Patriots for the Liberation of Kenya), which called for the violent overthrow of the government. Gitobu Imanyara, editor of the Nairobi Law Monthly, which had published articles on human rights, the death penalty and multi-party democracy, was charged with publishing a seditious publication. A subsequent ban on the journal was temporarily suspended by a court order.
At the beginning of the year 26 people, including at least four prisoners of conscience, were serving prison sentences of up to seven years which had been imposed after unfair political trials between 1986 and 1989. Ten of the 26 prisoners received one-third remissions of sentence and were released during the year. At least five others had their sentences reduced on appeal.
Six people were sentenced to prison terms following political trials in 1990. In March the Reverend Lawford Imunde, a Presbyterian minister, was jailed for six years for possessing a "seditious publication" - his private and unpublished diary, which contained some criticism of the government. He applied to the High Court to declare the conviction unconstitutional on the grounds of violations of his fundamental rights, saying that he had only pleaded guilty because he had been tortured during incommunicado detention and given false promises of a non-custodial sentence. The court dismissed the case.
Koigi wa Wamwere, a former member of parliament and exiled leader of the Kenya Patriotic Front, an opposition organization which he founded while living in exile, was arrested on 9 October in Nairobi. The police said he was captured at the home of Rumba Kinuthia, a lawyer and pro-democracy activist, and that arms and ammunition were found there and at the
home of Mirugi Kariuki, another lawyer. Police alleged that Koigi wa Wamwere had entered Kenya clandestinely to plan a violent campaign to destabilize the government. Rumba Kinuthia and Mirugi Kariuki had been arrested the day before Koigi wa Wamwere, but at that time police had not reported finding any weapons. At the end of 1990, the three were awaiting trial on treason charges together with five other people, including relatives of Koigi wa Wamwere and Rumba Kinuthia. Charges of misprision (concealment) of treason against two women related to Rumba Kinuthia were withdrawn and they were released after two months in custody.
Some political detainees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated in security police custody. At remand hearings George Anyona alleged that he and his three co-accused had been put in cells flooded with water and that their treatment in Kamiti prison was "inhuman and cruel". Allegations of torture and ill-treatment were also made by Koigi wa Wamwere and the others charged with him.
At least 40 people were sentenced to death after being convicted of robbery with violence or murder. The government did not disclose the number of prisoners on death row but it was believed to exceed 200. It was not known if any prisoners were executed or had their death sentences commuted during 1990.
In October and November hundreds of refugees and asylum-seekers were arrested after President Daniel arap Moi announced that reftigees and illegal aliens were to be expelled. Despite interventions by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, at least five recognized refugees were forcibly returned to Uganda.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, both those held without charge and those facing sedition or other charges. It also intervened on behalf of detainees in security police custody in an effort to protect them from torture or ill-treatment, illegal detention or unfair trial. Amnesty International called for independent investigations into all torture allegations and criticized the courts for failing to act on prisoners' complaints of torture and harsh treatment. The organization also appealed for the commutation of all death sentences. In October Amnesty International requested information from the Attorney General about the disputed
KENYA/KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC 0F)/K0REA (REPUBLIC OF)
circumstances of Koigi wa Wamwere's arrest and indicated its wish to send an observer to his trial, but without response.
In November Amnesty International published a report, Kenya: Silencing Opposition to One-Party Rule.
