GABON
Seven prisoners of conscience were released. Eighteen people arrested in 1989 in connection with two alleged plots to overthrow the govemment were tried by
GABON
the State Security Court: they had only a limited right of appeal. Two detainees were reportedly ill-treated.
In May a new constitution was introduced to end the one-party state and allow political parties other than the ruling Parti démocratique gabonais (pdg), Gabonese Democratic Party, headed by President Omar Bongo. This followed a series of strikes, demonstrations and riots by students. workers and others calling for social and political reform and for the convening of a national conference to discuss the need for constitutional change. The conference, which was convened in March by the government and attended by about 170 political and other groups, came out in favour of a multi-party political system. It also adopted a Charter of Liberties reaffirming the rights guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
Further riots broke out in Libreville and Port-Gentil shortly after the introduction of the new constitution when the leader of a newly formed political party, the Parti gabonais du progrès (pgp). Gabonese Progress Party, died in suspicious circumstances. pgp supporters alleged that Joseph Rendjambe had been killed by government agents but the authorities denied the allegation. The government then declared a state of siege, which remained in force until August, and the army was called in to quell the disturbances.
National Assembly elections took place in September and October. The pdg won a majority of seats amid opposition allegations of ballot rigging.
Seven prisoners of conscience were released in January. They had been
detained without charge or trial since December 1989 for allegedly distributing leaflets on behalf of an opposition party, the Mouvement de redressement national (morena), Movement for National Recovery (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Five other prisoners who were among over 20 people arrested in late 1989 in connection with two separate alleged plots to kill President Bongo and overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1990) were released in January. A pre-trial judicial inquiry concluded that they had no case to answer. Eighteen others, however, were brought to trial before the State Security Court for their alleged involvement in the two coup plots. Eight of them, including Lieutenant Colonel Georges Moubandjo, were sentenced in November to between five and eight years' imprisonment with hard labour. Six of the seven accused who faced charges at a second trial in December were present in court; Pierre Mamboundou, a leading government opponent recently expelled from France to Senegal, was tried in absentia. Four of the seven, including Pierre Mamboundou and Mathias Boussougou-Mapangou, a former commander of the presidential guard, were sentenced to between one and 10 years' imprisonment. Daniel Cohen, a French national, was given a six-year suspended sentence, and two, including Valentin Mihindou Mi Minzamba, a former minister and presidential adviser, were acquitted. All those sentenced were convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government. Defendants sentenced by the State Seciurity Court are restricted on appeal to raising points of law. All those sentenced in November and December appealed for presidential clemency but this had not been granted by the end of 1990.
The government did not disclose the results of autopsies on two other prisoners arrested in connection with the alleged conspiracies to overthrow the government, who had died in detention in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The authorities had told Amnesty International that the autopsy findings in both cases would be disclosed after the trials of the alleged coup plotters had been concluded.
Two pgp supporters arrested at the time of the May riots were reportedly ill-treated while detained incommunicado by the Service de contre-ingérence. Counter-
GABON/GAMBIA/GERMANY
intelligence Service. They were subsequently brought to trial in October with other pgp supporters but released.
Two people convicted in 1989 in absentia of attempted murder and one person convicted in 1989 of ritual murder remained under sentence of death. No new death sentences or executions were reported.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience, and called for the fair trial or release of other political detainees and the commutation of death sentences. It also urged the government to clarify the circumstances in which two political detainees had died in detention in 1989.
