SWITZERLAND
A total of 581 people were sentenced to prison terms for refusing to perform military service. Of these, 317 based their refusal on religious, ethical or political grounds, according to statistics published by the Federal Military Department. However, it was claimed that the number of people who had refused on conscientious grounds was far higher than reflected in the department's restricted categories. Many conscientious objectors served their sentences during 1990; all were considered prisoners of conscience. These included people sentenced in 1990 and earlier years, a large number of whom had expressed their willingness to perform an alternative civilian service.
Military service is a binding obligation under the Constitution and male citizens carry out a total of approximately 12 months' service between the ages of 20 and 50. Although there is limited access to unarmed military service, there is no provision for alternative civilian service, which could be introduced only by amending the Constitution through a public referendum.
In October the government issued an amendment to the Military Penal Code. Under its provisions, refusal to perform
military service would remain a criminal offence. If a military tribunal concluded that a conscript was unable to reconcile military service with his conscience because of "fundamental ethical values", it would sentence him to a period of work in the public interest, ranging from one and a half times the length of military service to two years, This would not result in a criminal record. Conscripts considered to be refusing military service on unrecognized grounds would continue to receive prison sentences resulting in criminal records.
The amendment did not come into force during 1990 as it was liable to a referendum. A campaign organized by opponents of the amendment had until mid-January 1991 to collect the 50.000 signatures required to request the referendum.
During the year the Socialist and Christian Democrat parties sought wider support for initiatives, which they put forward in November 1989 and September 1990 respectively, aimed at introducing an alternative civilian service.
In October the National Council (one of the two chambers of parliament) requested the Federal Council to draft a revised Military Penal Code, eliminating the death penalty.
Although refusal of military service was punishable by up to three years' imprisonment, in practice sentences rarely exceeded 10 months during 1990. The law allowed a maximum of six months' imprisonment if a tribunal recognized a conscript's "severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds; such sentences were served in the form of arrêts répressifs or semi-détention, allowing approved work outside the prison during the day.
Paul-Simon Dorsaz had spent over 12 years as an agricultural worker in religious communities when he refused military service. He began a sentence of three months' arrêts répressifs in November after a military tribunal recognized that his action was motivated by deep religious convictions and that he was facing a "severe conflict of conscience" and "moral distress". Caspar Schneider, a carpenter, served a seven-month prison sentence for refusing military service. He explained to the military authorities that his objection was based on his absolute belief in pacifism, influenced by the experiences of his mother's family in concentration camps and as refugees during the Second World War. A military
SWITZERLAND/SYRIA
tribunal acknowledged that ethical beliefs were a factor in his refusal but found that "egoistic" reasons were also present and concluded he was not suffering "a severe conflict of conscience". He was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment, reduced on appeal.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience. It wrote to members of parliament and the government expressing concem that the proposed amendment to the Military Penal Code would continue to punish people refusing military service on grounds of conscience and would not provide a genuine alternative service outside the military system. It also supported initiatives aimed at the introduction of such a service. In letters to Amnesty Intemational, the federal authorities stated that they were "aware that the question of conscientious objection in Switzerland has to be solved" and acknowledged that the amendment to the Military Penal Code would not introduce "a real civilian service"; this required an amendment to the Federal Constitution, rejected by national referendums in 1977 and 1984.
