FINLAND
Three conscientious objectors to military service began serving prison sentences; two of them completed their sentences and were released. Four conscientious objectors imprisoned in 1989 were also released after completion of their sentences. All seven were considered prisoners of conscience.
In February Finland signed the United Nations Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty. It had not yet ratified this instrument by the end of the year. In May Finland ratified both the European Convention on Human Rights and its Protocol No. 6 concerning the abolition of the death penalty.
Finnish law on unarmed and civilian service was last amended in 1987, increasing the length of alternative service from 12 to 16 months: twice as long as military service.
Three conscientious objectors began serving their sentences. Mauri Robert Ryoma, a hospital assistant, began serving a 12-month sentence in January. Timo Kin-nunen, a student, began serving a seven-month sentence in March. Hannu Puttonen, an editor, began serving a 12-month sentence in October.
Three conscientious objectors were released in June after serving their sentences; Karri Dyrendahl-Nyblin, Tomi Saarinen and Juha Kanerva (see Amnesty
International Report 1990). Veijo Heikkila, another conscientious objector adopted as a prisoner of conscience, was released in August. Timo Kinnunen was released after completing his sentence in October.
Mauri Robert Ryoma and Timo Kinnunen, along with two other imprisoned conscientious objectors who were not considered prisoners of conscience, began a hunger-strike on 23 April. The action was aimed in part at drawing attention to the punitive length of alternative service. Timo Kinnunen ended his hunger-strike on 18 May as a result of his deteriorating health; the others continued. On 31 May President Mauno Koivisto reduced Mauri Robert Ryoma's sentence and he was released shortly afterwards. The two remaining hunger-strikers were granted a presidential pardon. Earlier in May Amnesty International had called on the government to release the two prisoners of conscience immediately and to guarantee them adequate medical care.
In a letter of 14 August to the Finnish President. Amnesty International expressed its concern that Timo Kinnunen had not received a pardon or reduction of sentence as had Mauri Robert Ryoma and the other two hunger-strikers.
Amnesty International considered that because of its punitive length, civilian service did not provide an acceptable alternative to military service and sought the release of conscientious objectors whom it considered prisoners of conscience.
