UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Twenty-three prisoners were executed in 1990. At the end of the year more than 2,300 people were under sentence of death in 34 states and under United States (us) military law. Proposals to extend the death penalty under federal law were dropped from a major crime bill. Amnesty International continued to investigate criminal cases in which it was alleged that the prosecutions were politically motivated. There were complaints of ill-treatment of prisoners.
A congressional committee removed all death penalty provisions from a federal crime bill which was then passed by Congress on 26 October. The us Senate and House of Representatives had earlier approved draft bills which would have reintroduced the death penalty for a number of federal crimes and extended it to crimes not previously punishable by death.
The House bill had contained an amendment giving defendants the right to seek reversal of their death sentences on the grounds of a demonstrated pattern of racial discrimination in death sentencing. This too was dropped from the legislation.
In October the United States of America (usa) ratified the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Twenty-three prisoners were executed under state laws, bringing the number of executions since 1977 to 143. The states of Arkansas, Illinois and Oklahoma resumed executions after more than 20 years, Other executions were carried out in the states of Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Missouri, Nevada, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia.
The states of Kentucky and Tennessee passed legislation prohibiting the death penalty for mentally retarded defendants. Only two other us states already had such legislation. Missouri raised the minimum age at which an offender could be sentenced to death from 14 to 16 years at the time of commission of the crime. This brought the state into line with a 1989 us Supreme Court ruling that offenders as young as 16 could be executed.
Evidence suggested that the death penalty continued to be applied in a racially discriminatory manner. In February the General Accounting Office (gao), an independent agency of the federal government, published the findings of a survey it had conducted into the effects of race on capital sentencing practices. The gao had examined numerous research studies on this issue carried out since the mid-1970s. Eighty-two per cent of these studies suggested that those convicted of murdering white victims were significantly more likely to be sentenced to death than those convicted of murdering black victims.
In September a pre-trial motion on racial discrimination was heard in Columbus, Georgia, in the case of William Brooks, a black defendant charged with the murder of a white woman. Lawyers from the Southern Prisoners' Defence Committee (spdc) argued that the death penalty should not be available in this case as it had been applied in a racially discriminatory manner in the Chattahoochie Judicial Circuit, particularly in the city of Columbus where the case was being prosecuted. The spdc presented data on homicide convictions in the circuit between 1973 and 1990 which showed that prosecutors had sought the death penalty in 34.3 per cent of white victim cases and only 5.8 per cent of cases involving black victims. This difference could not be accounted for by non-racial factors such as the presence of aggravating circumstances, additional felonies, multiple victims or the murder of strangers. Of the 27 cases which went to trial on a capital charge, 21 involved white, mainly
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAAJRUGUAY
single victims and six involved black victims, four of which were cases with multiple victims.
The spdc also presented evidence to show that Chattahoochie prosecutors had consistently used their peremptory challenges (the right to reject potential jurors without explanation) to exclude blacks from trial juries in capital cases involving black defendants. Testimony given by the relatives of nine black murder victims suggested that their cases had been treated differently from those involving white families. On 19 September the court issued, without further elaboration, a four-word ruling: "The motion is denied." Amnesty International was represented at peirt of the hearing and concluded that the state had failed to offer a satisfactory explanation for the pattern of racial disparity in death sentencing.
Dalton Prejean, a black, mentally retarded juvenile offender, was executed in Louisiana in May. He was convicted in 1978 of the murder of a white police officer when he was 17 years old. He had been tried and sentenced by an all-white jury after the prosecutor had used his peremptory challenges to exclude all black prospective jurors from the jury panel. The Governor of Louisiana denied clemency despite a recommendation by the Louisiana Board of Pardons and Paroles that Dalton Prejean's death sentence should be commuted to life imprisonment without parole. Their recommendation was based on his history of childhood abuse and mental illness - factors which were not presented to the jury during the sentencing stage of his trial. International treaties and standards prohibit the execution of anyone under the age of 18 at the time of the crime,
In September Charles Coleman became the first prisoner to be executed in Oklahoma for 24 years. Eight years after his conviction his appeal lawyers discovered that he had a history of chronic schizophrenia and organic brain damage, first diagnosed in 1962 when he was aged 15. He had suffered head injuries in childhood and brain seizures since the age of nine -information which had not been presented at his trial. Amnesty International had written to the Oklahoma Board of Pardons and Paroles and to the Governor of Oklahoma arguing that Charles Coleman's brain damage, psychiatric history and
deprived social background constituted compelling grounds for clemency. However, clemency was denied.
The first execution in Illinois since 1962 was carried out in September when Charles Walker was executed by lethal injection. Three physicians reportedly inserted an intravenous line through which nonmedical staff later injected the lethal medication. This was believed to be the first time that doctors had participated so directly in an execution and was contrary to the guidelines of both the American Medical Association and the World Medical Association.
Earlier, the unique cruelty of the death penalty was graphically demonstrated when flames and smoke emitted from Jesse Tafero's headpiece during his electrocution in Florida in May. Three applications of high-voltage electricity were required before he was pronounced dead, owing to a malfunction caused by use of the wrong type of sponge in the headpiece. Executions in Florida were temporarily suspended until the state declared in July that the electric chair was working properly.
In September a Louisiana court issued a stay of execution for Frederick Kirkpatrick after his lawyers filed a petition arguing, among other things, that execution in the state's electric chair would be cruel and unusual punishment. Citing recent research by a United Kingdom physiologist, the petition argued that electrocution caused excruciating pain. The appeal was still pending at the end of the year.
Lawyers urged the Governor of Virginia to hold an inquiry into the use of the electric chair following Wilbert Evans' execution on 17 October. Blood had streamed from beneath the prisoner's mask and he had reportedly groaned as the electric current was applied.
In lanuary a us district court denied a habeas corpus petition in the case of David Rice, a black political activist serving life imprisonment in Nebraska. He and Edward Poindexter had been convicted in 1971 of the murder of an Omaha police officer, although both denied involvement and alleged that they were "framed" because they were leading members of the National Committee to Combat Fascism, an offshoot of the Black Panther Party. At the hearing, lawyers for David Rice argued that evidence which might have damaged the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAAJRUGUAY
credibility of the 16-year-old chief state witness had been improperly withheld by the prosecution at the time of trial. The witness, who was a major suspect in the murder, had been sentenced to youth custody in May 1971 after testifying for the prosecution and had proved untraceable since his release shortly afterwards. An appeal against the district court's denial of habeas corpus relief was heard in November and a decision was still pending at the end of the year.
Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General of Nebraska in November, questioning the fairness of the original trial proceedings and noting that the continuing absence of the chief prosecution witness may have significantly hampered investigation of the defendant's post-con-viction claims. Irregular conduct by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (fbi) during its "Cointelpro" (counter-intelligence) operations in the 1970s, Amnesty International said, had undermined the fairness of a number of trials of political activists, including members of the Black Panther Party.
In January the Governor of Louisiana rejected a recommendation by the Louisiana Pardons Board that Gary Tyler's life sentence be commuted to 60 years' imprisonment (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Allegations of ill-treatment at Harrison County Youth Detention Center in Mississippi and at the Harrison County Jail, made public in September 1989, were reported to be under federal investigation. Inmates, including two boys aged 13 and 14, were allegedly beaten or otherwise abused by officials between 1986 and 1989. Amnesty International wrote to the Mississippi Field Division of the fbi in February to express concern and seek information about the investigation but had received no reply by the end of the year.
Reports suggested that us prison authorities may have been deliberately negligent in their treatment of Dr Alan Berkman, who developed Hodgkin's Disease while serving a federal prison sentence for politically motivated offences. The cancer had gone into remission in 1986 but recurred in 1990. The authorities reportedly failed to follow specific medical recommendations about regular monitoring of his condition and were said to have held him at the Washington, District of Columbia (dc) Jail,
in conditions (including denial of fresh air and exercise) which had exacerbated his condition.
Amnesty International wrote to the Federal and Washington dc prison authorities in June expressing concern that the alleged medical neglect of Dr Berkman and his general conditions of confinement might be considered cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The Federal Bureau of Prisons replied, stating that Dr Alan Berkman -then in the custody of the Washington dc Corrections Department - was being treated by competent medical professionals and receiving chemotherapy.
Prisoners at Rikers Island Prison, New York, were reportedly ill-treated by guards on 14 August after a riot in the prison. It was alleged that guards took prisoners from their cells, lined them up against walls and beat them with batons. At least 142 prisoners and 20 prison guards were taken to hospital after the riot. Most had minor injuries but several inmates were still receiving hospital treatment days after the incident. An inquiry conducted by the New York State Commission of Corrections found that the guards had used excessive force.
Amnesty International wrote to the Mayor of New York City and to the New York State Commission of Corrections, welcoming the prompt decision to investigate the allegations and urging that those responsible for ill-treating prisoners after the riot should be brought to justice. In response, the authorities informed Amnesty International that several independent authorities (including the New York State Commission of Corrections) were continuing to investigate the allegations and that disciplinary action would be taken where appropriate.
In 1989 allegations came to light that police officers from the Area 2 police station in Chicago, Illinois, had systematically tortured or otherwise ill-treated more than 20 people suspected of killing police officers between 1972 and 1984. The suspects alleged that they had been beaten, kicked, subjected to electric shocks, had guns placed in their mouths or had plastic bags placed over their heads while in police custody during this period, At least 12 people filed complaints with the Chicago police department's Office of Professional Standards (ops), which were dismissed as "not sustained", despite substantial medical evidence in at least one
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAAJRUGUAY
case. In February 1990 Amnesty International expressed its concem to the Illinois Attorney General about the apparent inadequacy of the ops investigations and asked whether any action was being taken against police officers in light of the allegations. In response, the First Assistant Attomey General said that torture in police custody is prohibited in Illinois and that complaints to the ops were investigated by independent civilian personnel. He suggested addressing further complaints to the Cook County State's Attomey or the us Attorney for the Northem District of Illinois (who are responsible for investigating alleged civil rights violations). Amnesty International wrote to both officials in December, asking them to investigate the allegations. Amnesty Intemational also called on the Chicago city authorities to initiate a full inquiry.
There were allegations of human rights violations by us troops during the invasion of Panama (see Panama).
Amnesty Intemational made numerous appeals on behalf of prisoners under sentence of death, urging clemency in all cases, and made interventions on behalf of David Rice, Dr Alan Berkman and others.
In an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission Working Group on Detention, Amnesty Intemational included reference to its concerns on the imposition of the death penalty on juvenile offenders in the usa.
