NIGERIA
Over 120 people were executed, including 69 soldiers sentenced to death after secret, unfair trials for alleged involvement in a coup attempt in April. At least 106 prisoners were sentenced to death during
NIGERIA
the year: 72 after being convicted of involvement in the attempted coup, and the rest after being convicted of murder or armed robbery. Over 60 civilians, detained without charge or trial following the coup attempt, were prisoners of conscience: most were released but at least nine were still held at the end of the year. Harsh prison and detention conditions continued to be reported.
Hundreds of soldiers and civilians were detained following an attempt on 22 April to overthrow the government, the Armed Forces Ruling Council (afrc). At least nine soldiers and an unknown number of civilians were reportedly killed in the coup attempt, which was led by Major Gideon Orkar. In a radio broadcast before his capture, he claimed to represent the interests of people from central and southern Nigeria against domination by northerners.
Following the coup attempt, the government said that 863 soldiers and civilians had been tried by a special military court between May and luly and that 764 of them had been acquitted and released. A further 38 people were tried and convicted in September. Of the 72 people sentenced to death. 42 were executed on 27 July, including Major Orkar and nine other officers; 27 more were executed on 13 September. The executions were carried out the day after the court's verdicts were submitted to the afrc for approval. On both occasions, the sentences were not announced until after the executions had been carried out. The afrc was believed to have commuted three death sentences. The military court sentenced 18 defendants, including three civilians, to prison terms; the afrc subsequently reduced some of the sentences and ordered the release of two people sentenced to life imprisonment.
The trials were unfair. The defendants were detained incommunicado prior to the trial and there were allegations that some were tortured or ill-treated. Defendants were not permitted defence counsel of their choice, but were represented by military officers. It was not clear whether they had sufficient time to prepare their defence. The Special Military Tribunal, a court set up in 1986 following a previous coup attempt, tried the cases in camera, and details of the proceedings were not available. The court could not be considered independent: it was composed of
senior military officers and presided over by members of the government, in most cases by Major-General Ike Nwachukwu. A member of the afrc, he had been Minister of External Affairs until December 1989, and was reappointed to this position in September 1990. Defendants had no right of appeal. Their only recourse was to apply for clemency to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, whose recommendations would be considered by the afrc.
loumalists, academics and religious leaders were among at least 50 civilians who were detained without charge following the attempted coup. Many were detained after publishing articles or speaking publicly about the coup attempt, in one case apparently after calling for the rebels not to be executed. Most were released uncharged within six weeks. However, three university lecturers - Omotoye Olorode. Idowu Awopetu and Obaro Ikime - were held uncharged for three months and subsequently dismissed irom their posts, although their interrogation in detention apparently focused on their political views rather than any involvement in the coup attempt.
At least nine relatives of people sought by the authorities in connection with the coup attempt were reportedly still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. They included two sisters of a business executive who was wanted by the authorities for allegedly financing the coup attempt. They appeared to be detained solely because of their family ties and were believed to be held under the 1984 State Security Decree. This decree had been amended in January to empower the Chief of General Staff to order the indefinite detention without charge or trial of anyone suspected of threatening national security, and to provide for review of all detentions within six weeks by a committee headed by the Minister of lustice.
There was an increase in the number of people reported to have been sentenced to death or executed for criminal offences, During 1990 at least 34 people were sentenced to death for murder or armed robbery and at least 52 criminal prisoners were executed. Most executions were carried out in public by firing-squad. All of the executed criminal prisoners appeared to have been convicted by Robbery and Firearms Tribunals, special courts from which there is no right of appeal and
NIGERIA/NORWAY
whose procedures do not ensure fair trial.
Death sentences continued to be passed on defendants under the age of 18 at the time of the offence. Five men aged between 17 and 21 when they were arrested in 1983 were reportedly sentenced to death in December for murder and armed robbery.
In July the Military Governor of Lagos State refused to commute the death sentences on 12 young men convicted of armed robbery in 1988, although one was revealed after the trial to have been 14 years old at the time of the offence and Lagos State's own Justice Department had said that an appeal court would have overturned the convictions (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. One of the prisoners, Mohammed Ibrahim, died in December from pulmonary tuberculosis, apparently as a result of harsh prison conditions and medical neglect.
There continued to be a high incidence of prison deaths due to malnutrition and lack of medical care, particularly among prisoners awaiting trial. In March the judge in a Robbery and Firearms Tribunal in Oyo State expressed concern that seven of the 29 defendants in one case, most of whom were in their twenties, had died in Agodi Prison. Ibadan, before they could be brought to trial.
In November President Ibrahim Babangida ordered the release of 11 senior electricity employees serving sentences imposed for conspiring to interfere unlawfully with power-generating equipment and inducing others to do so during a strike in 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990].
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the use of the death penalty and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences, The organization was particularly disturbed by the speed with which prisoners sentenced in connection with the coup attempt were executed after having been tried unfairly and denied any right of judicial appeal. Amnesty International also pressed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for all other political detainees to be brought to trial promptly and fairly on recognizably criminal charges or released, and urged that all deaths of prisoners be officially investigated.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Sub-Commission working group on detention, Amnesty International
included reference to its concerns about the imposition of the death penalty on juveniles in Nigeria.
