ALBANIA
According to official sources nearly 200 political prisoners were pardoned and released between June and December, and several dozen others were released early on parole. At least 600 others remained in detention, including people imprisoned during the year. The majority were prisoners of conscience detained for attempting to exercise their rights to freedom of movement and freedom of expression. In most cases they had been denied legal assistance before and during trial. It was alleged that police and investigators had beaten and otherwise ill-treated suspects following arrest in order to obtain confessions. Prison conditions were harsh. It was alleged that border guards shot without warning scores of people attempting to leave the country. The authorities stated that some three or four death sentences are imposed every year, but owing to ofiicial censorship no details of death sentences or executions carried out in 1990 were available.
In January anti-govemment demonstrations took place in Tirana and Shkoder, followed by reports of unrest in other towns. On 2 July there were further anti-govemment demonstrations in Tirana, and several groups of people entered foreign embassies. Clashes occurred when security
ALBANIA
forces tried to prevent others from following them. However, that night and in the next few days almost 5,000 people took refuge in foreign embassies. In mid-July they were allowed to leave the country. In December the authorities decided to legalize opposition parties after mass peaceful demonstrations by students in Tirana, and the first two opposition parties were founded. Anti-government rioting broke out in Shkoder and other towns between 12 and 14 December and some 150 people were arrested.
In May and June the People's Assembly adopted legal reforms which softened some of the harshest restrictions on the rights to freedom of expression, conscience and movement. Other changes restored legal status to lawyers (lost in 1967) and reintroduced provision for early release on parole. In June Albania was granted observer status with the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce) and in September sought full membership.
Until 1990 the state severely restricted travel abroad and few Albanian citizens, apart from official delegations and a limited number of students, were permitted to leave the country. In June a decree was passed granting citizens the right to a passport, but many people continued to leave the country without official permission.
Among the changes introduced in May was the abolition of a law which had defined attempts to leave the country without official permission as a form of treason punishable by 10 to 25 years' imprisonment or death. Redefined as "illegal border-crossing", this offence became punishable by a maximum of five years' imprisonment. This change was not retroactive for people convicted before May and many prisoners of conscience continued to serve sentences of up to 20 years imposed under the old law.
Among them were Namik Ajazi, who was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in May 1988 by the district court of Librazhd. later reduced to 13 years; Alek-sander Rexhepi, sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment in April 1988 by the district court of Shkoder, apparently merely for having spoken with friends about his wish to leave the country; and Zeni Jonuzi, sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment in October 1988, also by the district court • of Shkoder.
In early July Haxhi Sula, Agim Sula,
Petro Mishtari and Ilir Seran were sentenced by the district court of Tirana to between two and three years' imprisonment and up to five years' internal exile for attempted "illegal border-crossing". The four men had been arrested near the town of Librazhd while attempting to cross into Yugoslavia. Another member of the group, Kujtim Xhaja, was shot and killed by border guards. In J\ily Christos Mertyris, a member of Albania's Greek minority, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for "illegal border-crossing" by the district court of Gjirokastër.
Changes were also made to Article 55 of the criminal code which prohibits "anti-state agitation and propaganda", In May the maximum sentence for this offence was reduced from 25 years' imprisonment or death to 10 years' imprisonment. This change was not retroactive except in the case of people convicted of "religious propaganda". who became eligible for release. Many prisoners of conscience who had non-violently expressed political dissent continued to serve long prison sentences.
Information came to light during the year on the imprisonment of Pétrit Ishmi, Alfred Berisha and Xhulieta Cuka, typographers from Tirana, who had been arrested in March 1989 after they produced and distributed a pamphlet calling for demonstrations to protest at restrictions on freedom of speech and the press. In August 1989 a military court in Tirana convicted them under Article 55 and sentenced Pétrit Ishmi to 20 years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile and Alfred Berisha to 15 years' imprisonment. Xhulieta Cuka received a 13-year prison sentence but was released in November 1989 under the terms of a general pardon which included almost all women prisoners.
In April 1990 a former political prisoner, Ramiz Kaca, aged 78 and in poor health, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment by Tirana district court for having sent letters to the authorities protesting at violence used by the police against people who had taken part in peaceful demonstrations in Tirana at the end of January. His trial was closed to the public and he was not permitted legal assistance. His sentence was reduced on appeal to three years' imprisonment. In November he was pardoned and unconditionally released.
In June three men, Vasil Dhimitri, Zeqir Gollobani and Faruk Pico, were reportedly
ALBANIA
tried in Tirana on charges of organizing the 28 January demonstration. According to some accounts they were sentenced to between 14 months and two years' imprisonment. but these sentences could not be confirmed.
The Umited information available suggested that most, perhaps all, prisoners of conscience imprisoned for their religious beliefs had been released by the end of the year, including Father Ndoc Luli (see Amnesty International Report 1985) who was reportedly released in 1989. Restrictions on religion (which was banned in 1967) were relaxed: in early November President Ramiz Alia indicated that the constitutional ban on religious activities and propaganda would be abohshed. On 4 November Roman Catholic worshippers in Shkodër attended a public mass for the first time since 1967 and by the end of the year Greek Orthodox and Muslim services had also been held in a number of places without official interference.
The pimishment of "administrative internment" — internal exile imposed by administrative order and without recourse to courts — was abolished. This measure had often been applied to families whose relatives had left the country without official permission, or to political dissenters. However, the available information indicated that people already administratively detained had not, as a result of the change, been automatically allowed to return home. Internal exile continued to exist as a form of supplementary punishment imposed by courts and could still be applied for up to two years as a "preventive measure" against people who had not committed a criminal offence, but whose activities were judged to be "incompatible with good conduct and social morality".
The code of criminal procedure was changed in May to allow defendants the right of access to lawyers throughout criminal proceedings. Lawyers' associations were established in November by the Ministry of Justice (itself re-established in May).
Former political prisoners alleged that following their arrest they had been tortured to force them to confess. They stated that they had been brutally beaten, deprived of sleep and made to wear handcuffs which were deliberately tightened in order to cause intense pain. Several alleged
that they had been tortured with electric shocks. People who were arrested during the demonstrations on 2 July in Tirana described how they had been taken to police headquarters and repeatedly interrogated and beaten before being released. There were reports that many of those arrested in connection with the anti-government riots in December had been tortured.
In June Odysseas Prasos (see Amnesty Internationa! Beport 1990], who was reported to have died after being arrested in October 1989 while attempting to leave the country without permission, arrived in Greece after he and two other members of his family had been granted passports. He confirmed, however, that he and his three brothers had been severely beaten following their arrest near the Greek border and afterwards at Sarande police station, and that they had been dragged through local villages to be denounced and beaten as "traitors". As a result of this ill-treatment Odysseas Prasos was admitted to Tirana prison hospital for treatment. Yorgos Prasos alleged that he had been made to hang by his hands from the ceiling of a cell in Sarande police station and that on one occasion electric shocks were administered to him. The four brothers were pardoned and released in November 1989.
Former political prisoners reported harsh conditions of imprisonment, including poor food and inadequate medical care. Those who had been held in corrective labour camps in Spa? and Qafe e Barit, where prisoners mine copper and pyrites, complained that prisoners were obliged to achieve high work quotas in dangerous conditions with minimal industrial protection.
Several people were allegedly shot by police while taking part in demonstrations in July in Tirana or while trying to enter embassies; among those said to have been killed were Edmond Hoti and Ramadan Zidri. There were also reports that border guards regularly shot without warning people trying to leave the country. A refugee, Vasilis Mathios, reportedly alleged that his son and three others were killed by border guards with bayonets on 13 December while trying to cross into Greece. However, in the last week of December border guards apparently did not fire on several thousand people, mainly members of the Greek minority, who crossed into Greece.
ALBANIA/ALGERIA
In May the number of offences punishable by death was reduced from 34 to 11 and women were exempted from the death penalty. Capital offences still included embezzlement or theft of state property, as well as treason, espionage, terrorism and murder. According to official statements, between 1980 and 1990 four death sentences were imposed for political offences and three or four people were sentenced to death every year for ordinary crimes. According to unofficial soiurces, the bodies of execution victims were sometimes publicly exhibited.
In April Amnesty International wrote to President Alia urging the abolition of the death penalty, and expressing the hope that amendments to the criminal code would ensure that Albanian citizens could enjoy without fear of punishment the nonviolent exercise of their human rights. The organization also called on the authorities to ratify the international covenants on human rights. In July Amnesty International asked the government for details of any charges brought against those held in connection with their attempts to leave the country. It called for an investigation into any killings of demonstrators or people seeking refuge in foreign embassies and urged that security forces comply with the un Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials.
In December the organization called for constitutional changes which would provide effective guarantees for basic human rights. It also expressed concern about the continued detention of prisoners of conscience; allegations of torture and ill-treat-ment and poor prison conditions; and reports that people trying to leave the country had been killed by border guards. In addition, it urged that Uiose arrested in connection with the riots in December be guaranteed legal safeguards, including adequate time to prepare their defence: 26 of them had been sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment within one week of their arrest.
