MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
More than 50 suspected government opponents were prisoners of conscience; some had been held continuously for more than 16 years. Others were arrested and imprisoned in 1990. Hundreds of other political prisoners, some of whom were possible prisoners of conscience, were serving sentences imposed after trials which fell short of international fair trial standards. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, and of deaths in custody, possibly following such abuse. No steps were taken by the authorities to clarify hundreds of cases of "disappearances" reported since 1975. More than 140 people were believed to be under sentence of death but no executions were known to have been carried out.
National elections due in 1990 were postponed in anticipation of a negotiated settlement to the long-running dispute over the Western Sahara. A plan for a cease-fire to be followed by an amnesty for political prisoners and a referendum in the Western Sahara, worked out under United Nations auspices in lune, was agreed by both the Moroccan Government and the Frente Popular para la liberación de Seguía el-Hamra y Rio de Oro, Popular Front for the Liberation of Seguia el-Hamra and Rio de Oro, known as the Polisario Front.
Riots took place in Fes, Tánger and other towns during a one-day general strike on 14 December called by two major trade
unions in support of a number of social and economic demands including a higher minimum wage. The government said five people were killed but other sources suggested that at least 50 people had died, mostly as a result of attempts by the police and army to restore order.
More than 40 prisoners of conscience and many others who may have been prisoners of conscience were held throughout the year. The former included Abraham Serfaty and seven other alleged members of clandestine Marxist groups sentenced after an unfair trial in 1977 (see Amnesty International Report 1978), and Ali Idrissi Kaitouni, a painter and poet sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in 1982 for his writings. All nine were held at Kenitra Central Prison.
Fatima Oufkir also remained in custody. Her husband, former interior minister General Mohammed Oufkir, died in suspicious circumstances after his alleged involvement in a coup attempt in 1972; Fatima Oufkir, her six children and one of her cousins continued to be held under house arrest and virtually incommunicado near Marrakech. They had been held continuously since 1972, when the youngest child was only three years old, although no charges had ever been brought against them.
Some 25 members of the armed forces were also prisoners of conscience. All remained in prison without facing further charges after completing their sentences: they had been among over 100 military personnel sentenced in 1972 for allegedly attempting to kill King Hassan II. In 1973, 61 of the prisoners were moved to a remote prison at Tazmamert and since then had been subjected to such harsh and grossly inadequate conditions that at least 29 of the group had reportedly died in custody.
Suspected government opponents jailed during the year were also prisoners of conscience. They included six alleged members of an illegal Islamic group, al-'Adl wa'l-Ihsan, Justice and Charity, who were tried by the Court of First Instance at Salé. They were each sentenced in March to two years' imprisonment for membership of an unauthorized organization, illegal fund-raising and other offences. Their sentences were confirmed on appeal in August. Between December 1989 and March 1990, 32 other people were tried on similar charges; six were acquitted after trial and
MEXICO/MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
the others were acquitted or given reduced sentences on appeal.
The trial of the six prisoners at Salé was marked by gross irregularities. Defendants' dates of arrest were falsified to conceal the length of time they had been held incommunicado in pre-trial {garde a vue) detention, and the court refused to allow the defence to call witnesses to testify to this: defence lawyers walked out of the court in protest.
Abdessalam Yassine, the leader of a¡-'Adl wa'l-lhsan, was also a prisoner of conscience. He was placed under house arrest in January and still confined at the end of the year.
Other prisoners of conscience included Ahmed Benjelloun, director of the weekly newspaper al-Tariq [The Way], who was sentenced to four months' imprisonment in May after being convicted under Article 44 of the Press Code, An article he had published in April 1989 was held to have defamed certain institutions.
Two others, Mohammed El-Brini and Abdelkader Himer, journalists with the newspaper al-Ittihad al-Ishtiraki [Socialist Uiiion], were also charged under the Press Code in connection with an article published in August which criticized corruption and delays in the courts. Their trial had not concluded by the end of the year and both men were at liberty.
Many other people brought to trial during the year, including a number arrested in the wake of widespread demonstrations on 14 December, may have been prisoners of conscience. More than 40 students were brought to trial before the December unrest on charges such as disturbing public order, and received sentences of up to five years' imprisonment. Some alleged in court that they had been tortured while held in garde á vue detention, often beyond the maximum period permitted by law. Nine Fes University students who were tried in the Chambre criminelle, criminal chamber, in Fes in July 1990, alleged that they had been tortured while held in garde á vue detention for up to 49 days following their arrests in 1989. They then remained in custody for nearly one year before being brought to trial.
Over 1,000 people were arrested following the riots on 14 December. More than 200 of them had been sentenced to prison terms of up to 10 years by the end of the year.
More than 300 political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years continued to be held throughout 1990. They included 14 prisoners serving sentences of up to 20 years' imprisonment imposed in September 1981 following riots in Casablanca and at least 110 others, including alleged members of illegal Marxist and Islamic groups, who were sentenced after demonstrations and riots in January 1984. Other alleged Marxists, convicted of belonging to Ila'l-Amam, Forward, and of conspiring against the government, had been sentenced in 1986, and more than 30 out of 85 students sentenced for public order and other offences in 1989 were also still held. Their trials failed to satisfy international fair trial standcirds.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly untried detainees held in garde d vue ■ detention. Seven of the Fes University stu- | dents who were tried in July alleged that they had been tortured at Derb Moulay Cherif detention centre in Casablanca while held incommunicado in 1989. They said that they were beaten, including on the soles of the feet, kicked, suspended in contorted positions, partially suffocated and given electric shocks. No investigation of these allegations was knovm to have been initiated by the court or the detaining authorities.
Abdelkader Migou, a trader, was also allegedly tortured at Oujda police station where he was taken following his arrest in August as a criminal suspect He was said to have lost consciousness after being kicked and to have sustained three broken ribs as a result of the alleged assault. He received hospital treatment and a medical report found injuries consistent with his allegations. His lawyer sought an official inquiry, but no investigation was known to have been initiated.
Reports of five deaths in custody suggested that the victims may have been tortured. Saida Habiba died in Azilal police station two days after her arrest in January, Mohammed Hirchi, a 17-year-old criminal suspect, died in hospital in Oujda in July, 12 days after his arrest. In both cases reports suggested that these prisoners had been tortured or ill-treated in garde a vue detention before their deaths. In January the Moroccan Government said an inquiry would be held into Saida Habiba's death, but Amnesty International received no
MEXICO/MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
information to indicate whether any such inquiry was established. Following Mohammed Hirchi's death his lawyer pressed for a judicial investigation into the cause and circumstances of his death but it was not known whether any such inquiry was held. The Moroccan Government informed Amnesty International delegates in February that the cases of Larbi Charrat and Abdeljalil Yakouti, who died in custody in 1989, had been put before the juge d'instruction (examining magistrate].
Reports of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in prison continued. In Kenitra Civil Prison women were reportedly slapped, kicked, and beaten with sticks and on the soles of the feet [fahqa]; in February one criminal prisoner. Malika Rabali, was allegedly tortured and put in a straitjacket for 24 hours. Political prisoners in Meknes, Safi and Ghbila prisons claimed to have been assaulted by prison officers. Severe overcrowding continued in many detention centres and prisons, and there were reports of over 100 prisoners being confined in cells measuring 24 square metres. Three political prisoners who had been on hunger-strike since June 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990), and one other who had been on hunger-strike since June 1985, ended their protests in February after they were transferred to Kenitra Central Prison. However, Hassan Aharrat and Noureddine Jouhari, who had been on hunger-strike since June 1985, were said to be still held incommunicado and secured to beds in Averroes Hospital in Casablanca at the end of the year. Both continued to be forcibly fed through gastric tubes (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
The goverrunent had still failed to account for the fate of hundreds of people of Western Saharan origin reported to have "disappeared" since 1975 in the custody of Moroccan security forces. There were persistent rumours that many were still alive and confined in secret prison camps or detention centres, one of which was said to be at Qal'at M'gouna, east of Ouarzazzate. However, this could not be confirmed.
No executions were recorded during the year. However, 147 prisoners reportedly remained under sentence of death in Kenitra Central Prison. They included 15 political prisoners who were convicted of plotting against the monarchy. Six of them were possible prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to call for the release of prisoners of conscience, for other political prisoners to be brought to trial promptly and fairly or released, and for government action to prevent torture. Amnesty International also continued to press for an investigation into cases of "disappearance" and expressed concern over reports of life-threatening conditions and deaths among prisoners at Tazmamert.
In February an Amnesty International delegation visited Morocco and had discussions with King Hassan II, government ministers and officials. Before the visit, the organization had submitted details of its concerns relating to garde à vue detention, which were subsequently published in a report, Morocco: Human Rights Violations in Garde à Vue Detention. The delegation also met a specially constituted Committee for Dialogue with Amnesty International, which presented a lengthy response. However, the response failed to address adequately Amnesty International's concerns. Two Amnesty International delegates who travelled to Morocco to carry out research in advance of a proposed second visit in March were asked to leave the country. Subsequently, the Moroccan authorities informed Amnesty International that it would not be permitted to send representatives to the country before the next meeting with the Committee for Dialogue, and no such meeting with the Committee was arranged before the end of the year.
In May King Hassan II appointed a Conseil consultatif des droits de l'homme (ccdh), Human Rights Advisory Council. This set up two working groups, one to examine the use of garde à vue detention and the remand system, détention préventive. and the other to review the prison system. The full findings of the two groups had not been officially announced by the end of the year.
In November Amnesty International published a report, Morocco: "Disappearances" of People of Western Saharan Origin, and reiterated its call for an inquiry into "disappearance" cases. The government did not respond to the report or the renewed appeal.
