RWANDA
About 7,000 suspected government opponents were detained after armed Uganda-based exiles invaded northeast Rwanda in October. Over 4,000 were believed to have been released by the end of 1990 but the government announced that more than 1,500 others, who included possible prisoners of conscience, would be tried. Many of those arrested were reportedly tortured and ill-treated, and at least five of them died as a result of poor prison conditions. Six other people were prisoners of con* science after being convicted of political offences at unfair trials. The Head of State commuted 480 death sentences to life imprisonment and no executions were reported.
An armed force of Rwandese exiles, mostly members of the Tutsi ethnic group who had left Rwanda in the late 1950s and early 1960s, invaded northeast Rwanda from Uganda on 1 October in an attempt to overthrow the government of President Juv6nal Habyarimana. Four days later, there was fighting in and around the capital, Kigali, when supporters of the rebels tried to open a second front. The rebels were said to have killed captured combatants and to have conscripted children into their ranks. The government declared a state of siege on 8 October, which was still in force at the end of the year, and took military action against the insurgents. The rebel-occupied territory was recovered and several rebel leaders were killed, but various parts of the north were still affected by the conflict at the end of the year. Hundreds of civilians were reportedly killed by rebel forces or government troops. A government minister said that more than
300 people killed by government troops were rebels in civilian clothes.
In November President Habyarimana announced that political reforms would be introduced to end the one-party state in 1991. He also approved a proposal for a regional conference to discuss the future of refugees and exiles from Rwanda, but this had not taken place by the end of the year.
About 7,000 people, the majority of whom appeared to be Tutsi, were detained in connection with the rebellion in the last quarter of the year. The detainees included members of the armed forces and civilians - some of them critics of the government -as well as relatives of the rebels and more than 200 Ugandan nationals. Among them were Alphonse Munyaneza, a Hutu and the son of a former government minister, and Thomas Kabeja, a Tutsi university lecturer: both men were among more than 4,000 people who were released uncharged before the end of 1990.
Following the first arrests in October the government set up commissions, composed of members of the security forces and the procuracy, to determine who should be released and who should be referred for possible prosecution. The grounds for their decisions were not made public, however, and some reports suggested that those still held at the end of 1990 included leading members of the Tutsi community and Ugandan nationals detained solely on account of their ethnic origin or nationality. The commissions ordered many releases, but numerous detainees had not appeared before them by the time their proceedings were suspended at the end of November. Eugène Ruta-garama, a Tutsi biologist who appeared to be a prisoner of conscience held on the grounds that he had been in contact with government opponents while travelling abroad, was among more than 2,000 people still held at the end of the year,
In December the government announced that 1,566 people arrested in connection with the rebel incursion would be brought to trial. The first 12 defendants appeared before the State Security Court in late December, but their trial was adjourned to 1991.
Earlier in the year several other people were tried before the State Security Court. In March Innocent Ndayambaje, a university student who had been detained incommunicado for more than three years
RWANDA/ST VINCENT W^D THE GRENADINES
(see Amnesty International Report 1990), received a five-year prison term for forming a political party in violation of Rwanda's one-party constitution. He was a prisoner of conscience. In April Callixte Sinaruhamagaye and Claude Bahintasi, both held since 1987, Dr Aloys Sebiziga. who was arrested in 1989, and two others were acquitted on charges of assisting a former government minister living in exile (see Amnesty /niernaf/ona/ Report 1990) and released.
Four Jehovah's Witnesses were sentenced to 10-year prison terms in April for disturbing the peace and organizing unauthorized meetings. All four were prisoners of conscience.
Two journalists, Vincent Rwabukwisi and Hassan Ngeze. were arrested in July. The State Security Court twice declined to pass judgment on the grounds of insufficient evidence but kept the journalists in custody. The Court reconvened in October, after the rebel incursion, and sentenced Vincent Rwabukwisi to 15 years' imprisonment for endangering state security by meeting Rwandese exiles in Kenya. There was no evidence to suggest that he had any prior knowledge of the armed incursion and he appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. Hassan Ngeze received a one-year suspended sentence for subversion as a result of a newspaper article he had published which claimed that the Tutsi dominated the Rwandese economy.
The State Security Court offered defendants little chance of a fair trial. All but one of the five judges were closely linked to the government and the security forces and could not be considered independent. Many defendants appeared in court without legal counsel and were unable to contest their cases on points of law. The court offered restricted and inadequate opportunities of appeal, and none of those convicted in 1990 was known to have lodged an appeal,
Many of those arrested in October were held for several days in Nyamirambo stadium, near Kigali, without food, drink or medical care, before being moved to various prisons. At least five people reportedly died in custody, possibly as a result of poor conditions and lack of medical care: only one such death was confirmed by the government.
Many detainees were also reportedly beaten by members of the security forces,
especially at the time of their arrest. One person was said to have died under torture in December soon after his arrest by members of the security forces in the town of Rwamagana.
A family of three was possibly extrajudicially executed. Michel Karambizi, his wife and child were shot dead in Kigali by government soldiers in early October. Some sources suggested that they may have been targeted because Michel Karambizi's brother, a political exile, was a well-known government opponent, but the authorities said the family was killed in an armed clash with the security forces. No inquiry into the killings was known to have been carried out.
In September 480 prisoners had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment by President Habyarimana. The courts were believed to have imposed further death sentences, but it was not known how many. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Innocent Ndayambaje and other prisoners of conscience.
Following the October incursion, Amnesty International sought information about those arrested, their legal status and their treatment and conditions of detention. It pressed the authorities to release all prisoners of conscience and to ensiu-e the fair trial or release of other political detainees. The organization appealed to the government to take all possible steps to protect those in custody from torture, ill-treatment or other human rights abuses, to instruct members of the security forces to respect human rights, and to investigate alleged human rights abuses. In late December an Amnesty International representative visited Kigali to observe the trial of alleged rebel sympathizers and to collect information about political prisoners. Amnesty International welcomed those releases that did occur and the commutation of death sentences.
