TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
One hundred and fourteen people were charged with treason following an attempt to overthrow the government; if convicted as charged they would be sentenced to death. At the end of the year there were over 90 prisoners imder sentence of death. There were no executions during the year; the last hanging was carried out in 1979. The Human Rights Committee adopted the view that there had been violations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (icCpr) in the case of a prisoner under sentence of death. The Commission of Inquiry into the effectiveness and status of the death penalty submitted its report.
In an attempt to overthrow the government of Prime Minister Arthur Napoleon Raymond Robinson, an armed group occupied the parliament building and state television station from 27 July to 1 August. Members of the ¡amaat-al-Muslimeen, Muslim Organization, a black Muslim group founded in the early 1980s and led by Yasin Abu Bakr, stormed the parliament
building. They took 46 hostages including the Prime Minister and members of the cabinet, Senate and House of Representatives. The group's demands included the resignation of the Prime Minister and a general election within 90 days. As a result of confrontations during the five days, over 30 people were killed, including a member of the House of Representatives and police officers. Hundreds were injured, both inside the occupied buildings and in the streets. Among the injiued was the Prime Minister who sustained gunshot wounds to his legs. A state of emergency was declared on 28 July and remained in force until 9 December. All members of the group engaged in the occupation surrendered unconditionally on 1 August.
As a result of the attempt to overthrow the government, 114 members of the Jamaat-al-Mushmeen were charged with treason, murder and other offences in August. The treason and murder charges carry a mandatory sentence of death on conviction. The trial was pending at the end of the year.
In July the Human Rights Committee, which supervises the implementation of the iccpr, held that Trinidad and Tobago had violated its obligations under the Covenant in the case of death row prisoner Daniel Pinto, and that he was "entitled to a remedy entailing his release". The Committee found that Article 14(3)(d) had been violated, because the legal assistance provided at his appeal did not "adequately and effectively ensure justice". Daniel Pinto had complained about the quality of the court-appointed defence lawyer at his trial and objected to the same lawyer appearing for him at appeal. He made arrangements for a different lawyer to represent him at his appeal, but these arrangements were ignored by the Coiut of Appeal. The Committee also concluded that Article 6 of the Covenant (the right to life) had been violated since the death sentence had been imposed after judicial proceedings that fell short of procédural guarantees protected by Article 14 of the Covenant. Daniel Pinto was still on death row at the end of the year.
The Commission of Inquiry examining the death penalty, appointed in March 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1989 and 1990], held public sittings in March and April for members of the public to present their views. The Commission's
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGOAUNISIA
report, submitted to President Noor Has-sanali in September, concluded that the death penalty for murder and treason should be retained. The Commission recommended that prisoners sentenced to death over 10 years ago should have their sentences commuted to life imprisonment but that executions of those who had exhausted their appeals should be resumed. Amnesty International appeared before the Commission of Inquiry into the death penalty in March and called for total abolition and for the death sentences of all 96 prisoners then on death row to be commuted. It said that such moves would set an example of leadership in the upholding and advancement of human rights in the Caribbean and internationally. The organization pointed to the worldwide trend towards abolition and the various problems inherent in the death penalty.
