GUATEMALA
Reports were received of hundreds of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, continuing the pattern of gross abuses reported over more than two decades. Many victims appeared to have been tortured before being murdered. As in previous years, there was a pattern of harassment and assaults directed at suspected government opponents by the security forces acting both in uniform and in plain clothes.
Human rights workers and others who pressed for inquiries into past violations were particularly vulnerable to attack by military personnel and their civilian agents, who repeatedly characterized them as guerrilla supporters. Other victims included villagers who refused to serve in the ostensibly voluntary civil patrols, people in areas believed to be sympathetic to or controlled by the armed opposition, representatives to the National Dialogue consultative process set up under the 1987 Central American Peace Agreement, academics and students, trade unionists, street children, journalists and politicians.
Some victims were shot outright by security force personnel, acting either in uniform or in plain clothes in the guise of "death squads". Other victims were forcibly seized; their bodies were found later, sometimes far from the original place of abduction, often badly tortured or mutilated to obscure identification. Others remained "disappeared". Civil patrols, formed at the behest of the military and operating under military control, were also blamed for human rights violations.
Abuses intensified as November elections approached to replace the government of President Vinicio Cerezo Ar6valo, which took office in 1986 and was Guatemala's first elected civilian government in
GUATEMALA
almost 20 years. President Cerezo's election had brought new hope for an end to the long-term pattern of human rights violations in Guatemala and for a public accounting for crimes committed by the security forces. However, his administration did little to investigate abuses committed under military governments or to bring those responsible to justice. After a brief initial decrease, reports of abductions, torture, "disappearances", and political killings escalated throughout his term of office.
The perpetrators of human rights violations appeared to operate with impunity. Very few instances were known of official personnel being charged with abuses even when specific evidence, including eyewitness testimony, pointed to their guilt. In the one known case in recent years where official agents were found guilty on such a charge, the six police officers involved were released in July 1990 after an appeal court overturned their conviction for the 1987 abduction and murder of two agronomy students, despite strong forensic and other evidence linking them to the crime.
The abuses were reported in the context of a continuing insurgency, and the government and military periodically charged that the armed opposition had carried out torture and murder, although details of individual cases were rarely conclusive. In the highly publicized killing of some 23 peasants in El Aguacate, Chimaltenango, in 1988, evidence presented by the authorities to support such allegations remained controversial and contrasted with findings of local and international human rights groups which alleged military responsibility (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
In January Guatemala acceded to the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel. Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Human rights activists were among those targeted for abuse. At least two members of an organization known as the cer), which protects the human rights of Guatemala's indigenous peoples, "disappeared", and some six others were apparent victims of extrajudicial executions. Several Cerj members were reportedly victimized because they had been pressing for inquiries into human rights violations previously carried out against their relatives or for exhumation from clandestine graves of family members killed during army
counter-insurgency campaigns in the early 1980s.
Maria Mejia was killed in March in Sacapulas, El Quiché department, by men in plain clothes in an attack in which her husband, also a cerj member, was severely wounded. According to his testimony, the assailants included two civilian army agents, who appeared to be acting under army orders. Reportedly, the same agents subsequently threatened several other local villagers with death because they opposed service in the nominally voluntary civil patrols, and a number of families fled the area. On 27 March, as the families attempted to return to their homes accompanied by cerj supporters and government officials, they were threatened and assaulted by approximately 25 armed men, believed to be soldiers in plain clothes and civil patrollers acting under military orders. Some of the attackers were masked. The group fled, but Assistant Human Rights Procurator Céscir Alvarez Guadamuz suffered an injury to his hand. In October the Assistant Procurator was again assaulted by a group including civil patrollers in similar circumstances.
Leaders and members of a group known as gam, which attempts to clarify the fate of members' "disappeared" relatives, were also targeted. In March a 100-person delegation led by gam was attacked by civil patrollers, reportedly acting under army orders, as it was travelling to El Quiché to support villagers threatened for refusing to join the civil patrols. The group's President, Nineth Montenegro de Garcia, whose husband had "disappeared" in 1985, was among those injured. In July unknown men opened fire on her mother's home, using bullets of the type reportedly used by the security forces. In August her eight-year-old daughter reportedly received death threats by telephone,
Ana Graciela del Valle also experienced continuing intimidation after she filed a protest following an incident in July 1989. Four armed men in plain clothes had held a gun to her two-year-old son's head and said he would be killed if her brother-in-law didn't stop his work as director of the human rights centre known as aeprodh. Police repeatedly questioned her, asking particularly about cieprodh's investigation of the 1988 El Aguacate killings.
In May Luis Miguel Solis Pajarito, representative to the National Dialogue of the
GUATEMALA
displaced peoples' association known as condeg, "disappeared." He had evaded a kidnapping attempt in April, and reported being followed by men in plain clothes during a May Day march. In September one-month-old Josefa María "disappeared" along with her mother, Maria Tiu Tojin. The two were taken into custody by the military along with members of a peasant community who had fled during the army counter-insurgency campaigns of the early 1980s and did not wish to return to areas under army control. The army customarily treated all members of such communities as guerrilla collaborators and they, as well as those who tried to publicize their often desperate economic and health conditions, were targets of abuses. Also in September Myma Mack, an internationally known anthropologist who had been researching displaced communities, died after a particularly brutal "death squad"-style attack.
In June a group of armed men identified by witnesses as military entered Pacoc in El Quiché and ordered the two deputy mayors to arrest 15 people denounced by civil patrollers as "subversives". Most were members of a group known as CONavigua, which campaigns for compensation for widows of those killed by the army, and for exhumation of their husbands' bodies from clandestine graves. The attempt to apprehend the conavigua members foundered when the two deputy mayors refused to cooperate. The mayors were then reportedly threatened with abduction.
Academics were also victims of human rights violations in 1990. Early in the year Dr Carmen Angélica Valenzuela, a professor at the University of San Carlos (usac) and President of the Guatemalan Association of Women Doctors, became one of the few survivors of abduction and "disappearance" in Guatemala in recent years. In February she was released from military custody following a widespread international outcry and diplomatic intervention on her behalf, and went into exile abroad. She had been abducted in the presence of witnesses by men armed with sub-machine guns and was tortured in custody. Reportedly, police and military authorities had initially denied that she was in detention.
In April foiu- people, three of them reportedly law students at the usac, were abducted by armed men driving a van with polarized windows - a type of vehicle customarily used by the security forces. They
had been fund-raising for a student satire. The bodies of three, bearing apparent signs of torture, were eventually recovered from a cemetery in eastern Guatemala where they had been biu'ied as "unknown".
Continuing human rights violations against academics, and the failure of the authorities to establish responsibility for a series of abductions and murders of usac staff and students in the third quarter of 1989, were cited by Harvard Law School as major factors in its decision to terminate in 1990 an administration of justice program that it had been implementing under the aegis of the United States Agency for International Development (usaid).
Two trade unionists, brothers Carlos Enrique and Tyron Francisco Sagastume, who worked at the Guatemala City Coca-Cola bottling plant, were found dead in February, the day after they had gone missing near their homes. Their bodies showed apparent signs of torture. Leaders and members of their trade union, which has played a leading role in Guatemalan trade unionism, had been targets of abuses over a long period.
Politicians were also subjected to abuses. Among the victims was Socialist International (si) leader Salvadorian Héctor Oqueli Colindres, who was abducted and apparently extrajudicially executed in Guatemala in January as he was on his way to observe the Nicaraguan elections on behalf of si. In the same incident, Guatemalan lawyer Gilda Flores Arévalo was also abducted and killed. Both the Guatemalan and Salvadorian governments initiated inquiries, but neither had announced significant findings by the end of the year. A report commissioned by si described the Guatemalan Government's inquiry as "gravely flawed" and suggested it may have been "designed to fail". Similarly, no findings were known regarding the abduction and torture of a United States (us) nun, Diana Ortiz, in November 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990), despite reports in April 1990 that the government would establish a special investigatory commission. Government oflicials initially said that Diana Ortiz had arranged her own kidnapping, but they later retracted this and promised an inquiry after pressure from us religious organizations.
At least 14 street children were apparently extrajudicially executed by
GUATEMALA/GUINEA
Guatemala City police during the year. They included 13-year-old Nahamán Car-mona López, who was attacked on 4 March and died 10 days later in hospital of multiple injuries, including a ruptured liver, six fractured ribs, two broken fingers and severe bruising to 70 per cent of his body. In June pressure from children's and international organizations led to the arrest of foiu? police officers in connection with his death. A number of street children whose witness testimony was crucial in the case against the detained officers were repeatedly assaulted and intimidated, apparently by other police officers. The case was also marked by judicial irregularities and delays. Staff of organizations which have been instrumental in calling international attention to abuses against the street children were also increasingly the victims of threats cmd police brutality. In December a street worker with Covenant House, a group associated with such efforts, narrowly escaped abduction. He may have been targeted because he had given testimony crucial in bringing charges against a Treasury Police agent for an attack on street children.
Amnesty International repeatedly made public its concerns and called on government authorities to initiate inquiries into many incidents of human rights violations and to bring those responsible to justice. No instances were known where those allegedly responsible were convicted for the abuses reported, even in cases where eye-witness testimony explicity identified the alleged perpetrators.
In April the organization called attention to the organization's concerns about escalating violence against human rights monitors, an issue also raised at an April meeting in London with Guatemala's Interior Minister and the Director General of the Treasury Police. In July Amnesty International published a document outlining its concerns regarding abuses against street children. In October an Amnesty International delegation to Guatemala held a press conference to publicize these and other concerns and to release an open letter calling on candidates in the November presidential elections to make clear the steps they intended to take to improve the human rights situation in the country. The delegation also met government officials, local human rights groups and other independent groups, and victims of and
witnesses to recent abuses.
In the lead-up to the November elections, the organization expressed special concern at the escalating attacks on politicians and journalists, noting that in October alone, two journalists were victims of "death squad"-style murders, and a third, Byron Barrera, survived an attack in which his wife died.
In a written statement to the UN Commission on Hxunan Rights in February, Amnesty International expressed grave concern at the deteriorating human rights situation in the country and the failure of the authorities to adequately investigate the reported incidents.
