JAPAN
The Supreme Court upheld five death sentences but there were no executions. Two prisoners had their death sentences commuted on appeal and one other prisoner, who had been under sentence of death for 15 years, was acquitted after a retrial. There was concern about the lack of safeguards to prevent the ill-treatment of detainees.
Some 90 prisoners convicted of murder were believed to be under sentence of death. The Supreme Court had confirmed 36 of these sentences, five of them in 1990. No executions took place.
In February the Fukuoka High Court commuted the death sentence on Hika Masanao and in March the Tokyo High Court commuted the death sentence on
Shinohara Shinichi, The courts stressed that the death penalty should be imposed only when unavoidable. Shimogami Norio, who had been sentenced to death for murder in 1975, was retried before the Nagoya High Court. In July the court acquitted him after finding that there was no material evidence to support his conviction for murder.
In April Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the government outlining its concerns about the use of the death penalty and about detention procedures in the light of claims by some detainees that they had been ill-treated during interrogation. Amnesty International urged the authorities to examine all allegations of ill-treatment - including cases publicized by the Japan Federation of Bar Associations -and to identify and eventually amend regulations and practices which could facilitate ill-treatment. Amnesty International urged the government to consider strengthening certain safeguards against ill-treatment, including prisoners' right of access to lawyers and the complaints procedure. It also urged it to review the policy of allowing prisoners to be detained in police holding cells instead of the normal detention centres administered by the Ministry of Justice. The Secretary General of Amnesty International discussed the memorandum with Justice Ministry officials during a visit to Japan in May and June. In September the ministry sent its written comments to Amnesty International pointing out, among other matters, that some restrictions on lawyers' meetings with their clients had recently been lifted. In its memorandum Amnesty International also urged the commutation of all death sentences and the abolition of the death penalty.
In April Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice and to the Tokyo High Court about the case of Zhang Zhen-hai, a Chinese national who had hijacked an aircraft to Japan in what he said was an attempt to avoid arrest in China for his political activities. His extradition was requested by the Chinese authorities but Amnesty International was concerned that if returned to China to face charges in connection with the hijacking, he could face additional charges in connection with his involvement in the pro-democracy protests in May and June 1989, for which some people had been summarily executed and others allegedly tortured or ill-treated. It
JAPAN/JORDAN
urged the Japanese authorities to respect the internationally agreed principle of non-refouhment of individuals at risk of human rights violations. Zhang Zhenhai was extradited to China at the end of April after the Chinese authorities had given guarantees to their Japanese counterparts that he would not be charged with a capital offence or for his political activities. He was sentenced in July 1990 to eight years' imprisonment for hijacking.
