ROMANIA
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were detained for short periods and allegedly ill-treated following disturbances in June. Legal safeguards were lacking in some political trials. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. Local officials allegedly colluded in violent attacks on people, in some cases apparently on the basis of the victims' ethnic origin.
Elections in May resulted in large majorities for President Ion Iliescu and the ruling National Salvation Front (nsf). Major reform of the legal system was initiated, and the Constitution, Penal Code and Code of Penal Procedure were under review. Throughout the year trials took place of people accused of having committed human rights abuses during the violent overthrow of the former government in December 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
In February the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights extended for a further year, with the Romanian Government's agreement, the mandate of the Special Rapporteur appointed in 1989 to examine the human rights situation in Romania. In March Romania signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty, but had not ratified it by the end of the year. In December it acceded to the
un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were detained following disturbances in June in Bucharest. On 13 June security forces evicted anti-govemment demonstrators from University Square where they had been encamped for seven weeks. Many were arrested and allegedly beaten by police. Later that day. a large crowd of anti-government protesters regained control of University Square. Sections of the crowd engaged in violence, including the burning of cars and attacking government buildings. The government, apparently unable to rely on the regular security forces, appealed to the population to "defend the democracy" and called thousands of workers, many of them miners, into Bucharest.
Over 1,000 people were reportedly detained; hundreds of them were prisoners of conscience unconnected with the violence. Costica Cojacaru, a retired telecommunications worker, alleged that he was attacked without provocation and "arrested" by miners on 14 June. He was taken to the Magurele military camp on the outskirts of Bucharest where he was detained in a garage with between 700 and 800 others until 16 June, when he was released. He alleged that he and the other detainees were repeatedly ill-treated by security officials and that miners were allowed to enter the base and threaten them.
Many of those detained were released after a few days, although some remained in detention for longer periods. Marian Munteanu, a student leader, was admitted into hospital on 14 June after miners broke into the University Architecture Faculty where he was sleeping, and savagely beat him. He was arrested in hospital on 18 June on charges of having incited the crowd to violence on 13 June, although eye-witnesses reported that he had categorically rejected the use of violence and called on the crowd to be peaceful. Other students who were arrested alleged that they had been forced to sign statements incriminating Marian Munteanu, He and many others arrested during these events were denied access to their families and lawyers, in some cases for over one month. Marian Munteanu was released on 3 August.
' There were many reports of torture and ill-treatment in connection with the June
ROMANIA
disturbances in Bucharest. lulia Horac alleged that after her arrest on 13 June, she and others arrested with her were beaten and kicked while being forced through a cordon of police officers armed with batons and shields. Miners and other workers called in by the authorities openly attacked those they considered to be government opponents with clubs, pickaxes and other weapons while the security forces stood by. The miners also "arrested" and severely beat hundreds of people, many of whom were also allegedly ill-treated after arrest by army and police officials. Many of the victims had no connection with the violence which had taken place earlier.
There were numerous eye-witness accounts of official encouragement, direction and control of the miners. Members of Bucharest's Rom (Gypsy) community appeared to be singled out in a way which suggested official coordination. Groups of miners, sometimes accompanied by police officers, reportedly targeted Rom homes, savagely beating the inhabitants, and attacked suspected Rom in the streets. A commission of inquiry into the June events was established but had not published its findings by the end of the year.
A number of people tried for public order offences were sentenced to up to six months' imprisonment under Decree 153/1970, which ostensibly deals with those "who lead a parasitic life". Those convicted included between 14 and 18 Rom sentenced in connection with inter-communal rioting in Tirgu Mures in March. These trials lacked essential legal safeguards and did not meet international standards for fair trials. Decree 153/1970 does not allow for an appeal to a higher tribunal and provides for an accelerated procedure which does not allow sufficient time to prepare a defence. The defence counsel for the Rom convicted in Tirgu Mures was reportedly permitted to see the dossier only minutes before the trial began.
There were many reports of ill-treat-ment of detainees, which in some cases amounted to torture. Some anti-govem-ment protesters arrested on 18 February were reportedly beaten by police officers until they signed confessions. They included Atila Rosianu, aged 16, who was reportedly beaten and forced by police to denounce one of his co-defendants. Some of the detainees - many of whom were minors including some under the age of
16 - were reportedly held incommunicado for as long as six weeks.
In Tirgu Mures on 19 March a large crowd of Romanians, many transported in fi'om neighbouring villages and armed with axes, pitchforks and scythes, attacked the headquarters of the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (rmdsz). There were reports of collusion with local officials who allegedly welcomed the attackers and directed them to the rmdsz headquarters. Ethnic Hungarians were brutally attacked and seriously injured in full view of police and military personnel who, eye-witnesses reported, did not intervene to protect them. Intercommunal tension had been rising in Tirgu Mures for some time, and the following day severe inter-communal rioting broke out. A commission of inquiry into the events was established but its findings had not been published by the end of the year.
Children detained in state-run psychiatric institutions were subjected to extreme neglect, amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The neglect had occurred over a long period of time under the former government, and resulted in scores of deaths, apparently from a combination of hunger and exposure to cold. Reports indicated that serious neglect continued in many of these state-run institutions after the change in govemment. Following widespread international attention, conditions reportedly improved.
An Amnesty Intemational delegation visited the country in January and discussed its concerns with senior officials. The organization called for the immediate release of Marian Munteanu and other prisoners of conscience arrested in the June events. During the year it raised its concems about alleged ill-treatment of detainees; the alleged complicity of local officials in violent attacks on people and the failure of the security forces to attempt to prevent such attacks; and the lack of legal safeguards in some trials. The authorities made a number of replies, most of which failed to address adequately the concems raised. Amnesty Intemational also called on the government to take immediate steps to prevent further ill-treatment of children in psychiatric institutions. In September a second Amnesty International delegation visited the country and met senior officials, including President Iliescu and Prime Minister Petre Roman.
