MALAWI
At least 28 prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout the year; most were held without charge or trial. They included people from the Northern Region arrested in the first half of 1989 and others held for even longer. At least 15 other political prisoners were also held without charge or trial and it was believed there were many dozens more whose identities were not known. The torture and ill-treatment of persistent criminal offenders continued in at least two prisons.
In February Malawi acceded to the Organization of African Unity's African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights. However, no action was taken during the year to guarantee basic human rights
as outlined in the Charter.
New political arrests were reported in 1990, but widespread fears that providing information about human rights issues would result in arrest made it impossible to obtain further details. All 28 prisoners of conscience known to be in detention at the start of the year were held throughout 1990, The majority were held without charge or trial under administrative detention orders imposed under the 1965 Public Security Regulations, which permit indefinite detention without charge or trial. The regulations require Life-President Dr Hastings Kamuzu Banda to review detention orders every six months, but even this limited safeguard was not known to have been implemented. Most political prisoners were therefore denied any opportunity to challenge the legal basis or reasons for their detention.
New information was received about one prisoner of conscience. Ishmael Mazunda, a medical instructor at a mission hospital, was arrested in November 1989. As secretary of a disciplinary committee at the hospital, he had expelled a number of students in July 1989. Subsequently, government officials were apparently told that he had made disrespectful references to Life-President Banda while teaching, as a result of which he was detained.
Also detained without charge or trial as prisoners of conscience were 16 people from the Northern Region who were arrested between February and May 1989 following public criticism of northerners by Life-President Banda (see Amnesty International Report 1990). They included George Mtafu, Malawi's only neurosurgeon, Thoza Khonje, a senior employee of the Sugar Company of Malawi, other employees of state-owned companies, civil servants, a teacher and a student. All were held in Mikuyu Prison near Zomba. Some were believed to be allowed monthly visits by their families, but it remained unclear whether all prisoners had this right.
Some prisoners of conscience were still held several years after they had been arrested. L.E. Chaloledwa was detained in
1977	apparently because of his family ties to a government opponent, and Kalusa Chimombo, a teacher, was detained in
1978	for allegedly showing disrespect to the Life-President. Jack Mapanje, an internationally respected poet whose work had increasingly dealt with political themes.
MALAWI/MALAYSIA
had been held since September 1987. Orton and Vera Chirwa, the only prisoners of conscience known to have been charged and tried, also remained in prison. Their trial in 1983 before a traditional court was grossly unfair (see Amnesty International Reports 1983 to 1990].
Other political prisoners detained without charge or trial had also been held for long periods. Machipisa Munthali was originally arrested in 1965 for allegedly smuggling arms into Malawi. He is believed to have been sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment, but once his sentence expired he remained in Mikuyu Prison under a detention order. Gomile Kuntumanji, a former government minister and rival to the Life-President, died in Chichiri Prison in April. He had been detained without charge or trial since 1969.
Harsh prison conditions and apparently deliberate neglect had a serious effect on the health of a number of prisoners. George Mtafu was reported to have become ill in mid-ig90 and two other prisoners of conscience, Blaise Machira and Margaret Marango Banda, were reportedly denied appropriate medical treatment (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Some criminal prisoners were reportedly subjected to a form of gross ill-treatment known as the "hard-core" regime. Under this, persistent offenders nearing the end of their sentences were reportedly taken to either Nsanje or Dzaleka Prison, chained naked to the floor of a cell, and denied adequate food for 30 days. Some criminal prisoners were also reported to have been beaten by prison staff with batons.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of all prisoners of conscience cind for the fair, prompt trial or release of other political detainees. The government did not respond at all to Amnesty International's extensive and concerted appeals, other than in January when it told the organization that Malawi government agents had played no role in the killing of Mkwapatira Mhango and nine others in October 1989 (see Amnesty International Beport 1990). In an oral statement to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to the plight of prisoners of conscience detained without charge or trial in Malawi.
