GREECE
Some 400 conscientious objectors to military service, all of them Jehovah's Witnesses, were in prison: all were prisoners of conscience. Two ethnic Turks were also considered to be prisoners of conscience. There were allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody.
Draft legislation first announced in 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990), proposing alternative civilian service double the length of military service, had still not been debated in parliament by the end of 1990.
Most of the imprisoned conscientious objectors were serving four-year sentences, which could be reduced to about three years by working for part of the sentence.
Jehovah's Witness minister Daniel Kokkalis continued to be held in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1990). In March a further two ministers, Dimitris Tsirlis and Timothy Kouloubas, were detained. They were sentenced in April and May respectively to four years in prison. Their appeal hearings were postponed twice and had not been held by the end of the year. The imprisonment of Jehovah's Witness ministers was in direct contravention of Law 1763/1988 which exempts, among others, religious ministers of a "recognized religion" from their military obligations. The Jehovah's Witness faith has been legally "recognized" in Greece for many years.
In October the Council of State ruled that Daniel Kokkalis should have been discharged fi'om military service as a minister of a recognized religion. However, he was still in prison at the end of the year.
Between 30 and 40 men, who were not Jehovah's Witnesses, had not been charged or imprisoned by the end of 1990 after publicly declaring their conscientious objection to military service on a variety of grounds.
In January two ethnic Turks, Sadik Ahmet and Ibrahim Serif, were sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment and three years' deprivation of civil rights under Article 192 of the Penal Code, which proscribes incitement to violence or mutual discord. The basis of the charge was their use of the word "Turk" to describe the ethnic Turkish minority in Western Thrace in a 1989 election manifesto. There was no indication that they had advocated violence. Ethnic Turks in Greece are oSîcially considered to be Greek Muslims and are forbidden to organize associations whose names include the word "Turkish". In March Sadik Ahmet and Ibrahim Serif were released following appeal: the appeal court reduced their prison sentences to 15 months and 10 months respectively and allowed them to pay a fine instead of serving the rest of their sentences. In April Sadik Ahmet was elected as an independent deputy to the Greek Parliament.
A number of people alleged that they had been tortured and ill-treated by the police. Kostas Andreadis, taken into police custody in March, stated that he had been forced to confess to crimes after being tortured by falanga (beating on the soles of the feet), electric shocks and threats that he would be thrown out of a window at the Thessaloniki Police Headquarters. An official medical report certified injuries to both feet.
In September Emmanuel Kasapakis lodged a complaint against the police for beating him at his home in Athens after they had called in connection with loud music at a party there. An official medical report certified injuries to the head which had needed stitches and had caused concussion and amnesia, and injuries to the left hand.
An inquiry into Dimitris Voglis' complaint about police torture was not concluded (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Amnesty Intemational appealed repeatedly for the release of all imprisoned conscientious objectors and urged the government to introduce alternative civilian service of non-punitive length. The
GREECE/GRENADA
organization also raised a number of cases of alleged torture and ill-treatment with the authorities. The government responded in four cases, including that of Kostas Andreadis, stating that the allegations were unfounded. No response was received concerning other cases.
An Amnesty International delegate attended the appeal hearing of Sadik Ahmet and Ibrahim Serif in March.
