PHILIPPINES
Scores of people were believed to have been extrajudicially executed and at least 50 others reportedly "disappeared" in police or military custody. Sixteen prison-ers of conscience were known to have been released but at least 13 others remained in custody; there were many possible prison's of conscience among the 700 or so other
PHILIPPINES
political prisoners held. Some political detainees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated. The Senate postponed a vote on legislation seeking the restoration of the death penalty.
The government continued to face armed opposition from the New People's Army (npa), the armed wing of the banned Communist Party of the Philippines (cpp). and from the Moro National Liberation Front (mnlf) and other rebel groups seeking independence for predominantly Muslim areas of Mindanao. Despite a constitutional ban on private armies, government and military authorities continued to encourage a wide range of armed groups commonly known as "vigilantes", which cooperated closely with the formal security forces in counter-insurgency operations. Government and military authorities labelled many lawful non-governmental organizations as "fronts" for the npa and cpp in an apparent effort to weaken civilian organizations critical of government policy.
Tens of thousands of people were forced to leave their homes and there was widespread destruction and loss of life in parts of Mindanao, Northern Luzon, Negros, Samar and Mindoro as a result of the bombing by government forces of villages suspected of harbouring npa or mnlf forces. A national state of emergency imposed by President Corazon Aquino in December 1989. following an attempted military coup, was lifted in June. In July a Supreme Court decision authorized law enforcement officials to arrest without warrant anyone they suspected of the crimes of rebellion or subversion.
Government forces clashed with demonstrators protesting against the continued presence of United States military facilities in the Philippines, and with trade unionists during a nationwide strike in October. Scores of people were arrested but most were released without charge.
The npa was responsible for many killings, at least 80 of which were reportedly committed by npa "sparrow units" -urban-based assassination squads, Victims included soldiers, police and civilians; among them was Mayor Xavier Hizon of Mexico, Pampanga province, who was killed in May. There was new evidence to suggest that three people earlier reported to have "disappeared" in 1988 had been detained by the npa as suspected military spies.
The government took some steps to promote and protect human rights. It invited both the United Nations (un) Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and the Special Rapporteur on Torture to visit the country and they did so in August and October respectively. The Presidential Committee on Human Rights, chaired by the Minister of Justice, began to meet regularly. The government-appointed Commission on Human Rights (chr) openly opposed the restoration of the death penalty.
However, lack of cooperation by police and military authorities, judicial delays, witnesses' fear of reprisals and weaknesses in the chr's mandate and procedures all combined to impede effective investigation of human rights violations and the prosecution of suspects. So too did Presidential Decree 1850, promulgated by former president Ferdinand Marcos, which protects members of the security services against prosecution in civilian coiuts. The failure of the authorities to exert effective control over tens of thousands of members of official and quasi-official paramilitary forces was also a major impediment to human rights protection.
Scores of suspected government opponents were killed in apparent extrajudicial executions by government or government-backed forces. The victims included human rights campaigners, peasant activists, journalists, church workers, trade unionists, suspected rebels and dozens of people living or working in areas of suspected npa or mnlf activity.
Ruben Medina was killed in February shortly after members of the Philippines Constabulary (pc) and paramilitary auxiliaries of the official Citizens' Armed Forces
PHILIPPINES
Geographical Unit (cafgu) took him from a bus at Orani, Bataan province, Hours later, relatives found his body in a funeral parlour: an autopsy revealed that he had been shot 28 times, had his genitals severed and his skull destroyed by a bullet. The authorities gave no explanation of his death and no action was known to have been taken against those responsible.
A suspected Muslim rebel, Kamlon Mamindiala, and 18 members of his family, including a pregnant woman and six children aged between one and 13, were reportedly killed in August by soldiers of the army's 38th Infantry Battalion in Tacurong, Sultan Kudarat province. Kamlon Mamindiala was reportedly shot when he resisted arrest: soldiers then apparently ordered his relatives out of their houses and shot them. The military authorities initially said the family had been killed in an armed encounter between govemment forces and Muslim rebels, but investigations by the pc Provincial Commander and the chr found that they had been massacred by "alleged members" of the 38th Infantry Battalion. The Defense Secretary reportedly ordered the temporary suspension of those allegedly responsible but they were not known to have been brought to justice by the end of 1990.
Cornelio "Oscar" Tagulao was shot dead in March, apparently because the trade union led by his brother was regarded by the military as a Cpp and npa "front". The three men in plain clothes who killed him in Mariveles, Bataan province, were said by eye-witnesses to have shouted, "For every npa killing there will be 10 people killed in retaliation". The three were believed to be linked to the 24th Infantry Battalion. The local military commander later reportedly described the killing as a "good thing", warning that members of the family affiliated to the trade union in question would remain on the military's "C5rder of Battle".
Human rights lawyers and activists, church workers and members of legal organizations which the authorities accused of being npa-cpp fronts received death threats believed to come from military or gov-emment-backed paramilitary sources. In Negros Occidental, Sister Aquila Sy, a well-known community and human rights worker, and others, including an 84-year-old parish priest, were threatened with death in August and September. Groups
linked to local govemment and military officials circulated leaflets accusing them of supporting the npa and calling for their deaths or expulsion. Sister Aquila Sy, known for helping "internal evacuees" displaced from their homes by military operations, had recently tried to locate three such people who had "disappeared" in military custody.
More than 50 people "disappeared" during the year after being detained by members of govemment or government-backed security fotces. At least 15, whose detention had originally been denied by security forces, reappeared after a period in police or military custody. Five were believed to have died or to have been killed in custody. Most of the victims belonged to legal non-governmental organizations accused by the authorities of being npa-cpp fronts; others were suspected npa members.
Nestor Loberio and Diomedes Abawag, who worked with a farmers' organization in Catbalogan, Samar province, "disappeared" after they were abducted in January by armed men believed to be members of a military intelligence "death squad". Diomedes Abawag was thought to have been tortured and beheaded by his captors; his head, bearing signs of torture, was found by fishermen on 1 February. Nestor Loberio's whereabouts remained unknown at the end of the year.
Two women, Soledad Mabilangan and Alita Bona, who was then pregnant, "disappeared" after being taken by cafgu and army personnel from a market-place in Wright, Samar province, in March. The military authorities denied that they were in custody for six weeks until two visiting Amnesty Intemational representatives and two chr officials found them in detention at the 802nd Infantry Battalion headquarters in Bagacay, Samar. However, they were not released; the military authorities said they would be held until their husbands, alleged npa members, surrendered.
More than 1,500 suspected government opponents were arrested in 1990 but most were held briefly and released after questioning. Some of the 700 or so political prisoners still held at the end of the year were believed to have been prisoners of conscience, although most were accused of supporting the insurgency and charged with criminal acts such as murder and illegal possession of firearms in furtherance of rébellion.
PHILIPPINES
Sixteen prisoners of conscience were released, including 12 who were among a group of 25 farmers from Leyte whose trial on rebellion charges ended in 1989 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990). Judgment was delayed for more than 18 months before the court acquitted the 12. It had still not ruled on the remaining defendants, all prisoners of conscience, by the end of 1990, and they remained in prison.
Four members of the Alliance of Farmers of Central Luzon (amgl) in Nueva Ecija, believed to be prisoners of conscience, were released on bail. They were among a group of 13 amgl members arrested in 1988 and charged with subversion; the other nine had been released on bail in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
There were continued reports that members of government and government-backed forces tortured and ill-treated political detainees and suspected rebels to extract confessions or for revenge. Ruben Abaigar alleged that he was beaten repeatedly and threatened with death by soldiers of the 52nd Infantry Battalion and cafgu personnel who detained him in February as a suspected npa member. He said the soldiers blindfolded him. tied his hands and beat him repeatedly, then threatened to stab him to make him admit to npa membership. He was released without charge on 23 March.
Benedicto Mabilangan. a suspected npa supporter, and his 15-year-old son Orlando were arrested without warrant by soldiers during a town festival in Catbalogan, Samar, and detained for 20 days. The boy, who was given one electric shock himself, witnessed his father being beaten and tortured with electric shocks and by having his face covered with cellophane into which holes were made so that water could be forced into his nostrils. A human rights lawyer who later helped to bring charges against the perpetrators received death threats believed to come from military sources.
The government named 43 police and military personnel said to have been sentenced between March 1986 and mid-1990 for "human rights violations", including two reportedly sentenced in 1990. It was unclear whether all had in fact been convicted of human rights-related offences or for common crimes. Other than the two listed by the authorities, no other member
of the police or military was known to have been convicted of human rights offences in 1990, although a number were brought to trial. A military officer accused of killing labour leader Rolando Olalia in 1986 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1987) was acquitted after a three-year trial; others accused in the same case went into hiding or were given immunity to testify for the state.
Some alleged violations were officially investigated but generally the findings were not made public. An investigation was ordered into the killing of Jose Dy and Gilberto Lopez. The two had been shot dead in June by masked members of the pc while attending the funeral of an alleged npa member in Manila. The outcome of the investigation was not known. Similarly, police in Northern Samar filed kidnap and murder charges against nine cafgu members accused of killing three suspected npa members in captivity in February. However. the nine were not known to have been arrested or to have stood trial by the end of the year.
The Senate Committee on Constitutional Amendments and Revision of Codes adopted a resolution in February postponing for one year any new legislative measures on the death penalty, which was provisionally abolished under the 1987 Constitution. There were continued calls for the restoration of the death penalty for certain "heinous crimes".
Amnesty International urged the government to ensure the independent investigation of alleged extrajudicial executions and "disappearances", and called for those allegedly responsible to be brought to justice before the civil courts. It called for the release of prisoners of conscience, for the prompt, fair trial or release of other political detainees and for the review of the cases of prisoners sentenced after apparently unfair trials. It urged the government to repeal Presidential Decree 1850 and to review the use of civilian paramilitary forces in its counter-insurgency campaign.
In April an Amnesty International delegation visited the Philippines to conduct research and to meet local human rights activists and organizations. The delegation also had discussions with the Commission on Human Rights. In September the organization testified before the un Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,
