IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT
Thousands of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial or imprisoned after unfair trials. Some of them had been detained in Iraq in 1990 or previous years but thousands of others, including Iraqi exiles, foreign nationals and Kuwaitis, were imprisoned after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on 2 August. Torture of prisoners was routine and widespread. Hundreds of people, including Iraqi refugees who returned to Iraq under official amnesties and Kuwaitis detained after the invasion, reportedly "disappeared" in custody.
IRAN/IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT
There were hundreds of extrajudicial exe-cutions: the victims included Kurdish opponents of the Iraqi Government and Kuwaiti opponents of Iraq's occupation, including children. Two people were executed after imfair trials. It was not clear whether other executions were preceded by any judicial proceedings.
On 2 August Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait, and on 8 August it was annexed as Iraq's 19th province. On 3 August the United Nations (un) Security Council passed a resolution imposing economic sanctions on Iraq and demanding the immediate withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait. At the end of the year, Iraqi troops remained in Kuwait, despite nine other Security Council resolutions calling for withdrawal and for the restoration of the sovereignty of Kuwait.
In March a general amnesty was declared for all Iraqi Kurdish government opponents living abroad. Initially valid for two months, the amnesty was extended until 11 July. Between April and June, some 2,900 Iraqi Kurds, Assyrians and Tiucomans reportedly returned from Turkey to Iraq under the amnesty. However, there was no independent intemational monitoring of the return process, and many refugees were reportedly coerced into retuming (see Turkey). Scores of returning Iraqi Kurds were arrested and later "disappeared", and others, including four Turcomans, were reportedly executed. In December another general amnesty was declared for all Iraqi govemment opponents living abroad and army deserters.
Thousands of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained in detention without charge or trial, or were serving prison sentences imposed after unfair trials; hundreds of others were detained for political reasons during the year. They included suspected members of prohibited political parties, such as the Kurdistan Democratic Party (kdp); the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (puk); the Iraqi Communist Party (icp); and al-Da'wa al-lslamiyya, the Islamic Call. Relatives of suspected govemment opponents, including children, continued to be imprisoned while the authorities sought the suspects.
Two people were executed after unfair trials, from which there was no right of appeal. Farzad Bazoft, a British-based Iranian joimialist arrested in September 1989
(see Amnesty Intemational Report 1990) and convicted with two others of espionage by the Revolutionary Court, was sentenced to death and executed in March. One of his co-defendants, British nurse Daphne Parish, was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment but pardoned by President Saddam Hussein in July and released. The third defendant, an unnamed Iraqi national, received a 10-year prison sentence. On 13 July an Iraqi with Swedish citizenship, Jalil Mahdi Saleh al-Nu'aimi, was executed by hanging. He had been convicted of espionage by the Revolutionary Court and sentenced to death on 30 April.
There were new reports of "disappearances" of govemment opponents. One, a kdp member sentenced to death in absentia in 1988, "disappeared" after he was extradited from Turkey to Iraq in May, despite having been recognized as a refugee by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr). Reports suggested that he was executed following a trial in June.
The fate and whereabouts of thousands of other prisoners who "disappeared" in previous years also remained unknown. Among them were 353 Kurds who "disappeared" in custody in August 1988, and 33 Assyrian Christians and a number of Kurds who "disappeared" following their retum from camps in Tiukey and Iran in 1988 and 1989 under official amnesties (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Hundreds of people were reportedly executed, although in most cases it was difficult to determine whether they had received any form of trial. Among them were 23 Iraqi Kurds who were executed in the Shahrazar region of northern Iraq between December 1989 and Febmary 1990. They were reportedly arrested
IRAN/IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT
following anti-govemment demonstrations and held at a military camp in the city of Khurmal prior to their execution.
In February Amnesty International received reports that large numbers of people, including unarmed civilians and army deserters, were killed or wounded following armed incursions by government forces in southern Iraq between 10 and 21 January. Troops were said to have attacked more than 30 towns and villages in the predominantly Shi'a provinces in the south.
Following the invasion of Kuwait on 2 August, thousands of people were reportedly arrested there by Iraqi forces, and either detained in Kuwait or taken to prisons in Iraq. They included Iraqi exiles suspected of having links with al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya: membership of this organization carries the death penalty in Iraq. Hundreds of Kuwaitis, including children, were also arrested, as were former members of parliament, civil servants and students. Many of them were prisoners of conscience, held for their peaceful opposition to the Iraqi occupation. Some were soon released, but hundreds, possibly thousands, were believed still held at the end of the year.
Hundreds of foreign nationals were also detained. Some were held at military and industrial installations in Iraq^d Kuwait as so-called "human shields", but all were believed to have been released by the end of 1990.
According to the testimonies of former detainees, torture was routine and widespread. The methods used reportedly included prolonged beating all over the body, breaking of limbs, extinguishing cigarettes on the body and in the eyes, gouging out of the eyes, electric shocks, sexual assault and mock executions. The majority of victims were Kuwaiti males, among them minors as young as 13. Rape victims were said to include women and young men. A 17-year-old Kuwaiti student arrested in September and held for one month in Kuwait City and Basra alleged that he was severely kicked and beaten, subjected to falaqa (beating on the soles of the feet) for prolonged periods, had electric shocks applied to his chest until he lost consciousness, had his skin pierced with pins, was threatened with the insertion of a bottle into his anus and was subjected to mock execution. Most victims said their torturers sought information about those opposing the Iraqi occupation. Some
detainees reportedly died under torture and had their bodies dumped in the street or outside their homes.
Scores of Kuwaitis reportedly "disappeared" following arrest; it was feared that many were extrajudicially executed. Relatives who inquired about them were in some cases themselves arrested and tortured.
In August Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council (rcc) introduced the death penalty for looting, hoarding food for commercial purposes and harboiuing Western nationals. A man said to be an Iraqi soldier was executed by firing-squad. His body was pubhcly displayed in Kuwait City on 16 August: he was said to have been convicted of looting. Ten others, including Kuwaiti, Syrian, Egyptian emd Iraqi nationals, were executed for the same offence later in August and seven more were publicly hanged in November. It was not known whether any of them had received a trial.
Iraqi troops were said to have deliberately Idlled hundreds of unarmed civilians. According to eye-witnesses, Kuwaiti men and young boys were shot in the head at close range, often in front of their families. Many had already been detained and tortured. Some were killed after being found in possession of opposition literature, the Kuwaiti flag or photographs of the Amir of Kuwait. Others were reportedly killed for refusing to display photographs of President Saddam Hussein. According to medical personnel working in hospitals in Kuwait, scores of bodies of young men were brought in off the streets; many of them had been shot in the head or heart at close range. Some of the bodies were mutilated and bore marks of torture. A Kuwaiti woman and two youths aged 13 and 16 were reportedly shot dead after Iraqi troops fired without warning on a peaceful demonstration in the Jabiriyya district of Kuwait City of 8 August. On 9 September, five employees of al-'Addan Hospital were summarily executed for allegedly neglecting an injured Iraqi officer who was brought in for treatment but died subsequently. Patients were also said to have died after Iraqi troops forcibly removed them from life-support machines at hospitals in Kuwait City.
IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT/IRELAND (REPUBLIC OF)
Some 120 Iraqi soldiers and oificers were reportedly executed in early August for allegedly refusing to take part in the invasion of Kuwait. Amnesty hitemational received the names of some of those reportedly killed, including Major General Kamal 'Abd al-Sattar and air force Brigadier Saleh Muhammad Jaber. Reports were also received of the execution of Iraqi army deserters following the invasion of Kuwait.
Amnesty Intemational continued throughout the year to call for the release of prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners detained without trial or after unfair trials, and for urgent government action to halt torture and ill-treatment and to account for the "disappeared". Amnesty International also campaigned against the death penalty, and called for the commutation of all death sentences, including that imposed on Farzad Bazoft after a grossly unfair trial, and for an end to extrajudicial executions. Amnesty Intemational expressed particular concern to the government in lanuary about reported mass killings of unarmed civilians and army deserters by govemment forces in southern Iraq. In May the organization called for full human rights protection for more than 2,500 returning Kurdish refugees in view of past reports of "disappearances" and the lack of independent international monitoring of the return program. In June Amnesty International published a report, Iraqi Kurds: At Risk of Forcible Repatriation from Turkey and Human Rights Violations in Iraq, which drew attention to these concems. In response to the report, the Iraqi Government stated that "refugees - on their retum to Iraq - will be free to reside in their original areas or wherever they may wish..."
Following the invasion of Kuwait, Amnesty International expressed grave concem about the arrests there of Iraqi exiles, many of whom were taken to Iraq, and the imprisonment of all those detained for political reasons. Amnesty International called publicly on the Iraqi Government to end the gross human rights violations -torture, "disappearances" and executions -committed by its forces in Kuwait. In December Amnesty International documented these violations in a major report, Iraq/Occupied Kuwait: Human Rights Violations Since 2 August, and repeated its call for an immediate end to human rights violations. The government denied violating human rights and rejected
Amnesty International's findings.
In an oral statement delivered to the UN Commission on Human Rights in Febmary, Amnesty Intemational drew attention to its concems in Iraq. After the Commission had rejected a resolution calling for a Special Rapporteiu- to be appointed to study Iraq's human rights record. Amnesty Intemational issued a statement saying that it was deeply disturbed at the decision of the UN's central human rights body to take no action on the systematic and wide-ranging abuses in Iraq.
