MALI
At least one prisoner of conscience and several possible prisoners of conscience were detained without charge or trial. Two possible prisoners of conscience were tried for insulting the Head of State and one was sentenced to two years' imprisonment. Government forces were responsible for extrajudicial executions following an
MALI
uprising by members of the Tuareg ethnic group during which civihans as well as government troops were killed. One detainee reportedly died as a result of torture or ill-treatment. Foiu death sentences were passed in absentia. No judicial executions were known to have been carried out.
Bassirou Diarra, an opposition leader based in France, was detained without charge for one week when he visited Mali in July. His detention appeared to have no legal basis and he was considered a prisoner of conscience.
Two people tried in February on charges of insulting the Head of State may have been prisoners of conscience. Mamadou Alpha Idrissa Niang was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for allegedly insulting the Head of State, General Moussa Traoré, although he had made no written complaint as required by law for a prosecution. The outcome of his appeal was unknown. Mamadou Camara, who had been held since October 1988, was acquitted and released.
There was an uprising by members of the Tuareg ethnic group in June, apparently sparked by the government's perceived lack of concern for the Tuareg community. Tuareg insurgents launched attacks in the northeast, killing government officials, members of the security forces and civilians. After an attack on Ménaka, in which about 14 people were killed, they abducted at least two people, one of whom was knowTi to have been released.
In response, the government declared a state of emergency in the sixth and seventh administrative regions around Timbuktu and Gao, and sent troops to the area. Under the emergency, the security forces were
empowered to detain without charge for up to two months any person considered a threat to public safety. Severe reprisals were taken against the Tuareg community: army units attacked encampments, beat, raped or killed the inhabitants, and destroyed property. More than 50 Tuareg were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by government forces in August. In Gao, about a dozen Tuareg men and one woman were said to have been publicly shot by firing-squad near the airport on 4 August, after which their bodies were mutilated by onlookers and crushed by an armoured vehicle. A further 24 Tuareg were reportedly executed extrajudicially by soldiers in Gao on 14 August, as well as 18 others in M6naka, Kidal, Tin Essako and the Tamesna area. One of the alleged victims, Akhmed Ag Makhakha, leader of the Ichadanharen clan, was in his eighties.
Tuareg encampments in the remote desert area near the Algerian border were also reportedly attacked by government forces but few details were available. At In Teguift Well, three men and a paralysed woman were said to have been killed on 8 August and other Tuareg, including children, were driven away and later died of thirst. At Alkit, near Kidal, government soldiers who attacked an encampment of members of the Idnan clan on 9 August reportedly stripped both men and women, and then flogged and shot the men, killing about 10.
The government said in August that 30 people had been killed in the uprising. Other sources suggested that the real figure was much higher, with possibly more than 300 people killed by Tuareg insurgents, and almost as many by government forces, including elderly people and children. The government denied that anyone had been executed. Further sporadic clashes between Tuareg and government forces were reported after September but on a smaller scale than before.
Several leading members of the Tuareg community and others were arrested at the height of the crisis and detained or placed under house arrest. Some were released within a short period but others were held for several weeks. They were possible prisoners of conscience. Among those detained were Sikaye Ag Ekawel, director of a gov- [ emment-sponsored food aid project, and Ou6fane Ag Soulaymane, a merchant. In | September some 70 Tuareg were reported
MALI/MAURITANIA
to be held at Djikoroni military camp near the capital, Bamako. None of those arrested was known to have been charged or tried and it was not clear whether they and others had been released by the end of the year.
Political detainees were reportedly held in harsh conditions and, in some cases, ill-treated. In August Habib Ben Wahab reportedly died in custody at Gao police station after torture or ill-treatment. He was apparently suspected of passing military information to the rebels. No inquest or other inquiry into his death was reported. In one incident, the head of the Idnan clan and another man were reportedly stripped in public and beaten by soldiers in Kidal in early August.
Four people were sentenced to death in absentia in December. They were convicted of embezzlement by the Special State Security Court. This special court allows no right of appeal, although procedural questions may be contested in the Supreme Court. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for other political detainees to be brought to trial promptly and fairly on recognizably criminal charges or released. It also called on the government to halt extrajudicial executions by the security forces, to safeguard detainees from ill-treatment and to establish an independent investigation into the killings.
