ZAIRE
calls for a further inquiry. At least 24 people remained under sentence of death but no executions were reported.
In April President Mobutu Sese Seko announced that Zaire would cease to be a one-party state and that two new political parties and independent trade unions would be permitted. The ruling party -renamed in July the Mouvement populaire pour le renouveau (mpr), Popular Movement for Renewal - had been the only political party permitted by law since President Mobutu took power in 1965. A new constitution was adopted by the National Assembly in luly, which eliminated references to the mpr's dominant role in government, and dozens of new political parties were formed before the end of the year.
In April President Mobutu said that the security forces were to become apolitical and in May the government's National Security Council announced that administrative and incommunicado detention and internal banishment would no longer be used. The National Security Council said that seciirity service detention centres would be used only to detain suspects for short periods for questioning. In August the national security service was renamed the Service national d'intelligence et de protection (snip). National Intelligence and Protection Service. Despite these developments, however, the security services continued to carry out unlawful arrests and detentions.
Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, leader of Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (uDPs), Union for Democracy and Social Progress, an unauthorized opposition party, was released. He had been under, house arrest since March 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Most other prisoners of conscience were released either after the announcement of political reforms in April, or after the National Security Council announced in May that all uncharged political prisoners were to be freed. They included Albert Mola and Philippe Mamonekene, two members of Tshisekedi wa Mulumba's household arrested in July 1989. In May Kabongo Ntambwa (see Amnesty International Report 1990] had restrictions on his freedom of movement lifted. In July Tshitshinga Kanyinda and three other political prisoners sentenced after an unfair trial in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988] were freed as a result of a presidential amnesty.
However, banishment orders imposed in 1987 on two high-ranking army officers, General Mukobo Mundende Popolo and Major Kayembe Mbandonkulu, apparently remained in force.
More than 100 suspected or known supporters of the udps and other political groups were detained during the year for short periods without referral to judicial authorities. Omene Samba was rearrested (see Amnesty International Report 1990] in January, together with dozens of other members or supporters of the udps, the day before a planned pro-democracy demonstration in the capital, Kinshasa. They were all released within several weeks.
At least 14 other udps members were detained in April after members of the security forces violently broke up a udps meeting at a house in Kinshasa. Two of those present - Denis Mwamba and Bwala Bwala - were said to have died as a result of injuries they sustained during the incident, in which dozens of others were wounded. Those arrested were released after a few days.
At least six journalists were also detained for short periods either because of their contact with Tshisekedi wa Mulumba or because they wrote articles critical of the government.
Government opponents still held at the end of the year included Digekisa Piluka, a Roman Catholic friar and student leader at Lubumbashi University. He was arrested in May apparently in connection with unrest at the university and possibly because he tried to publicize an incident at the university on 11 May in which a number of students were killed. About 30 other students arrested in connection with demonstrations in Lubumbashi and Kinshasa were also believed to be held with him at Makala prison in Kinshasa at the end of 1990. It was unclear whether a pre-trial judicial investigation of their cases had begun.
Other government critics arrested during the year included Ekongo Odimba and at least three other members of the Mouvement national congolais-Lumumba (mnc-l), Congolese National Movement-Lumumba wing, who were arrested while demonstrating peacefully in Kinshasa in July. They were held incommunicado for several weeks and then released uncharged. At least 15 members of the Parti lumumbiste unifié (palu). Unified
ZAIRE/ZAMBIA
Lumumbist Party, were arrested while demonstrating peacefully in Kinshasa in October, They were released in November. In both cases, those arrested were held by the security forces without having their cases referred to the procuracy.
Some political arrests were accompanied by violence on the part of the security forces. In July at least 12 udps members who were arrested at a meeting in Kinshasa's Kimbaseke district were beaten and two women among them were said to have been raped. All of them were released before the end of the month.
In May there were reports that up to a dozen students were killed during a night raid at Lubumbashi University campus by the security forces. Soldiers dressed in civilian clothes were said to have attacked the students; some sources suggested that between 50 and 150 students were killed and hundreds of others injured, but there was no independent evidence to support such estimates. The raid occurred after three students accused of being government informers were severely assaulted by other students. The government initially denied any responsibility for the killings. However, a parliamentary inquiry accused the governor of Shaba region and at least 10 other government and security officials in Lubumbashi of complicity in the attack and of failing to prevent it. The 11 officials were arrested but had not been tried by the end of the year. The inquiry did not establish how many students had been killed or injured, nor the identities of their attackers, and it recommended that a further, more thorough inquiry be carried out. The government maintained that only one student had died and did not order another inquiry.
Twenty-four people convicted of murder and robbery in September and October 1989, and an unknown number of other prisoners, remained under sentence of death. Amnesty International did not learn of any new death sentences or executions during the year.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, including those under banishment orders, and for all death sentences to be commuted. The organization called for a full and impartial inquiry into the attack on students at Lubumbashi University to establish the number and identity of those killed and the nature and extent of official complicity.
and urged that those responsible for the killings be brought to justice.
The Ministry for the Citizen's Rights and Freedoms told Amnesty International that government officials had been arrested and would be prosecuted in connection with the attack. However, the ministry, which has a responsibility to investigate alleged human rights abuses, rarely responded to other appeals or inquiries made by Amnesty International. In September Amnesty International published a report. The Republic of Zaire: Outside the Law -Security Force Repression of Governwent Opponents, 1988-1990, which described the organization's concerns about political imprisonment, security force violence and other abuses. The report included recommendations to the government regarding measures needed to protect human rights.
