MYANMAR (BURMA)
More than 350 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience were known to be among thousands of people believed held for political reasons. Many were detained without charge or trial but others were sentenced after unfair trials by military tribunals. Torture and ill-treat» ment of prisoners were reportedly common. There were continuing allegations of extrajudicial executions by government troops in ethnic minority areas affected by armed insurgency. At least 100 people remained under sentence of death, but it was not known if any executions took place.
The ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (sLORc), headed by General Saw Maung, continued to enforce Martial Law Order 2/88, which prohibits gatherings of more than five people, and Notification 8/88, which prohibits public criticism of the military. Scores of people were arrested for contravening these provisions and Order Number 3/90, issued in February, which severely restricts freedom of expression during election campaigning activities.
Parliamentary elections were held on 27 May. The opposition National League for Democracy (nld) won an overwhelming majority, despite the detention or imprisonment of its leaders. However, by the end of the year the slorc had not announced a
MYANMAR (BURMA)
firm timetable for convening the National Assembly or for handing over powrer to the elected civilian government.
More than 350 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience had been identified by the end of 1990, but the actual number of people held for political reasons vi^as thought to be in the thousands. Hundreds of people were arrested for their peaceful election campaigning activities or for protesting against the slorc's refusal to hand over power and its continuing repression of government critics. In February at least 25 parliamentary candidates were reportedly arrested in the Yangon (Rangoon) area: it was not known whether any of them were released. Thirty other political activists were arrested in April and May during the election campaign. U Hla Wai, a candidate for the Democratic Party for a New Society (dpns), was reportedly arrested at his home by 40 armed security officials on the day before the election. He was apparently still in detention at the end of the year. U Nu, a former prime minister, and the nld's leaders. Aung San Suu Kyi and Tin U, remained in custody throughout 1990 and were officially barred from participating in the elections. Many other people arrested in 1989 apparently remained in prison throughout 1990.
Zar Gana, a former prisoner of conscience, was rearrested in May apparently for satirizing on stage the military authorities. He was said to have been sentenced to at least five years' imprisonment emd held at Insein Prison, near Yangon. Another prisoner of conscience. Nay Min, a lawyer sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment in 1989, was reported to be suffering from an acute heart ailment. Torture with electric shocks may have exacerbated his condition.
Further political arrests occurred after the May election. Kyi Maung, the acting Chairman of the nld, and the nld's acting Party Secretary, Chit Khaing, were arrested in September. They were reportedly accused of passing sensitive information to unauthorized recipients, and in November were both convicted of violating the 1923 Official Secrets Act. Kyi Maung was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and Chit Khaing to seven years. Other political activists were arrested in September for writing, possessing or publishing anti-goverrunent material. Those held included
nld Information Officer Kyi Hla, and two dpns leaders - Kyi Win and Ye Naing. Kyi Win and Ye Naing were each sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. All were considered to be prisoners of conscience.
It was unclear in many cases whether individual political prisoners were being detained without charge or trial under the 1975 State Protection Law or had been tried and sentenced. However, some were known to have been tried by military tribunals which were established in luly 1989 in order to try alleged martial law offenders. Such tribunals used summary trial procedures which contravened international fair trial standards; they could waive "unnecessary" witnesses, and defendants had no right to judicial appeal. Those convicted were liable to one of three sentences: at least three years' hard labour, life imprisonment, or the death penalty.
Among the prisoners of conscience who were sentenced was U Thein Han, a lawyer and nld candidate from Pabedan Township, who was arrested in February and sentenced to three years' imprisonment with hard labour. Another was 82-year-old U Oo Tha Tun, a well-known Arakan historian and election candidate for the Arakan League for Democracy. He was reportedly sentenced to three years' imprisonment with hard labour under Section 5/l of the 1950 Emergency Provisions Law, which prohibits promoting disloyalty to the state. In addition, two nld leaders, Ohn Kyaing and Thein Dan, were sentenced to three years' imprisonment in October by a military tribunal at Insein Prison. They had reported the alleged killings of two Buddhist monks and two students by security forces during a demonstration on 8 August in Mandalay.
The demonstration, led by monks, commemorated mass anti-government protests in 1988 during which hundreds of demonstrators were shot dead by security forces. At the 1990 demonstration, at least 17 monks were beaten or arrested, and eight others were shot by security forces. The four alleged killings, which the slorc denied, could not be confirmed.
Following the 1990 demonstration, Buddhist monks in Mandalay and other cities reftised to provide religious services for military personnel and their families, and demanded that General Saw Maung apologize for the injuries inflicted on monks at the demonstration. They also
MYANMAR (BURMA)
called for the release of all detained monks, for an accurate account of the 1990 demonstration to be published, and for troops to be kept out of monasteries. In October, after a directive that monks must end their boycott had failed, the slorc issued Order Numbers 6/90 and 7/90. The first order required all unofficial monks' organizations to disband and the second empowered military tribunals to try monks. Between 22 and 25 October troops systematically searched monasteries and arrested as many as 40 monks, only one of whom -U Laba "U Wayama" - was known to have been officially identified. Troops arrested at least 300 other monks in the following days. The slorc then introduced decree Number 20/90, which provided for the imprisonment of monks belonging to unofficial monastic organizations or who criticized official monastic organizations.
Official suppression of the monks' protest was accompanied by searches of nld and other political party offices and the arrests of more than 50 nld leaders in late October. Those held included Khin Maung Swe, Kyaw Min, Chan Aye and Soe Thein, all nld Central Executive Committee members, and at least 16 elected members of the National Assembly. All appeared to be prisoners of conscience. More than 40 nld activists were also detained, as was the entire dpns leadership, comprising at least eight people. Most were believed still held at the end of the year.
Nita Yin Yin May. another prisoner of conscience, was sentenced in November to three years' imprisonment under the Official Secrets Act. A Myanmar national employed by the British Embassy in Yangon, Nita Yin Yin May may have been imprisoned because she was suspected by the slorc of involvement in discussions about non-violent opposition to military rule with foreign diplomats.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were received throughout the year from prisons in urban centres and in ethnic minority areas affected by armed insurgency. In the latter, civilians continued to be forcibly conscripted as porters by government forces and were apparently used as human minesweepers by troops as well as to carry supplies. Conscripted porters were said to have been beaten and kicked, and some reportedly died as a result.
Several prisoners were reportedly
beaten in September, when 89 inmates at Insein Prison staged a hunger-strike to demand a transfer of power to the elected opposition. Nine prisoners apparently required hospital treatment and there were suggestions that six may have died. The slorc later said that "internationally recognized batons" were used to control the hunger-strikers, and that only three prisoners were "slightly injured".
At least one person was reported to have died as a result of torture. Maung Ko, a senior member of the nld, died in a military detention centre near Yangon on 9 November. His family reportedly said that they believed torture was the cause of his death because his body was covered in bruises and one of his legs was broken. However, General Saw Maung denied the allegation and said that Maung Ko had committed suicide by hanging himself with a blanket.
Extrajudicial executions continued to be reported from ethnic minority states: government troops were alleged to have deliberately killed civilians suspected of being political opponents as well as porters conscripted by the army. At least 100 people reportedly remained under sentence of death, including Moe Kyaw Thu who was 17 years old when convicted. It was not known if there were any new death sentences imposed during the year or if any executions were carried out.
Amnesty International pressed for the release of all prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners, for investigations into all reports of torture, and for the commutation of all death sentences. In May Amnesty International published Myaninar: Prisoners of Conscience and Torture, and in November a full report on its concerns, Myaninar: In the National Interest. In these publications, the organization called for urgent steps to be taken to end widespread and systematic human rights violations by Myanmar's military government. Amnesty International informed the slorc that it wished to visit Myanmar to discuss human rights but received no response.
In January Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Myanmar for United Nations (un) review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of human rights violations. In February
MYANMAR (BURMA)/NAMIBIA
Amnesty International submitted information about human rights abuses in Myan-mar to the un Commission on Human Rights in both a written and an oral statement to the Commission. These included reference to its concern about the government's failure to investigate torture allegations. In August Amnesty International delivered an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission Working Group on Detention which drew attention to the continued imposition of a death sentence on Moe Kyaw Thu, who was 17 at the time of the offence. The slorc responded to Amnesty International's reporting of human rights violations in Myanmar by categorically denying that torture is used or that political prisoners are held.
