KUWAIT
Human rights violations were perpetrated on a massive scale by Iraqi forces following their invasion of Kuwait on 2 August. Hundreds, possibly thousands, of Kuwaitis and other nationals were arbitrarily arrested and detained or restricted. Torture was widespread, resulting in a number of deaths, and hundreds of people reportedly "disappeared" in detention. The death penalty was introduced for new offences and scores of summary executions and extrajudicial killings were carried out by Iraqi forces (see Iraq/Occupied Kuwait).
Earlier in the year, the Kuwait Government carried out political arrests. At least 26 suspected opponents of the government were detained without charge or trial for up to three weeks. Some may have been prisoners of conscience. Four political prisoners who were brought to trial before the State Security Court were acquitted. They and some of the untried detainees said they had been tortured. Twenty-nine other political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in recent years were believed to have escaped after the Iraqi invasion.
Thirteen suspected opponents of the government of the Amir of Kuwait, all Shi'a Muslims, were arrested in February and detained without charge or trial at Amn al-Dawla Prison in Kuwait City, where some were reportedly tortured or ill-treated. Some of those held, who included Hassan Habib al-Salman, a municipal councillor, Saleh Jawhar Hayat, imam of the Imam al-Hussain Mosque in Kuwait, and Faisal al-Saffar. a university student, had previously been detained in 1989. All 13 were released on bail in March,
although none was formally charged or brought to trial. 'Abd al-Rida Karoun, an untried political detainee held since November 1989. was also released in March.
Thirteen other people, prominent advocates of parliamentary democracy, were arrested in May following months of protests and demonstrations supporting the restoration of parliamentary democracy. They included former members of parliament Ahmad al-Khatib, Ahmad al-Nafisi and Jassem al-Qatami. Eleven of them were charged with holding illegal meetings, and the other two with distributing leaflets without a licence. They were all released on bail after four days, and the Amir pardoned them in lune.
Four Shi'a Muslims who had been arrested in September and November 1989 in connection with bomb attacks in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, were tried by the State Security Court in May and June (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The four, Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Musawi, Faisal al-Mahmid, Walid al-Mazidi and 'Abd al-Hamid al-Saffar, faced 10 charges, including membership of a prohibited organization aiming to overthrow the government, inciting sedition and illegal possession of weapons. Their trial was held in camera. All four defendants, who alleged in court that they had been tortured in pretrial detention, were acquitted and released in June.
Twenty-nine Shi'a Muslim political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, were still serving prison sentences ranging from three to 15 years at the beginning of 1990. All had been convicted by the State Security Court after trials which failed to satisfy international fair trial standards. Seven had been convicted between 1985 and 1987 on charges including the distribution of leaflets inciting violence. The other 22 were tried in 1989 on charges including membership of banned organizations and publicly defaming the Amir of Kuwait. All remained in Kuwait Central Prison until 3 August, when they were believed to be among an estimated 60 political prisoners who escaped from the prison following the Iraqi invasion.
Political detainees who had been held at Amn al-Dawla Prison alleged that they had been tortured. Some of those released in March said they had been kicked and beaten, subjected to falaqa (beating on the
KUWAIT/LAOS
soles of the feet), deprived of sleep and threatened with sexual assault. The four defendants acquitted by the State Security Coiut in June also alleged that they had been tortured to force them to make confessions. One of them, Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Musawi, said he had been given electric shocks after water was poured over his body, and was forced to keep his arms raised for long periods during the five months in which he was held incommunicado.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about the arrests of suspected opponents of the government and the alleged torture of political detainees. In March the government replied that "the offenders were given the opportunity to defend themselves without pressure or torture". In May an Amnesty International delegation visited Kuwait and discussed the organization's concerns with government officials and members of the judiciary. The delegation also attended two in camera sessions of the trial of four defendants before the State Security Court.
