TUNISIA
An Islamic activist was imprisoned as a prisoner of conscience. Hundreds of other religious or political activists, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested. Most, including at least 460 students who were forcibly conscripted into the army after demonstrations in February, were released during the year, but over 100 others were sentenced to prison terms. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. One execution was carried out, the first since 1987, and a second death sentence was passed.
Moncef Ben Salem, a university professor. was arrested in April after he criticized the government in a newspaper interview. A supporter of Hizb al-Nahda, Party of the Renaissance, an Islamic group not permitted to register as a legal political party, he was convicted in May of disseminating false information and defaming public order. He received a three-year prison sen-" tence which he was serving at the end of the year. He said that after his arrest he was held at the Ministry of the Interior for more
than 36 hours without food and was prevented from sleeping. He had previously been detained without charge or trial for 18 months until May 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Bechir Essid was a possible prisoner of conscience. A lawyer and founder of the Union démocratique unioniste (udu), Democratic Unionist Union, an unregistered political party, he was sentenced to four years' imprisonment in October by the Criminal Chamber of the Appeal Court in Tunis. He had been arrested 13 months earlier (see Amnesty International Report 1990). He was convicted of forming a gang and conspiring to attack persons and property. defaming the President, distributing false information and putting posters on public buildings without permission. He denied the charges, which were based on the uncorroborated testimony of a co-defendant.
Information was received in January that four possible prisoners of conscience, alleged members of the Parti communiste des ouvriers tunisiens (pcot), Tunisian Workers' Communist Party (see Amnesty International Report 1990), had been acquitted in December 1989.
Over 1,000 students were arrested in February during demonstrations at five universities which resulted in violent clashes with the police. Most were released uncharged, but at least 460 students, including some who had already completed their military service or who had been certified medically unfit, were forcibly conscripted into the army. They were sent to isolated military camps where they were effectively held incommunicado. However, about 360 of them were released from military service in April and the remainder in June.
Hundreds of others were arrested in connection with frequent demonstrations by supporters of Hizb al-Nahda and other Islamic groups. Many were released uncharged but over 100, including possible prisoners of conscience, were tried and sentenced to up to two years and three months' imprisonment. Many such arrests occurred after Tayeb Hammasi, a Tunis school student, was shot dead by police in September during a demonstration in which Islamic activists reportedly distributed leaflets and threw stones at the police. The authorities said the death was accidental and that an inquiry would be
TUNISIA/TURKEY
held, but it sparked a wave of demonstrations and arrests of Islamic activists. At least 30 were arrested following a demonstration at Al-Fatah mosque in Tunis. Two - Salah al-Boughanmi and Lutfi Ghariani -were convicted in October of making speeches during an unauthorized demonstration and sentenced to one year in prison. Four others received six-month sentences for public order offences and 22 people received suspended sentences.
There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of both political detainees and criminal suspects. Hedi Ben Allala Bejaoui, a Hizb a!-Nahda supporter, alleged that he was beaten, sexually abused with a stick and had faeces forced into his mouth at Ariana police station in Tunis after his arrest on 9 April. He also said that he was tortured with electric shocks at the Ministry of the Interior before being released uncharged after a few hours. A subsequent medical examination noted numerous injuries. The Interior Ministry said that there would be an investigation into his alleged torture, but it was not known whether this occurred.
In June Raouf Mthlouti, an ll-year-old boy accused of theft, alleged that he was beaten while in police custody in Ariana. A subsequent medical examination supported his allegations and his lawyer made a formal complaint to the procuracy, which apparently took no action.
Abdellatif Tlili, a Hizb al-Nahda supporter, was also reportedly tortured while being detained in November and December at the Ministry of the Interior in Tunis. Legally, suspects can only be held in pretrial incommunicado detention for a maximum of 10 days, but he was held incommunicado for six weeks during which he was allegedly beaten severely, had a stick forced into his anus and was repeatedly suspended from a bar under his knees with his hands and feet bound together in front of him (the rôti position) for long periods. A medical examination after his release found injuries consistent with his torture allegations.
At least two people were sentenced to death. One of them was convicted of multiple murder in May and executed in November. This was the first execution to be carried out since President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali came to power in 1987. Former diplomat Lamari Dali was sentenced to death on 25 December after being
convicted of treason at a trial conducted in camera. His sentence was confirmed on 28 December, but he had not been executed by the end of 1990.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in lune to express concern at recent arrests and reports of torture and ill-treatment of suspects held in pre-trial incommunicado [garde d vue) detention. There had been no response by the end of the year.
In September Amnesty International published a report, Tunisia: Summary of Amnesty International's Concerns, which detailed recent evidence of torture and ill-treatment of detainees while held incommunicado and, sometimes, beyond the maximum time limit for garde d vue detention, Amnesty International also appealed for the commutation of the death sentence carried out in November and the one passed in December.
