KOREA
(REPUBLIC OF)
Around 150 people were believed to be prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience. Thirty prisoners, including several prisoners of conscience held for over 15 years, were released in amnesties. Several prisoners convicted of national security offences complained that they were ill-treated during interrogation. Fourteen people convicted of criminal offences were executed, double the number of executions in 1989.
The National Security Law continued to prohibit contacts with North Korea and activities beneficial to anti-state organizations and North Korea. However, the South-North Exchange and Cooperation Law came into force in August. Under this law, the South Korean Government can authorize its citizens to visit North Korea,
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
to invite North Koreans to the south and to trade and engage in joint ventures with them. Unauthorized contacts with North Koreans continued to result in arrests.
The Constitutional Court made two rulings related to basic freedoms. In January it upheld the constitutionality of Article 13 (2) of the Labour Dispute Mediation Act under which third parties - people not directly connected with the workplace -have been imprisoned for intervening in labour disputes. In April the court ruled that paragraphs (1) and (5) of Article 7 of the National Security Law - which prohibit activities and publications praising anti-state organizations - were constitutional but open to political abuse. Arrests under these provisions continued.
In April the government acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) and its first Optional Protocol. It made reservations on four provisions of the iccpr, including the right of government employees to organize trade unions. In October the government acceded to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Over 1,500 people were imprisoned for politically motivated activities. More than half of them were students and workers charged with taking part in illegal demonstrations or committing violent acts. According to a government report to the National Assembly, the number of arrests under the National Security Law increased and 759 people were officially reported to have been charged under this law in the 12 months prior to September 1990. About 250 of them were charged with sympathizing with, or espionage for. North Korea; most of the others were charged with establishing "anti-state" organizations and
producing and distributing materials benefiting North Korea.
At least 25 writers and publishers and a number of students were among those tried under the National Security Law for disseminating written or other material said to benefit North Korea. Most received suspended sentences of up to two years' imprisonment. Oh Pong-ok was arrested in February after writing a poem, Red Mountain, Black Blood, which the authorities said praised the role played by North Korean leader Kim Il-sung during the Japanese occupation. Oh Pong-ok was released in May with a two-year suspended sentence. Another prisoner of conscience, Kim Song-kyu, was released in April. The President of the student council of Dongguk University, he had been arrested in December 1989 for organizing a student performance of a North Korean revolutionary play.
Over 140 prisoners convicted of espionage continued to serve sentences ranging fi:om five years to life imprisonment. Some had been held since the 1950s but most of those arrested since 1971 had been convicted of visiting North Korea or contacting North Korean agents abroad, notably in lapan. Under the National Security Law, information useful to North Korea, even if it is freely available, is considered a state secret. Many prisoners serving sentences for espionage were believed to have received unfair trials and to have been forced to confess under torture in pre-trial detention. They included prisoners of conscience such as Park Ki-rae, detained since 1974, who served eight years under sentence of death before his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. Like others, he was denied an early release because he refused to write a statement of conversion to "anti-communism".
Unauthorized contact with North Korea continued to be punished by imprisonment. Dissident artist Hong Song-dam was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in January on charges including sending photographic slides of his painting, A History of the National Liberation Movement, to North Korea where they were reproduced for exhibition. He was a prisoner of conscience. In September the Supreme Court upheld sentences of 18 months' imprisonment imposed on four members of Minja-tong, the Central Council for National Peaceful Reunification. They were arrested in June 1989 because Minjatong espoused
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
certain views on reunification which were similar to those of the North Korean authorities. They too were prisoners of conscience. In November three members of the dissident organization Cbonminnyon, the National Coalition for a Democratic Movement, were arrested for participating in an unauthorized meeting in Berlin with North Koreans.
Accusations under the National Security Law of organizing or participating in anti-state organizations were brought against members of alleged underground revolutionary socialist or communist groups, composed mostly of students, former students and workers. Around 200 people were believed to have been arrested on such charges in the second half of the year in connection with groups called Hyukromeng, the Alliance for the Struggle of the Revolutionary Working Class, Sanomaeng, the Socialist Workers League, Chamintong, Independent National Unification Group, and Chonminhangnyon, the Democratic Students League. The authorities accused them of planning to overthrow the government by force and replace it with a socialist government.
Thirty prisoners who had been convicted on national seciuity charges were released in presidential amnesties in February and May, and it was confirmed that 27 others had been freed in December 1989. Those released included Suh Song, a prisoner of conscience held since 1971, and three other prisoners of conscience -Chin Tu-hyon, Choi Chol-kyo and Paek Ok-kwang - held since 1974 and 1975. Another prisoner of conscience, the Reverend Moon Ik-hwan, was released in October on health grounds after serving one year of his seven-year sentence for an unauthorized visit to North Korea.
Several prisoners complained of beatings and sleep deprivation during interrogation, principally prisoners who were arrested late in the year on suspicion of belonging to "anti-state" organizations. Criminal suspects also alleged that they were beaten, particularly some who were arrested after the government declared a "war on crime" in October. In December the Ministry of Justice told the National Assembly that 53 lawsuits alleging torture and assault had been filed against 115 police ofiicers during the 12 months prior to October 1990. Most such lawsuits were believed to have been unsuccessful.
A former marine officer was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for torturing a marine in military custody in 1983. Compensation was awarded to the relatives of two people who died, in 1986 and 1989, as a result of police ill-treatment.
Some 100 prisoners alleged that they were beaten and tied in painftil positions for several hours at a time as a punishment for taking part in a prison protest in August in Seoul Detention Centre. The authorities denied the reports, but the prisoners and their families reportedly filed a complaint with the courts.
Fourteen people who had been convicted of rape, robbery or murder were executed, and two prisoners had their death sentences commuted. Kim Hyun-hui, a North Korean sentenced to death in April 1989 for planting a bomb which blew up a Korean Airlines aircraft, was released under a special amnesty granted by President Roh Tae-woo in April. Suh Sun-taek, sentenced to death in July for spying for North Korea, had his sentence commuted by the Seoul Appeal Court in November.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience and appealed for those still held to be fi'eed. The organization called for the cases of prisoners convicted of espionage to be reviewed to establish whether they had received fair trials, Amnesty International urged the authorities to amend the National Security Law, to enforce safeguards against tortiue and ill-treatment of prisoners and to abolish the death penalty. In January it published two reports: South Korea: Return to Repressive Force and Torture? and South Korea: L£)ng-term Political Prisoners. The government responded to these reports and other Amnesty International documents and appeals by reiterating its commitment to human rights and referring to recent prisoner releases and legal reforms in 1989. The government said that they were not holding any prisoners of conscience, arguing that those arrested had "threatened the rule of law and national survival" and were "radical anti-state forces intent on overthrowing our free democratic system". The government also denied that prisoners had been tortured or refused access to their lawyers or relatives.
In October an Amnesty International delegation visited South Korea and discussed human rights concerns with Ministry of Justice officials.
