CONGO
All known political prisoners were released in August following a presiden« tial amnesty. At least 50 such prisoners were freed, including prisoners of conscience. At least four prisoners remained under sentence of death but no new death sentences or executions were reported.
President Denis Sassou-Nguesso announced political reforms in July,
including the end of the one-party state and the unchallenged position occupied by the Parti congolais du travail (pct), Congolese Labour Party, since 1969. The pct Central Committee decided in July to allow other parties to compete for power in 1991 after the introduction of a new constitution providing for multi-party democracy. It recommended that a law should be enacted to strengthen basic rights to freedom of expression, press, association and assembly: these rights had been guaranteed under the 1985 Constitution but not respected in practice. The Chief of Staff of the National People's Army announced in November that from January 1991 the army, which had dominated successive Congolese governments since 1969, would be required to be apolitical and that soldiers would return pct membership cards and medals awarded by the pct. The reforms were announced following mounting pressure on the government to increase political freedom and the standard of living: protests included workers' strikes, and petitions and demonstrations by political and social groups.
At least five people - civilians and members of the armed forces - were arrested in July and accused of involvement in a plot to overthrow the government. Among them were C61estin Nkoua, a former radio journalist and manager of a printing company; a former leading trade unionist and member of the pct Central Committee; and Lieutenant-Colonel Michel Ngangouo. A government minister said that documents seized at C6lestin Nkoua's home showed that the men had been planning a coup since 1987, that they had planned to establish a new form of government in January 1990 and had conspired in May 1990 to
CONGO/COTE D'IVOIRE
incite the army to rise against the government. Despite these assertions, however, it appeared that those detained had been arrested solely because of their opposition to the one-party state and their support for a national conference to debate political reforms. They were held as prisoners of conscience without charge at the central police station in the capital, Brazzaville, until August when they were released.
President Sassou-Nguesso announced on 14 August that all political prisoners were being released. At least 50 prisoners were freed: 26 of them were members of the Kouyou ethnic group arrested in 1987 and 1988 in connection with an alleged conspiracy to overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The 26, who included prisoners of conscience such as Father Joseph Ndinga, a Roman Catholic priest, had all been detained without charge or trial in military and civilian prisons in Brazzaville.
Claude-Ernest Ndalla, who had been sentenced to death in 1986 after an unfair trial before the Revolutionary Court of Justice, and others convicted with him, were also released under the amnesty. His death sentence had been commuted in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989].
Four people convicted of murder in 1989 remained under sentence of death. Amnesty International did not learn of any new death sentences imposed by the courts or of any executions carried out during the year.
In May Amnesty International published a report, The People's Republic of Congo: Unlawful Politicai Detentions and Amnesty International's Concern about Unfair Trial, detailing violations of the basic rights of those detained since 1987 and 1988, and the organization's fears that their trials might be unfair. It urged the courts to investigate all allegations of torture and not to accept evidence extracted under torture. Before August, Amnesty International called for the release of prisoners of conscience and for prompt and fair trials for all political prisoners. It welcomed the release in August of all political prisoners and called for the commutation of all death sentences.
