BURUNDI
Three people held without charge for one week appeared to be prisoners of conscience. More than 60 political prisoners, some of whom had been detained without trial since 1988, were released. Several prisoners reportedly continued to be held in deliberately harsh conditions. An amnesty announced in August resulted in the commutation of all death sentences.
BURUNDI
In April a government commission completed preparation of a draft charter of national unity, which was presented to the nation by President Pierre Buyoya in May. It proclaims every citizen's right to personal security, fundamental human rights and equality with others. It was unanimously adopted at the end of December by an extraordinary congress of-Burundi's only legal political party, the Union pour le progrès national (uprona). Union for National Progress. The congress elected an 80-person uprona Central Committee, composed of members of the Hutu and Tutsi ethnic groups, replacing the military committee which had ruled Burundi since President Buyoya came to power in September 1987. The charter was expected to be submitted to a referendum in early 1991. President Buyoya stated that a new constitution would be drawn up in early 1991 and that the electorate would eventually be allowed to choose between the existing one-party state and a multi-party political system.
On 9 May Burundi acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Three people arrested and detained for one week in February appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Albert Nsezeye, a lay preacher from Gisuru in Ruyigi province, was arrested with two others apparently because he had typed a letter to the Minister of the Interior on behalf of villagers in Gisuru. They were complaining about alleged embezzlement by a local government official. When they were released, the three were required to pay a fine on the grounds that they had distributed tracts, although they had been neither charged nor tried.
A number of political prisoners were released. In January the last of some 20 Jehovah's Witnesses who had been arrested in mid-1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990), were freed. In April Manara Elonga Nsamba, a Zairian national held since June 1989 for allegedly possessing "anti-govemment" tracts, was released. All had been held without charge or trial.
In August President Buyoya announced an amnesty on the eve of a visit to Burundi by Pope John Paul II. Among those freed were over 40 members of the Hutu ethnic group who had been arrested in August and September 1988 in connection with
serious intercommunal disturbances. They were said by the authorities to have been involved in intercommunal killings, but none of them was ever charged or brought to trial. Some appeared to be imprisoned on account of their prominence in the Hutu community, rather than because there was evidence of any involvement in violent offences. The amnesty also led to the release of at least 15 soldiers and civilians arrested in March 1989, who had been accused of conspiring against the government (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
At least four people were reported to have been severely beaten at the time of their arrest, during a violent assault in August on Mabanda military camp by an armed group which had apparently infiltrated the country from Tanzania. At least seven people died in the attack. The four were still held without charge or trial in Rumonge prison at the end of 1990.
Two untried political detainees died in custody in mid-1990: one had been arrested in connection with the intercommunal disturbances in August 1988 and the other in connection with the alleged conspiracy against the government in March 1989. The authorities attributed their deaths to natural causes, but other sources suggested that ill-treatment at the time of their arrests and harsh conditions of imprisonment may have contributed to their deaths. Neither was the subject of an inquest.
Three former government ministers imprisoned for corruption after the coup which brought President Buyoya to power continued to be held in deliberately harsh conditions (see Amnesty International Report 1990). They were kept in isolation cells and denied regular contact with their families.
At the time of the August amnesty President Buyoya commuted all death sentences to life imprisonment; the number of sentences commuted was not announced. Amnesty International did not learn of any new death sentences imposed during the year and no executions were reported.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of uncharged political prisoners and the commutation in August of all death sentences. In response to inquiries from Amnesty International, the government said that the deaths of the two political detainees were due to natural causes.
