CAMEROON
At least 21 prisoners of conscience had been released by the end of the year. Oth> ers remained imprisoned. Over 140 other political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were also released, although most were placed imder restriction orders. At least 80 others remained in prison despite an official undertaking to release them. At least three prisoners of conscience were reportedly tortured or
CAMEROON
ill-treated. Several government opponents were killed in suspicious circumstances. Eight death sentences were passed but no executions were known to have been carried out.
Several laws were amended or replaced in December which maintained the government's powers under previous laws to imprison its critics. Broad powers of administrative detention were maintained without any safeguards against arbitrary imprisonment. A state of emergency could still be imposed by decree without control by the legislature or the judiciary. Special military courts to try political cases were replaced by a special State Security Court, whose judges were still to be appointed by the government and which allowed no right of appeal. Three new political offences were created, all punishable by long prison sentences, concerning the spreading of false information and incitement to revolt and rebellion.
At least 21 people were prisoners of conscience during 1990. Yondo Black, former president of the Cameroon Bar Association, and Anicet Ekan6, a company director, were arrested in February. In April they were sentenced to three and four-year prison terms respectively for attending meetings to discuss multi-party democracy and the formation of a new political party. They were tried by a special military court with nine other civilians, including one in absentia. The other defendants received suspended prison sentences or were acquitted. Details of the charges -subversion and showing contempt for the Head of State - were withheld throughout the trial, and no convincing evidence was brought to justify the convictions. At least three of the defendants were reportedly tortured or ill-treated; Anicet Ekan6 said that he had been stripped, beaten and forced to stand without food and water for two days. Yondo Black and Anicet Ekan6 were freed in August following an announcement in July by President Paul Biya that all political prisoners were to be released.
Other prisoners of conscience were released. They included Samuel released in July, who had been held without charge or trial almost continuously since December 1985 for allegedly distributing literature on behalf of the opposition Union des populations du Cameroun (upc). Union of Cameroonian Peoples (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Isidore Nkiamboh was released in June after more than five years' detention without charge or trial. He was apparently arrested in April 1985 after entering Cameroon with a letter to President Biya requesting registration for the Cameroon Democratic Party (cdp), an opposition group based abroad. Three other people arrested in September 1990 for allegedly bringing cdp documents into the country were released uncharged after about three weeks.
Djeukam Tchameni Dominique, a computer company director who had been arrested in November 1988, was convicted of importing subversive material and sentenced to three years' imprisonment by a special military court in March. He was released unconditionally in August.
In April President Biya announced that all prisoners still held in connection with a coup attempt in April 1984 would be released. This announcement was made shortly after Amnesty International had publicized reports that two political prisoners had died in custody in December 1989 as a result of torture or ill-treatment. At least 140 prisoners were reported to have been freed but the authorities did not identify those who were released. Most had been held in administrative detention after completing prison sentences. Others had been detained either without trial or after being acquitted in 1984 of involvement in the coup attempt.
Suzanne Lecaille and Issa Tchiroma, who had been acquitted in 1984, were released unconditionally. At least 18 of those released, and possibly many more, were forbidden to leave their home areas without official authorization. Many had become ill due to harsh prison conditions: Haman Toumba and Jean-Pierre Dia, who were administratively detained after completing five-year sentences, were both reportedly deaf and blind when they left prison and Haman Toumba was barely able to walk.
At least 80 prisoners held in connection with the coup attempt, including possible prisoners of conscience, were believed to be still held at the end of 1990. Of these, about 60 were still serving prison sentences of 10 years or more, imposed after unfair trials before special military courts in 1984. At least 20 others remained in administrative detention; they included Paul Daissala Dakolé, a senior transport
CAMEROON/CANADA
official detained without charge or trial since 1984. and Ahmadou Alfaki, a police officer rearrested following his acquittal in 1984.
Following the deaths of two prisoners at Yaounde's Central Prison in December 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990], new information was received suggesting that as many as 26 political prisoners had died between 1984 and 1989. Most were reportedly untried detainees held in connection with the 1984 coup attempt who had died from malnutrition, disease and medical neglect. One, Moudio Hildina, a former government official, had apparently been paralysed for years before his death in June 1989 as a result of being denied medical treatment. He had remained in prison despite completing a two-year prison sentence imposed in 1984. Neither his death nor those of other political prisoners were the subject of inquests,
Several government opponents were killed in suspicious circumstances, accompanied by allegations of official complicity. In April Pierre Bouobda was shot dead by security police. He was one of 200 lawyers who had nominally joined Yondo Black's defence team and was questioned by police shortly before his death. Witnesses alleged that he was followed and killed by police officers who subsequently tried to make his death appear to be the result of an armed robbery. Following protests, it was announced that investigations involving several police officers had been opened, but none was known to have been charged by the end of 1990.
A cover-up was also alleged after six supporters of a new opposition political party, the Social Democratic Front (sdf), were shot dead by the security forces in May at an unauthorized rally in Bamenda. Government-employed journalists later said that they had been made to report falsely that the six had been killed in the crush of the crowd. Some sources also alleged that two women students were raped and killed by the police following subsequent clashes between student supporters of the sdf and the security forces in Yaounde, although Amnesty International was unable to verify this. Hundreds of students were briefly detained and reportedly ill-treated.
Eight death sentences were imposed during the year for attempted murder and aggravated theft. No executions were
known to have taken place.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for a review of the cases of those in administrative detention or imprisoned after unfair trials. In July it published a report, Cameroon: Imprisoned for Advocating a Multi-party System - the Yondo Black Ajfair, which described the trial of Yondo Black and others as 9 travesty of justice. Amnesty International also called for an official inquiry into all deaths of prisoners, for major improvements in prison conditions, and for the commutation of death sentences. Announcing the release of Yondo Black and others in July, President Biya said that Amnesty International was welcome to visit Cameroon. However, efforts by Amnesty International to follow up this invitation had received no response from the government by the end of 1990.
