BAHRAIN
Dozens of people suspected of opposition to the government, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested and detained without charge or trial. Others were sentenced after unfair trials or continued to serve sentences imposed after unfair trials in previous years. Political detainees alleged that police officers had tortured or ill-treated them in incommunicado detention to make them confess. One death sentence was imposed but there were no executions.
Members of the Shi'a community continued to comprise the majority of those arrested and imprisoned on political grounds. Arrests occurred throughout the year, and dozens of people were detained without charge or trial under the 1974 Decree Law on State Security Measures (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Many of those held, among whom were a number of children, were believed to be prisoners of conscience. Some long-term untried detainees were released in August, including al-Sayyed 'Abdullah al-Muharraqi, a Shi'a religious leader.
About 40 people were arrested in June, reportedly for distributing leaflets which expressed solidarity with political prisoners. Most were released within a few weeks. A Sunni religious leader, Nidham Ya'aqoubi, was detained in August, reportedly after criticizing members of the government in his Friday sermons. He
BAHRAIN
was subsequently released uncharged, but forbidden from delivering sermons in the mosque.
Some Bahrainis were arrested on their return from visits or residence abroad and were detained for days or weeks as possible prisoners of conscience. They included six women and their children - families of prisoners sentenced in 1981 for their alleged participation in a coup attempt -who were held for about one week in August and then sent back to Syria.
Dozens of political prisoners were sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials. Five were jailed in March at the end of a trial before the Supreme Civil Court of Appeal of nine people arrested in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990). Their arrests had taken place following the brief detention of a prominent religious leader, Sheikh 'Abd al-'Amir al-Jamri, apparently because of his outspoken criticism of government policies.
Muhammad Jamil 'Abd al-'Amir al-Jamri was convicted of membership of an unauthorized organization and other offences and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. 'Abd al-Jalil Khalil Ibrahim Hassan received a seven-year term, two others received three-year sentences and the fifth, Hussein Ibrahim al-Qassab, a minor at the time of the offence, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment. Four of the accused were acquitted. All nine defendants alleged that they were tortured by police in pre-trial custody, and prosecution witnesses said they had been threatened by security police to make them give false testimony against the accused. No investigation into these allegations was known to have been carried out.
The trial, like others before the Supreme Civil Court of Appeal, did not satisfy international fair trial standards. The court can convict solely on the basis of uncorroborated confessions obtained by the police in the absence of witnesses, and defendants have no right of appeal against their conviction or sentence. Apart from close relatives of the accused, the public are excluded ft'om the court.
Nineteen other people arrested in 1988 were convicted by the Supreme Civil Court of Appeal in May on charges of forming an unauthorized organization and possession of leaflets. 'Abd al-Ridha Mansour al-Khawaja and 'Abdullah Ibrahim 'Ali al-Sairafi were each sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. Six others received five-year prison sentences. The remaining 11 defendants received one-year prison terms and were released as they had already been in custody for approximately 21 months.
In a separate case, three people charged with membership of an unauthorized organization were acquitted in November, although they were then held for a further week before being released. All three alleged that they had been tortured and beaten in detention. In December nine people from the village of Bani Jamra were sentenced on similar charges. Seven received two-year prison terms, one received a three-year term, and one, Fatima Ibrahim Kadhem, was given a one-year suspended sentence. Two others were acquitted. Most of them had been held since early 1989.
Scores of political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years remained in prison throughout 1990. They included alleged members of banned organizations such as the Bahrain National Liberation Front (bnlf), the Islamic Liberation Front and the Islamic Enlightenment Society. Other alleged members of these organizations completed their sentences and were released.
Political prisoners, including approximately 70 people sentenced to long prison terms in 1981, complained of harsh prison conditions and mounted a number of hunger-strikes. One took place after Salah al-Khawajah, a political prisoner serving a seven-year term at Jaw Prison, sustained an eye injury, allegedly as a result of torture.
A Pakistani national, convicted of drug-trafficking, was sentenced to death by the
BAHRAIN/BANGLADESH
High Criminal Court in July but there were no executions: the last known execution was in 1977.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the imprisonment of possible prisoners of conscience, the use of prolonged incommunicado detention, allegations of torture, unfair trials and the death penalty. It also sought information about a number of specific cases.
Following an inquiry about alleged members of the bnlf imprisoned since 1986, the Minister of the Interior responded in October that one such prisoner was a "trained international terrorist", while other sentenced political prisoners were "criminals...sentenced for using or advocating the use of violence". He denied that the Bahrain! authorities were holding prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International urged the government to ratify the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other international human rights treaties, and to apply their provisions in order to safeguard human rights.
