JAMAICA
Nineteen people were known to have been sentenced to death for murder, at least one of whom was under 18 at the time of the crime. Over 250 prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of the year. No executions were carried out; the last executions took place in February 1988. The Human Rights Committee adopted the view that there had been violations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) in the case of a prisoner under sentence of death. Three prisoners died during a prison riot, allegedly as a result of ill-treatment by prison officials.
Jamaica's Minister of Justice told Parliament in June that consideration was being given to commuting the death sentences of certain categories of prisoners, but no decision had been taken by the end of 1990. In November an opposition senator tabled a
JAMAICA
motion calling on the government to rat-ily the Second Optional Protocol to the iccPR Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty.
Adrian Campbell, sentenced to death for murder in February, was under 18 at the time the crime was committed; international standards and Jamaica's Constitution forbid sentencing minors to death. His co-defendants, Barrington Clarke and Conrad Henricks, were reportedly 18 at the time of sentencing and therefore may also have been under 18 in June 1989 when the murder took place. All three remained on death row at the end of the year.
In July the Human Rights Committee, which supervises implementation of the ICCPR, held that Jamaica had violated its treaty obligations under the Covenant in the case of death row prisoner Carlton Reid. It expressed the view that he was "entitled to a remedy entailing his release". The Committee found a violation of Article 14(3)(b) because the court failed to grant defence counsel sufficient time to prepare his examination of witnesses, and a violation of Article 14(3)(d) because Carlton Reid had been denied effective representation at the appeal proceedings. The Committee also concluded that Article 6 of the Covenant (the right to life) had been violated since a death sentence had been imposed after judicial proceedings which fell short of international standards. Carlton Reid was still on death row at the end of the year.
Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan remained on death row despite the fact that in April 1989 the Human Rights Committee had expressed the view that their sentences should be commuted (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990].
Three death row inmates died during attempts by police and soldiers to end disturbances at St Catherine's Adult Correctional Centre on 28 May. The increasing
number of prisoners on death row had created serious overcrowding. Tension had further increased among death row inmates following a statement by the Minister of National Security in early May, expressing his personal support for the resumption of executions. The riot reportedly broke out after prison warders stopped work to protest against low wages and poor working conditions. As a result, they did not open cells or provide morning meals for inmates. Prisoners in the death row and general population areas broke their cell locks and some of them set fire to unused materials in a store room. Warders reportedly later ordered prisoners to leave their cells, made them strip, and beat them with batons and guns. Tear-gas was also used to subdue the prisoners. The riot lasted for about one hour.
The results of the autopsy performed on the three dead prisoners were not made public, but reports allegedly emanating from hospital workers said that Calvin Green and Paul Grey died as a result of haemorrhaging caused by blows to the head and other parts of the body. Warders reportedly tear-gassed Denny Wilson in his cell, sprayed him with high pressure water, and then took him out of his cell and beat him to death. Injured prisoners were allegedly not given prompt medical attention; Anthony Bernard had his jaw broken as a result of being beaten by warders and allegedly did not receive prompt medical care. Prisoners were denied visits for about one week after the disturbance. An investigation was reported to have been started by the Corrections Department and the Police Department but there had been no public report of their findings by the end of the year.
Five warders charged with murder for the killing of a prisoner beaten to death at the Gun Court Rehabilitation Centre in July
1988	(see Amnesty International Reports
1989	and 1990] went on trial in July; three were convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to nine years in prison; two were released.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the sentencing to death of Adrian Campbell in contravention of international standards and Jamaican law. and sought clarification about the ages, at the time of the crime, of his two co-defendants. Amnesty International called for the immediate commutation of the death sentences.
JAMAICA/JAPAN
Amnesty International wrote to the authorities in June about the death of the three prisoners in the May prison riot, urging a full and impartial inquiry. It also expressed concern about the death of two prisoners at the General Penitentiary in July 1989 and one at St Catherine's Adult Correctional Centre in September 1989; they reportedly died from injuries inflicted by warders or members of the security forces brought in to quell disturbances at the prisons (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Amnesty International reiterated its view that the uncertainty of the situation of death row prisoners had led to growing tension and had had an adverse effect on both warders and prisoners; it urged the authorities to take steps towards commuting all death sentences. No replies had been received by the end of the year.
