YUGOSLAVIA
Over 1,000 ethnic Albanians were imprisoned in Kosovo province for up to 60 days for going on strike or for peacefully expressing nationalist sentiments. The number of prisoners of conscience serving long terms of imprisonment decreased significantly as a result of pardons, early releases and acquittals: by the end of the
YUGOSLAVIA
year they numbered some 35. At least 30 ethnic Albanian demonstrators or onlookers were killed and several hundred others wounded during clashes between demonstrators and police. It was alleged that the police had used excessive and indiscriminate force. There were many allegations that police had beaten and otherwise ill-treated people under arrest. Conditions in some prisons were said to be harsh. At least four people were sentenced to death for murder, but no executions were reported.
Numerous opposition parties were legally established throughout the country and by the end of the year multi-party elections had taken place in all six republics. Nationalist parties won four of these elections, while communists retained power in Serbia (where they were renamed socialists) and in Montenegro. Slovenia and Croatia demanded that Yugoslavia cease to be a federation and become a confederation of states. Ethnic conflict intensified in Kosovo province; in July the Serbian parliament suspended the Kosovo parliament and government after ethnic Albanian members of the Kosovo parliament declared Kosovo independent of the republic of Serbia. Thousands of ethnic Albanians who refused to declare their approval for these measures lost their jobs, and the main local media in the Albanian langucige were baimed. In September Serbia adopted a new constitution which deprived its two provinces, Kosovo and Vojvodina, of most of their autonomy.
Changes to the federal criminal code adopted in June significantly reduced the scope for prosecuting people for the nonviolent exercise of their human rights. For example, Article 133, under which many prisoners of conscience had been imprisoned in the past for the non-violent exercise of their right to fi-eedom of expression, was amended so as to prohibit only the advocacy of violent change to the constitutional order.
In March Yugoslavia signed the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; it had not yet ratified this by the end of the year.
Between 24 January and 3 February there were violent clashes between the police and ethnic Albanian demonstrators in many parts of Kosovo province after ethnic Albanians, who form some 85 per cent
of the province's population, called for greater independence from Serbia, the resignation of local political leaders and the release of political prisoners. During the clashes at least 30 ethnic Albanians died and several hundred others, including police officers, were injured. An investigation carried out by police and judicial investigators claimed in a report in March that in almost all cases police officers had resorted to firearms only after being shot at by demonstrators. It stated that the police had used firearms improperly in only two incidents, and that the circumstances of four other deaths required further clarification. However, the report cited one incident in which police officers had used firearms although demonstrators had not fired at them. According to the report, on 31 lanuary demonstrators in Kogare village erected barricades and were throwing stones at police. After other "physical and chemical methods" had failed to restore order, police officers fired shots, allegedly into the air, killing 15-year-old Bekim Sejdiu.
Unofficial somces alleged that there were other incidents in which the police shot and killed people who had not fired on them. On 29 January Rexhep Aliu was killed by stray police bullets outside his garage on the outskirts of Urosevac as police chased a group of fleeing demonstrators. The report stated that the officers were returning fire; however, unofficial sources alleged that although there was violent rioting in the town at the time, there was no shooting by demonstrators in the vicinity. On 30 January Sadri Maksuti was severely wounded when police fired at demonstrators in Stanovac village. A local human rights committee in Kosovo alleged that police officers subsequently dragged Sadri Maksuti fi-om a car which was taking him to hospital, and beat him to death, The driver of the car was also reportedly beaten.
Almost 600 demonstrators were sentenced and imprisoned for up to 60 days for their part in the protests; it was not possible to assess whether they included prisoners of conscience. In mid-March the press reported that police had filed 2,381 requests for proceedings against those who had contravened compulsory work orders, introduced under emergency measures, by striking in support of the demonstrations. Among them were 676 workers from GoleS
YUGOSLAVIA
mines. 85 of whom had been sentenced to between 30 and 60 days' imprisonment by 21 March. In June it was reported that proceedings were under way against 2,597 workers from Kosovo's TrepCa mine alone.
By June, 391 ethnic Albanians in Kosovo had been arrested and proceedings had been initiated against 433 people for making a "V" (victory) sign to express their disagreement with official Serbian policy in the province - thus allegedly "disturbing public order" and "offending the socialist and patriotic sentiments of citizens". Scores of other ethnic Albanians were sentenced during the year to up to 60 days' imprisonment for alleged breaches of public order for peacefully expressing political dissent. In July Shefqet Haziri, Ramush Jashari and Islam Bjegova were sentenced in Pri§tina to 30 days' imprisonment for hanging in their office a picture of Ibrahim Rugova, the leader of Kosovo's largest ethnic Albanian opposition party. In August Hajrullah Gorani and Ilir Tollaj, respectively President and Vice-President of the Union of Independent Trade Unions in Kosovo, were sentenced to 60 days' imprisonment for calling on ethnic Albanians to join in a general strike in Kosovo province on 3 September in protest against the dismissal of ethnic Albanians from their jobs. In October Qazim Kovagi was sentenced to 45 days' imprisonment by a court in Montenegro for selling a book about the ethnic Albanian writer Adem Demagi and an Albanian-language magazine.
In April the federal Presidency released 108 political prisoners and reduced the sentences of 115 others. Among the prisoners of conscience released was Adem Demagi, whose 15-year prison sentence, his third for political offences, was due to expire in October. Officials stated in May that 190 political prisoners were still serving sentences, including 160 ethnic Albanians. Further releases followed: in May the federal Assembly granted an amnesty to all those prosecuted or convicted for "hostile propaganda" or "damaging the reputation of Yugoslavia" (under Articles 133 and 157). Press reports stated that there were only two prisoners serving sentences imposed under Article 133 at the time, but did not make clear how many were serving sentences imposed under Article 157. In Jime the Croatian Presidency released early on parole 37 political prisoners; the majority of them were ethnic Albanians.
According to official sources, only two political prisoners, who were not yet eligible for early release, remained in Croatian prisons. In November the federal Presidency granted pardons to or dropped charges pending against 564 people; 124 of them were released from prison and 69 had their sentences reduced.
In April Azem Vllasi. the former president of the Kosovo communist party, and 13 other ethnic Albanians were acquitted by the district court of Titova Mitrovica on grounds of lack of evidence. They had been charged with "counter-revolutionary undermining of the social order" for having allegedly organized or supported strikes at Stari Trg mine in February 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). An appeal by the prosecution against the acquittal had not been concluded by the end of 1990.
On 7 September ethnic Albanian deputies of the suspended Kosovo assembly met clandestinely and adopted a constitution proclaiming Kosovo a republic within the Yugoslav federation. On 17 September four deputies - Raif Ramabaja, Nazif Matoshi, Ismail Sahiti and Fatos Pula - were arrested and charged under Article 116 of the federal criminal code with having aimed to unconstitutionally change Serbia's borders and proclaim Kosovo province a republic. The Serbian assembly revoked their parliamentary immunity from prosecution. However, on 25 October the Supreme Court of Kosovo ordered their release. On 21 September similar charges had been brought against Agim Mala, the former director of Pri§tina television, and six former Kosovo government officials, including Prime Minister Jusuf Zejnullahu and Secretary of the Interior Jusuf Karakushi. Most of them were outside Kosovo at the time, but two - Seladin Skeja and Leke Vuksani - were arrested. Zenun Celaj, a journalist and human rights activist, was arrested on 27 September and charged under Article 116 for writing and publishing a report on the meeting of 7 September; he was released on 27 October. None of these men was accused of having used or advocated violence, but investigation proceedings continued against all of them.
In April the Serbian authorities took over policing in Kosovo province. Frequent reports continued to be received of police beating or otherwise ill-treating ethnic
YUGOSLAVIA/ZAIRE
Albanians in detention. For example, on 1 May, as large crowds were leaving a village near DeCani after a ceremony marking the end of a traditional blood feud, the police reportedly forced several dozen young people to get out of their cars after some people had made a "V" sign. The young people were beaten and taken to a local police station. Two of them, Lutfi Gashi and Sevdali Sherifi, were later taken with injuries to a local medical clinic where two police officers treated them after expelling the doctor on duty. On 18 May police allegedly stopped Bashkim Gerlica from PriStina and asked for his papers. When they found in his possession a photograph of Anton ^etta, who had taken a leading part in a campaign to end blood feuds, they reportedly took him to a local police station, beat him and forced him to swallow his engagement ring. On 23 July Xhevdat Sadiku from Gnjilane was arrested and taken to a police station after police officers saw a photograph of Ibrahim Rugova in his shop window, He was reportedly beaten so badly in custody that he was admitted to hospital in Pri§tina on 24 July. On his discharge four days later, he was issued with a medical certificate stating that he had suffered injuries to his head and body and that blood had been found in his urine. Many similar incidents were reported in subsequent months.
There were also reports of police violence in several incidents which took place outside Kosovo. On 13 June police officers reportedly beat a number of demonstrators who had gathered outside Belgrade television studios in a peaceful protest against editorial policy. Among those injured were Dragoljub Micunovic, a leader of a Serbian opposition party, and LjubiSa Mitic, whose collar bone was broken.
In September the Bar Association of Macedonia appealed for the release of nonviolent political prisoners. They stated that conditions at Idrizovo prison in Macedonia were poor and that punitive measures taken against prisoners on an almost daily basis had provoked a revolt by prisoners in October. Conditions in Stara Gradi§ka prison in Croatia and Zenica prison in Bosnia-Hercegovina were described by former prisoners as harsh. In February a court in Vranje sentenced four prison guards to three months' imprisonment each on charges of having beaten 18 ethnic Albanian detainees in March 1989
(see Amnesty International Report 1990]. Twelve other prison guards were acquitted.
In March Xhafer Kurteshi and Rifet Hajrid, both convicted of murder and rape, were sentenced to death. Two people were sentenced to death for murder; Milan Tank: in April and Fikret Fehric in December. No executions were reported. On 21 December a new constitution adopted in Croatia abolished the death penalty.
In May an Amnesty International delegation met federal and Serbian officials in Belgrade, discussed the organization's concerns in Yugoslavia and were informed about forthcoming legislative changes. In November the organization sent a memorandum to the authorities in which it welcomed certain legal reforms, but urged the release of all prisoners of conscience and expressed concern about allegations of police abuses in Kosovo province. It called on the government to initiate an independent investigation into the deaths of demonstrators in January and February and to ensure that security forces operated in accordance with internationally recognized norms.
ZAIRE
More than 100 government opponents were arrested and held without charge, including prisoners of conscience, but most were released by the end of the year. Many were beaten at the time of arrest, and two were said to have died as a result. Up to a dozen students were reportedly killed in an attack in which the security forces were implicated: at least 11 ofiicials were arrested after a preliminary inquiry but the government did not respond to
