IRAN
More than 50 supporters of the opposition group, the People's Mojahedine Organization of Iran (pmoi), were held in incommunicado detention. Their whereabouts were unknown and there had been no news of some of them since 1988.
Hundreds of other people were reportedly arrested following political demonstrations in various parts of the country. In February disturbances after the postponement of two football matches in Tehran turned into protests about government policy and clashes between demonstrators and police, resulting in the detention of scores of people. In April the official press reported the arrest of 65 people for taking part in a political demonstration in Mellat Park in north Tehran. Throughout the year there were reports of unrest in Kurdistan and Baluchistan resulting in the arrest of hundreds of people, some of whom may have been involved in armed attacks on members of the security forces, or smuggling. There were no reports of alleged participants in political demonstrations being brought to trial, and it is not known how many of those arrested remained in prison at the end of the year.
In March, 10 men were sentenced to death for spying for the United States of America (usa) in closed trials before Islamic Revolutionary Courts. They were arrested at the end of 1988. with no reason being given for their detention, and held incommunicado in Evin Prison until August 1989, when family visits were permitted. Confessions by the prisoners were reported in the press in November 1989. Three of the condemned prisoners were met by the un Special Representative in October, but the fate of the other seven was not known.
Torture of prisoners in pre-trial detention continued, and arbitrary brutality towards convicted prisoners was common. One of the women prisoners of conscience released temporarily in August said that prisoners were beaten by the guards on the slightest pretext.
At least 12 people had the fingers of one hand amputated as judicially imposed punishments for repeated theft, and floggings were imposed for a wide variety of offences.
Former prisoners who had escaped from Iran to seek political asylum in Europe described the torture they had suffered during 1988 and 1989. One man, accused
of having monarchist sympathies, described how, in 1989, he had been taken for execution in Qasr Prison, Tehran, with 10 other prisoners. He was blindfolded and forced to stand against a wall, and then heard gunshots. As he was being led away, he lifted his blindfold and saw that eight of the prisoners had been killed.
A man arrested in 1988 in Zahedan and suspected of activities for Peykar, a banned left-wing political organization, described how he had been taken to a detention centre, strapped to a bed face down, and beaten with whips and cables. He said that on one occasion an interrogator had held a pistol to his neck while another guard fired a pistol into the air.
A number of political opponents of the government were killed outside Iran in circumstances suggesting that they were the victims of extrajudicial executions carried out by Iranian Government agents. In April Dr Kazem Rajavi, a representative of the pmoi, was shot dead while driving near his home in Geneva. A Swiss judicial investigation revealed evidence that agents of the Iranian Government were directly involved in this killing. In August an Iranian Kurdish activist was found shot dead on the Konya to Ankara road in Turkey. It was alleged that Iranian Government agents may have carried out this killing, as well as a letter bomb attack in Sweden in September in which the wife of an Iranian Kurdish exile was killed. In October Sirous Elahi, a prominent member of the Flag of Freedom Organization, was found shot dead in his Paris apartment building, and Iranian Government involvement in the killing was alleged. Several other attempts on the lives of Iranian exiles were reported.
There were 757 executions of people convicted of criminal offences. Many of these executions took place in public, often after summary trials which failed to comply with international standards. More than 400 of the executions were for drug-trafficking; over 100 of these took place in a two-week period in September when an intensification of the long-running anti-narcotics campaign, including further proposals to speed up the punishment of offenders, was announced.
It was not possible to estimate the number of political executions which routinely took place in secret. It was alleged that among those executed for criminal offences were a number of political opponents
IRAN/IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT
falsely accused of involvement in criminal activity. For example, Dr Sepah Man-sour. executed in January in Karaj, was said to have been falsely accused of drug-trafficking. and to have been killed because of his opposition to the government.
In December a Christian pastor, the Reverend Hossein Soodmand, was executed in Mashhad apparently on charges of apostasy, punishable by death under the Islamic Penal Code of bran. He had converted to Christianity from Islam more than 20 years ago.
In May the Islamic Consultative Assembly passed a new law extending the death penalty to offences such as profiteering and food-hoarding, described as "economic terrorism". This new law, which was seen as a political attack on influential bazaari merchants, was blocked because of an objection from the Council of Guardians, which is empowered to veto parliamentary decisions which it finds incompatible with Islamic principles.
Four men accused of rape of minors were beheaded, and at least six people were stoned to death. One man was put to death by being thrown from a precipice. Kazem Shirafkan, aged 17, was executed in Mashhad for the murder of a 10-year-old boy.
Amnesty International c'ampaigned throughout the year for an end to executions in Iran, expressing particular concern about the very large number of executions and the lack of procedural safeguards for defendants facing charges punishable by death.
In February Amnesty International submitted a written statement to the un Commission on Human Rights which drew particular attention to its concerns about the death penalty and torture.
In August Amnesty International made reference to the execution of minors in Iran in an oral statement to the un Sub-Commis-sion on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
In April Amnesty International wrote to President Rafsanjani asking to be informed of the reasons for the arrest of 65 people in Mellat Park in Tehran, and seeking further information on their situation. The letter also sought information about other reported arrests, but no reply was received.
Amnesty International also pressed for the release of all prisoners of conscience and for fair trials for all political prisoners.
In May it publicized the plight of the women prisoners fi?om left-wing opposition groups imprisoned since 1983, eight of whom it named as prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International made renewed appeals in August following the imprisonment of more than 20 prisoners of conscience for criticizing the lack of rights and freedoms in Iran, and expressed particular concern about their torture and ill-treatment. The organization wrote to Ayatollah Yazdi, the Head of the Judiciary, about its wish to send a delegation to observe the trial of these prisoners, but there was no response and no indication from the authorities as to when the trial might take place,
In June Amnesty International wrote to President Rafsanjani expressing its deep concern at the preliminary conclusions reached by a Swiss judge investigating the killing of Dr Kazem Rajavi which indicated "the direct involvement...of one or more official Iranian services". Amnesty International expressed its unreserved opposition to extrajudicial executions and sought urgent clarification of the role of the Iranian authorities in Dr Kazem Rajavi's killing. No reply was received.
In December Amnesty International published a major report, Iran: Violations of Human Rights 1987-1990, which contained detailed information about torture, executions and political imprisonment, and criticized the Iranian authorities' failure to halt persistent gross violations of human rights.
