ALGERIA
Fifteen government opponents sentenced after an unfair trial in 1987 were released in July. Some may have been prisoners of conscience. There were renewed
allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Seven people were sentenced to death in absentia.
New legislation was introduced in March under which those convicted of publishing information endangering state security or national unity may be imprisoned for up to 10 years. Penalties of up to three years' imprisonment may be imposed for criticizing Islam or other revealed religions.
By the end of the year over 30 new parties had been registered under legislation introduced in 1989. In June the Front ishmique du salut (fis), Islamic Salvation Front, gained the majority of votes cast in the country's first multi-party municipal elections.
In July the government of President Chadli Benjedid announced an amnesty for those tried and convicted by the former State Security Court (see Amnesty International Report 1990) and those foimd guilty of political offences committed before the new constitution was introduced in February 1989. The amnesty benefited those arrested in connection with the riots of October 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989) who had been freed on liberté provisoire, provisional liberty, as well as members of the security forces accused of torturing detainees during the riots. A further Act established rates of compensation for those who had been tortured during the riots.
The Direction générale pour la documentation et la sécurité (dgds), General Office for Documentation and Security, a security police force, was dissolved in September. It was widely criticized during the 1988 riots for its involvement in surveillance and repression of government opponents.
Fifteen political prisoners sentenced after an unfair trial in 1987 were released in July. Their sentences had been quashed in 1989 but they had remained in prison pending a retrial. Those freed, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, included Mansouri Milyani,
ALGERIA/ANGOLA
Abdelkader Chbouti and Mohamed A'mamrah, all of whom had originally been sentenced to death. The 15 had been tried before the State Security Court with more than 170 other supporters of radical Islamic groups on charges of plotting to overthrow the government, murder, sabotage, armed robbery and membership of armed gangs (see Amnesty International Report 1988). They were the last of those tried to be released.
Torture continued to be reported. About 60 prisoners who escaped from Blida prison in September, including untried members of Islamic groups accused of violent offences and convicted criminal prisoners, alleged that they were tortured after their recapture a few days later. They were said to have been beaten with plastic hoses, electric wires, whips and thongs. They also alleged that they were tortured with a method known as rabha, where a stick is tied to a rope binding the victim's feet and tightened so that it cuts into the flesh. They were then reportedly hung upside-down and beaten on the chest, back and head. The government ordered an inquiry, which confirmed the allegations.
Further allegations of ill-treatment were made by more than 20 people arrested in T6nfes in October. They were detained following demonstrations and riots in the town and were taken to Tönös police headquarters, where they were allegedly kicked, beaten and urinated on by police officers. Five of the alleged victims, all of whom reportedly faced criminal charges arising from the riots, were aged under 18. The authorities denied that they were ill-treated.
Seven people were sentenced to death in absentia after being convicted of carrying out an armed attack in January on a court in Blida. During the attack one gendarme and two of the assailants were killed. The seven were among those who escaped from Blida Prison in September.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners. It also expressed concern to the government about continued reports of torture and sought information about the outcome of relevant official inquiries.
