FRANCE
Hundreds of conscientious objectors to the national service laws, the vast majority of them Jehovah's Witnesses, were considered prisoners of conscience. There were reports of ill-treatment in police custody.
Conscientious objectors who refused to conform to the national service laws continued to receive sentences of up to 15 months' imprisonment. The alternative civilian service available to recognized conscientious objectors remained twice the length of ordinary military service.
Thierry Daligault refused to perform military service because of his Christian and pacifist beliefs. He did not apply for civilian service because, among other objections, he considered its length to be
FRANCE/GABON
punitive. He was arrested on 19 July and following a trial on 27 November was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment for failing to obey call-up orders and refusing to put on military uniform.
At least three imprisoned conscientious objectors had been refused conscientious objector status because their applications had been made after their call-up orders were issued.
Ludovic Bouteraon stated that when he registered for national service in early 1990, he informed the authorities of his wish to perform an alternative civilian service compatible with his pacifist beliefs. He claimed that he received no indication that there were further procedures to be followed to obtain conscientious objector status. He therefore reported to an air force base on 1 August, as ordered, declared his conscientious objection and refused to perform military service. He was held under arrest at the base until 17 August, when he was tried under a summary procediue by a Strasbourg court. He was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment and transferred to a civilian prison. On 8 September he submitted a formal application for conscientious objector status to the Ministry of Defence. This was rejected in October, on the grounds that it had been made outside the stipulated time limit. In November an appeal court reduced his sentence to 12 months' imprisonment, eight of which were suspended. He was released on conditional liberty in December and exempted from further military obligation.
Several judicial inquiries were under way into allegations of ill-treatment in police custody. These often concerned immigrants and French citizens of North African origin.
Abdelaziz Gabsi and Kamel Djellal alleged that they were ill-treated on the night of 11 December 1989 in Echirolles, near Grenoble, after a police officer asked to see Abdelaziz Gabsi's identity papers. They claimed that when Abdelaziz Gabsi offered a jacket containing the papers the police officer insulted him, struck him across the face with the butt of his shotgun and then hit him several more times on the head. The police officer then allegedly struck Kamel Djellal several times, handcuffed him and beat him to the ground. He was also bitten by a police dog in the charge of a second officer. Following the incidents Abdelaziz Gabsi's face was reportedly badly bruised and swollen, and Kamel Djellal required 20 stitches to wounds on his head and face.
The police stated that the accused officer had been attacked by Abdelaziz Gabsi and had acted only in self-defence. The Public Prosecutor's office in Grenoble opened a judicial inquiry into the allegations and ordered the General Inspectorate of the National Police to carry out an investigation. The inquiry was apparently continuing at the end of the year.
A judicial inquiry opened in September 1989, following Lucien Djossouvi's allegations of ill-treatment by the police in Paris (see Amnesty International Report 1990], had not concluded.
Amnesty International considered that because of its punitive length civilian service did not provide an acceptable alternative to military service. It also considered that individuals should be able to seek conscientious objector status at any time. It appealed throughout the year for the release of conscientious objectors whom it considered to be prisoners of conscience, including Thierry Daligault and Ludovic Bouteraon. The organization expressed concern to the authorities about allegations of ill-treatment in police custody and asked to be informed about the progress and outcome of inquiries opened into such allegations.
