ZIMBABWE
Several critics or opponents of the government were briefiy detained without charge or trial; two were allegedly assaulted by intelligence officers. However, all long-term political detainees were released before the state of emergency was lifted in July and dozens of sentenced political prisoners were freed in an amnesty. They included over 50 prisoners who had been under sentence of death. At least three
ZIMBABViE
other people were sentenced to death during 1990 but no executions were reported.
There was continuing insecurity along the eastern border owing to incursions and killings by guerrillas fighting the Mozambican Government. The national state of emergency which had been in force continuously since 1965 was lifted in July. As a result, the Emergency Powers (Maintenance of Law and Order) Regulations, which had provided for indefinite detention without charge or trial, were withdrawn; all untried political detainees, totalling at least eight, were released shortly after. In July the government also declared an amnesty for criminal prisoners, among them armed opponents of the government and prisoners serving sentences for human rights abuses committed in the early 1980s in Matabeleland. A committee set up to review cases had authorized the release of 1.400 people, most of them petty criminal offenders, by November.
In October the Supreme Court declared solitary confinement to be inhuman or degrading, and therefore unconstitutional. A similar ruling was expected to be made in November in relation to hanging, thereby effectively abolishing the death penalty, following an appeal to the Supreme Court by Douglas Chitiza, a soldier sentenced to death for murder. The appeal was not heard but Douglas Chitiza was released the day before it was due. However, the government introduced legislation in December to amend the Constitution so as to provide that neither hanging as a method of execution, nor corporal punishment for male juveniles (which the Supreme Court had declared unconstitutional in 1989) could be challenged on the grounds that they constitute inhuman or degrading punishment.
Several opposition activists were arrested following elections in March which saw the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union - Patriotic Front (zanu-pf) headed by Robert Mugabe returned to office with an overwhelming majority. Before the election, Patrick Kombayi, a candidate for the opposition Zimbabwe Unity Movement (zum), was shot and seriously injured in suspicious circumstances. There were allegations that members of the government's Central Intelligence Organization (cio) were involved, although this could not be confirmed. Those responsible for the shooting escaped arrest.
In April Paul Razika, Patrick Kombayi's election agent who had been with him at the time of the shooting, was arrested and held without charge or trial for 20 days. He was rearrested in May with three other zuM activists: they were accused by the authorities of recruiting people for military training in South Afirica. All four, however, were released uncharged within two weeks. They appeeued to be prisoners of conscience,
Newman Ndlela, a defeated zum candidate, was also briefly detained in April, He was moved fi-om place to place by police in Bulawayo, apparently to deny him access to his lawyer before he had made a statement and been brought to court. He was released on bail the day after he was charged with illegal possession of arms of war, a charge which arose from possession of a gun in the early 1980s. In July the case against him was dropped.
Five student leaders were arrested in October following demonstrations by students in Harare against legislative changes by the government which placed the university more directly under the control of its Vice-Chancellor and the Minister of Higher Education. This followed previous student unrest in 1989, which had resulted in arrests (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). The five students were held without charge for a few days and then released.
Two detainees alleged that they were beaten in custody. Kembo Dube Bango and Soft Nhari, both zuM activists, said they were ill-treated for 24 hours by cio officers while held at Stops Camp, an interrogation centre within Mzilikazi police station in Bulawayo.
The amnesty declared by the government resulted in the release of more than 50 former government opponents under sentence of death. Most had been sentenced for murder and other violent crimes committed in Matabeleland in the early 1980s,
At least three people were convicted of murder and sentenced to death during 1990 and the Supreme Court confirmed one death sentence imposed for murder and rape. However, no executions were known to have been carried out.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Paul Razika and other prisoners of conscience and urged an official investigation into the shooting of Patrick
ZIMBABWE
Kombayi. Amnesty International also expressed concern to the government about its amendment of the Constitution to retain hanging and reintroduce whipping as a punishment for male juveniles. The organization urged that steps be taken to abolish the death penalty.
259



T^iÄ?' ' ■	•• • ••
pS-..';:;": ■ , ;

-	''•■ii V." -•■ V 'f-ll-

_ ' ••. • i, .
Um:-''
I»*-	-
y; , ■ , ' !. " • -
■ÄM.yic'jii'^	.....
5,

- .1
-■Vi''

. -h-


â


íjva.Htjí--; '
•ji.
^ ■> ■
tiMt«« ■¡■^r. U' -JMÎÂ. ,
Î : i
. iwuííidí.;
jot«««,-
