BENIN
Pohtical reforms at the beginning of the year were followed by important changes affecting human rights and strengthening the rule of law. Ail remaining political prisoners were released in an amnesty announced in March. In contrast to previ-ous years, there were no reports of torture and the few people arrested for political reasons were referred to the courts instead of being held unlawfully or in administrative detention. A political activist was killed in September by a security officer.
After several months of strikes and demonstrations advocating political change, the government convened a national conference in February to discuss reforms.
At the conference, representatives of some previously banned opposition groups and other political leaders called for an inquiry into torture allegations, the dismantling of all torture centres, and the release of all remaining political prisoners. A High Council, chaired by the Roman Catholic Assistant Archbishop of Cotonou, Mon-signor Isidore de Souza, was set up to oversee the implementation of the conference's recommendations. President Mathieu Kerekou retained his post as head of state, but an interim government was appointed, headed by Nicephore Soglo, to hold power until elections scheduled for 1991. A new constitution was prepared and approved by a national referendum on 2 December. It included important human rights safeguards prohibiting arbitrary detention and making torture a criminal offence.
The national conference also approved the formal establishment of a 42-member National Human Rights Commission which included government appointees and elected representatives of the country's nongovernmental organizations. The conference recommended the creation of a national committee to investigate past torture allegations, but apparently no investigation was initiated.
The last remaining political prisoners were released under an amnesty announced in March. Three prisoners arrested in 1977 and held either without charge or after a grossly unfair trial, as well as two groups of prisoners accused of plotting to overthrow the government in 1988, were among those released. However, no official inquiry into prisoners' allegations of torture or other human rights abuses had opened by the end of the year.
Some government critics and opponents were arrested, but most cases were quickly referred to the procuracy and the courts to determine whether offences had been committed, This contrasted with the official practice throughout the 1970s and 1980s of detaining political opponents without trial, outside the jurisdiction of the coiu*ts. Most of those arrested were members of the Convention du Peuple, People's Convention, an umbrella organization representing several political groups including the Parti communiste du Dahomey, Communist Party of Dahomey, many of whose members had been detained without trial in past years (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1990).
BENIN/BERMUDA
One person who appeared to be a prisoner of conscience was Laurent Metognon, a trade unionist. He was arrested in January and held for two weeks for allegedly inciting disobedience against the government and for threatening behaviour in connection with strikes at the Ministry of Finance where he \\ orked. The procuracy ordered his release. -
Three other people, including Augustin Voy6m6, a medical doctor, were arrested in August at So-Ava for attending an unauthorized meeting. They were taken before the procurator and charged with using violence against the authorities and organizing prohibited demonstrations. They were acquitted at a trial two weeks later.
Other Convention du Peuple supporters were arrested when they tried to arrange the replacement of unpopular mayors outside the normal administrative framework. One person was arrested in Sav6 in February and charged with trying to substitute an illegal authority for legal authority. He was released to await trial, but no proceedings had started by the end of the year. In another case, Jean-Marie Yacoubou, a former prisoner of conscience held from 1985 to 1989, was detained for three weeks from 10 February without charge.
Segla Kpomassi, a teacher and member of the Convention du Peuple, was reportedly shot dead by a security officer on 16 September in Azov6, Mono province, where there had been demonstrations and protests against the authorities. No attempt appeared to have been made to arrest him. The Minister of the Interior said S^gla Kpomassi had been shot when officers returned fire from the crowd, but the only other casualty reported was another protester. An inquiry into the circumstances of S6gla Kpomassi's shooting had not concluded at the end of the year.
Amnesty International welcomed the improvements in human rights in 1990 and submitted proposals to the commission drafting the constitution, urging the abolition of the death penalty and the introduction of a procedure to allow all detainees to question the legality of their detention before the courts. In May an Amnesty International delegation visited Benin and discussed measures to protect human rights with government officials, including the establishing of responsibility for past human rights violations. Amnesty International also investigated the cases of those
arrested for political reasons in 1990 and was informed by the government that an inquiry into the circumstances of Sfegla Kpomassi's death was under way.
