URUGUAY
New evidence came to light linking senior officials in the military government of 1973 to 1985 to "disappearances" carried out in that period. Nevertheless the few remaining official investigations into "disappearances" failed to clarify the fate of the victims. Civil courts hearing compensation claims foimd the state responsible for the death in custody of a detainee in 1975 and for the illegal arrest and torture of several political prisoners under military rule. During 1990 several prisoners died in disputed circumstances in Libertad prison and there were further reports of ill-treatment of prisoners there.
Following the election victory of the Blanco National Party in November 1989, Luis Alberto Lacalle took office as
President in March 1990.
In Febmary and October respectively, Uruguay signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty and the protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights to abolish the death penalty. It had not ratified these treaties by the end of the year.
The few remaining official investigations into "disappearance" cases failed to clarify the fate of the victims. Investigations into "disappearances" had been entrusted to a military prosecutor under the 1986 Expiry Law (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 to 1990), which prevented the prosecution of military and police officials for human rights violations committed under military mle. In several cases the military prosecutor closed cases after concluding that the "disappeared" person had never been detained by the security forces. The prosecutor had made similar rulings in previous years, despite considerable evidence implicating members of the security forces.
Fresh evidence linking former senior govemment officials to "disappearances" continued to emerge. In April a Umguayan newspaper revealed the existence of a classified memorandum, written by a Foreign Ministry official in 1976 to the then foreign minister, Juan Carlos Blanco, assessing the possible international repercussions of releasing Elena Quinteros, a teacher who "disappeared" following her 1976 abduction by police from the grounds of the Venezuelan Embassy, Further evidence implicating government officials in the Quinteros "disappearance" came to light in May when the results of a Foreign Ministry
URUGUAY
investigation carried out between 1987 and 1989 were made public. However, a parliamentary commission set up in June 1990 to investigate the involvement of Juan Carlos Blanco in this "disappearance" concluded that there was insufficient evidence to initiate proceedings against him. In 1983 the Human Rights Committee established under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had concluded that the government had an obligation to investigate the case thoroughly, to clarify Elena Quinteros' fate and to bring to justice those responsible. In June 1990 the Foreign Minister announced that he would seek compliance with the Committee's 1983 conclusion. However. President Lacalle then stated publicly that neither legal channels nor public opinion supported a reinvestigation of the past, At the end of the year the case remained closed.
In Febmary 1990 criminal proceedings brought by Sara Méndez against the adoptive parents of a 14-year-old boy, whom she believed to be her "disappeared" son, were closed following the government's decision that the case was covered by the Expiry Law (see Amnesty International Report 1990]. Sara Méndez' son "disappeared" after being taken from his mother by police during her detention in 1976. However, her lawyers argued that the Expiry Law did not apply to alleged criminal offences committed by civilians, in this case the concealment of the identity of a minor. In May 1990 she took the case before a civil court, which in September ordered blood tests to ascertain the child's identity. However, the tests were delayed following a series of appeals by the adoptive parents, one of which was still pending at the end of the year.
Despite the barrier to criminal prosecution created by the Expiry Law, several relatives of people killed, "disappeared" or imprisoned under military rule obtained compensation from the state following civil court rulings in their favour. In April a judge ordered the Ministry of the Interior to pay compensation to the relatives of Alvaro Balbi, a Communist Party leader who died in police custody in July 1975. The judge concluded that Alvaro Balbi had died under torture, but stated that those responsible could not be brought to justice owing to the Expiry Law.
In November the Ministry of Defence accepted responsibility in a claim for
damages presented to a civil court by the relatives of Vladimir Roslik, a doctor who died under torture at the Fray Bentos military headquarters in April 1984. In similar lawsuits, the Ministry of Defence agreed to negotiate a settlement with Sergio López Burgos and five other Uruguayans detained and tortured in Buenos Aires in a joint operation by Argentine and Uruguayan police in 1976 and later imprisoned in Uruguay. While acceptance of these claims was seen as a tacit admission of the Defence Ministry's responsibility for illegal detention and torture, the offer of an out-of-court settlement eliminated trial proceedings in which former members of the military would have been called to testify as witnesses. Other former political prisoners whose claims for damages were before civil courts expressed their dissatisfaction with any settlement that permitted the government to evade a thorough investigation and clarification of events as well as a public and unequivocal admission of state responsibility.
There was little progress in the investigations into two killings allegedly committed by police officers in 1989. Despite the presentation of new witnesses in the cases of Nestor Castillo Romero and Jorge Ricardo Inciarte Castells (see Amnesty International Report 1990], responsibility for their deaths had still not been established at the end of the year.
A police officer was tried for the illegal arrest of Guillermo Machado, who died in police custody in July 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). To Amnesty International's knowledge, he was not convicted.
At least five criminal prisoners died in disputed circumstances in Libertad maximum security prison outside Montevideo. Among them was Jorge Barreiro Dorta, who was found hanging in his cell on 14 February. His cell-mate testified before a court that Jorge Barreiro Dorta had been subjected to ill-treatment by prison guards shortly before his death. His death provoked a hunger-strike by prisoners protesting against ill-treatment and harsh prison conditions. There were further reports of ill-treatment in Libertad prison during a cell search by prison guards on 2 July. According to relatives, scores of prisoners showed signs of having been beaten during the operation. A Supreme Court delegation, accompanied by judicial officials and
URUGUAY/VENEZUELA
forensic doctors, visited the prison in November and took statements from prisoners who said they had been ill-treated. In a number of cases judicial proceedings were initiated to investigate these allegations,
Detainees in some police stations in Montevideo also reported having been ill-treated. Three metalworkers detained in August later claimed in court that they had been hooded and beaten in order to make them confess to theft.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior expressing concern at reports of ill-treatment in Libertad prison and requesting information concerning the progress of official investigations initiated after the visit of the Supreme Court delegation. The organization asked what measures had been taken to clarify the death of five prisoners in Libertad and to guarantee the physical safety of those held there. Amnesty International continued to investigate allegations of ill-treatment of detainees in police custody.
