EGYPT
Several thousand members and sympathizers of Islamic groups, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial under state of emergency legislation. A number of political prisoners were acquitted after courts found that their confessions had been extracted under torture and were inadmissible as evidence. Allegations of torture and ill-treatment, although fewer than in 1989, were once again reported. At least 38 death sentences were passed during the year, some of them in absentia. Five prisoners were executed.
In January a new Minister of the Interior, General Muhammad 'Abd al-Halim Musa, was appointed. Like his predecessor, he made extensive use of the special powers granted to him under the
EGYPT
state of emergency, in force since 1981, to order administrative detention and to contest judicial decisions to release political detainees. Sporadic clashes in Upper Egyptian villages, mostly between the police and members of Islamic groups, resulted in dozens of deaths. On 12 October the Speaker of the People's Assembly, Dr Rifa'at al-Mahgoub, and five guards were shot dead in Cairo. Thousands of arrests followed, initially among nationals of other Arab countries and then among members of Islamic groups and their sympathizers. Elections for the People's Assembly held on 29 November were boycotted by most opposition parties, who alleged that the new election law was biased in favour of candidates standing for the ruling National Democratic Party (ndp) of President Hosni Mubarak. The ndp gained nearly 80 per cent of the seats in the assembly, but voting in some parts of the country was accompanied by violent clashes between rival groups, resulting in at least five deaths, and there were allegations of ballot rigging.
Political arrests under emergency legislation took place throughout the year. The authorities frequently justified detention orders on the grounds that the person concerned was a "threat to national security". At hearings held a month or more after the arrests in question, the courts frequently declared that this constituted insufficient grounds for detention and ordered detainees to be released. These decisions were regularly challenged by the Minister of the Interior, often leading to prolonged detention without charge or trial. Moreover, some of these detainees did not appear in court when their initial appeals for release were heard, and thus spent several months in detention without appearing before a judicial authority. These included Hassan Ibrahim Mar'iy, a former parliamentary candidate for the Socialist Labour Party, and 16 others held with him between April and July.
The overwhelming majority of those detained under the emergency laws on
political grounds, including prisoners of conscience, were members or sympathizers of Islamic groups, many of them students. Most were eventually released unchcirged after weeks or months in detention.
In June 'Ala' al-Din Hamid, a writer, was arrested. The authorities later said that his novel, Masafa fi 'Aqli Bajul (Distance in a Man's Mind), "offend[s] and degradels] religions in a way which has jeopardized national unity and... threatened social peace". He appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. He was released on bail on 22 August.
Five Muslim converts to Christianity detained since November 1989 were held without trial for several months. One of them, 'Abd al-Hamid Bishari 'Abd al-Muhsin, died in prison in February as a result of heart failure, according to official sources.
Other Muslim converts to Christianity detained during the year included Mustafa Muhammad Sa'id al-Sharqawi, Muhammad Hussein Muhammad Ibrahim Sallam and Hassan Muhammad Isma'il Muhammad, who remained in prison at the end of 1990 without charge or trial after three months in detention, during which they were reportedly subjected to torture and ill-treatment.
Some of those arrested in 1990 were tried before (Emergency) state security courts, while numerous other such trials continued ft'om previous years. Under state of emergency legislation, verdicts of (Emergency) state security courts are not enforced until approved by the President of the Republic, who is also empowered to reduce the sentence imposed or reject the verdict and order a retrial. These powers seriously undermine the independent functioning of the judicial process.
Fourteen prisoners of conscience were released on 24 April by order of the Prime Minister, acting in his capacity as Deputy Military Governor. They had been serving prison sentences originally imposed in 1986 (but only enforced in 1989) in connection with the so-called Egyptian Communist Party case of 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1990]. All of the defendants in a similar case dating from 1979, in which the defendants had previously succeeded in having their sentences quashed by the Court of Cassation, were retried and acquitted in March. In November the retrial began of 176 people arrested
EGYPT
in the wake of food riots which occurred in January 1977. The charges against them included membership of illegal political organizations, instigating the 1977 riots, and distributing leaflets. In April 1980 a state security court had acquitted 155 of them, and sentenced the others to either one or three years' imprisonment. The President did not accept this verdict.
Several other groups of political prisoners indicted in previous years were acquitted on the grounds that their confessions had not been freely given but resulted from torture or coercion. By the end of the year the President had not approved these judgments, and those acquitted, most of whom were members of Islamic groups, remained at risk of retrial.
Allegations of physical and psychological torture continued during 1990. The most common forms of torture reported were beatings, suspension, burning with cigarettes and electric shocks, often accompanied by threats, invariably inflicted by members of the State Security Intelligence Police. Khalid al-Sharif, a journalist working for the weekly Al-Haqiqa [The Truth) newspaper, was detained in August for the fourth time under state of emergency legislation. He alleged that security police suspended him by the wrists and tortured him with electric shocks applied to sensitive parts of the body, cigarette burns and beatings. It was not clear what action, if any, was taken by the authorities to investigate this allegation.
Reports of torture were received in the wake of the mass arrests which followed the assassination in October of the Speaker of the People's Assembly. At least 10 people accused of participating in the murder, including Mamdouh 'Ali Youssef, Safwat 'Abd al-Ghani, and the brothers Ahmad and Muhammad Mostafa Zaki, were reportedly severely beaten while in incommunicado detention. Mamdouh 'Ali Youssef suffered injuries to his spine and had to be carried to his interrogation sessions on a stretcher. The suspects were reportedly held for several weeks at the State Security Intelligence Police Directorate at Lazoghly, Cairo, and were denied access to their lawyers and medical treatment.
The health of Nabil al-Maghrebi, a political prisoner serving a sentence of life imprisonment in Tora Prison, continued to give cause for concern following reports
that his condition was deteriorating as a result of ill-treatment and lack of adequate medical care.
No information came to light concerning the whereabouts of Mostafa Muhammad 'Abd al-Hamid "Othman, a medical student who "disappeared" after his arrest in Zagazig in December 1989. Fellow students reported seeing him at the State Security Intelligence Police Directorate in Lazoghly in January, but official sources stated that he had been released in December, 10 days after his arrest.
Dr 'Ala' Mohy al-Din 'Ashour, a prominent member of AI-Gama'at al-ls!amiyya, the Islamic groups, was shot dead in a Cairo street on 2 September, reportedly by people shooting from an unmarked car. There were allegations that he may have been extrajudicially executed.
At least 38 people were sentenced to death, including some in absentia, most of whom had been convicted of drug-traffîcking or murder. No executions were recorded of people convicted of drug-trafficking (see Amnesty International Report 1990). At least five people who had been convicted of murder and other offences were executed. At least one death sentence was quashed by the Court of Cassation.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of prisoners of conscience, including those held because of their religious beliefs. The government said that some of those detained had been arrested because their activities offended religion and threatened social peace.
In February Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the Egyptian Government concerning the use of administrative detention and torture. The organization called for changes in detention procedures to safeguard detainees from torture and arbitrary imprisonment. In the memorandum and again later in the year Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate torture allegations thoroughly and impartially in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, to which Egypt acceded in 1986. However, there was virtually no progress with such investigations.
In May an Amnesty International delegation visited Cairo to discuss human rights with the government and to urge the
EGYPT/EL SALVADOR
implementation of the recommendations contained in its May 1989 report, Egypt: Arbitrary Arrest and Torture under the State of Emergency, and in its memorandum. In October 1990 Amnesty International published the updated text of its February memorandum and said that torture and arbitrary detention under emergency laws "could well continue as long as the security forces can detain and torture with apparent impunity".
In August Amnesty International delivered an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, outlining its concerns about emergency legislation permitting lengthy administrative detention.
