SENEGAL
Hundreds of people suspected of supporting a separatist movement were arrested for political reasons; among them were possible prisoners of conscience. Some were released, but at least 300 were still held awaiting trial at the end of the year.
One prisoner of conscience convicted in 1989 began serving a six-month prison sentence and several government opponents were imprisoned after trials which did not conform to international fair trial standards. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees, sometimes leading to the victim's death, were widely reported after May. Government soldiers were alleged to have carried out several extrajudicial executions.
The government continued to face armed opposition in the Casamance region. Most human rights violations occurred in May and the following months after a series of attacks on civilian "targets by armed groups believed to be associated with the Mouvement des forces démocratiques de la Casamance (mfdc). Movement of Casamance's Democratic Forces, the main separatist organization.
Hundreds of people were arrested during the year in connection with the Casamance independence movement: most of them were suspected of being members of the mfdc but some may have been prisoners of conscience. Some were held for up to a few weeks in police custody in Casamance and then released uncharged. However, the majority, at least 300, were charged with endangering the security of the state and forming an unlawful association. They had not been brought to trial by the end of 1990. Those charged were transferred to Dakar and Rufisque prisons for their cases to be investigated by an examining magistrate. They included Father Diamacoune Augustin Senghor, a Roman Catholic priest and prominent supporter of Casamance independence previously imprisoned from 1982 to 1987. and An-kiling Diabone, a former African judo champion.
One prisoner of conscience began a six-month prison sentence in July. Cheikh Koureyssi Bâ, managing editor of the newspaper of the main opposition party, the Parti démocratique sénégalais (pds), Senegalese Democratic Party, lost his appeal. He was convicted in 1989 on charges arising from his newspaper's claim that the pds candidate won more votes than President Abdou Diouf in the 1988 presidential elections (see Amnesty International Report 1990). In another case heard in 1990, the pds leader in the National Assembly, Ousmane Ngom, was sentenced to a three-month prison term for insulting
SENEGAL/SIERRA LEONE
the Head of State in a newspaper article. He appealed against the verdict and remained free.
At least one political trial took place which failed to meet international standards of fair trial. In mid-August five people from Casamance region, including Mamadou Sané "N'Krumah", a former political prisoner (see Amnesty International Report 1990], were convicted by the State Security Court in Dakar. They were found guilty of plotting against the internal and external security of the state, endangering public security and forming an unlawfiil association, They were accused of having asked officials in neighbouring Guinea-Bissau for military assistance for those seeking the independence of Casamance. They were sentenced to prison terms of between six and 10 years. All had been arrested in Guinea-Bissau, repatriated without any judicial proceedings, and arrested on arrival in Senegal in February 1988. The court did not investigate claims made by one of the defendants that he had been tortured in Senegalese police custody. Defendants convicted by the State Security Court have no right of appeal, although this is required by international law.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees suspected of supporting the mfdc and of their relatives were increasingly reported after May in the context of counter-insur-gency operations in Casamance. In one incident in lune, government soldiers who entered Kabiline village. Bignona department, looking for suspected separatists, reportedly beat several of their relatives. One victim, Binta Niassy, apparently suffered a miscarriage after she was beaten, whipped and trampled on by soldiers. The soldiers also killed Famara Mary, a villager who escaped but was soon recaptured. Witnesses said that soldiers put a gun to his head and shot him dead.
Several people were reported to have died in custody as a result of torture or beatings. One, Assoua Diabone, a peasant farmer from Oussouye, died in Oussouye police station in June a few days after his arrest as a suspected separatist. Further deaths occurred in October: Younouss Djiba and a man known as Ampa Dakar, both suspected members of the mfdc, died after they were reportedly beaten by soldiers based at Kaguitte military barracks. Sékou Mary "Agnocoune" was apparently
beaten to death by police based in Diouloulou. shortly after being forcibly returned to Senegal ft'om the Gambia (see Gambia),
No formal inquiry by the procuracy was known to have been conducted into any of these deaths. Nor was any new information received about the findings of an inquiry into the alleged death under torture of Jean-Pascal Badji, a suspected mfdc member, in April 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990].
Several people were extrajudicially executed during the year, In May Jean-Marie Sagna from Kouring village, Ziguinchor department, was shot dead by soldiers based at Kaguitte military barracks. He was stopped by an army patrol and summarily killed, apparently because he was mistaken for a military leader of the separatists. The soldiers allegedly burned his body. The government said that there would be an inquiry into his death, but it was not known if this had been carried out.
In September dozens of soldiers entered Kanaw village, near the Gambian border, apparently with a list of people suspected of supporting the mfdc. Five men, including Kaoussou Tamba and Souleymane Goudiaby, were taken away by soldiers and were later found dead in a rice field.
In May Amnesty International published a report. Senega!: Torture - the Casamance case, which described the torture and ill-treatment of hundreds of alleged government opponents between 1982 and 1989. The government said that the allegations were "groundless" and were "an incredible story written by a Senegalese secessionist".
Amnesty International repeatedly urged the government to ensure prompt and impartial investigations into all allegations of torture and extrajudicial executions, and into all deaths in custody, and to bring to justice those found responsible. It also urged the authorities to take action to prevent further human rights violations.
