PERU
Over 300 men, women and children "disappeared" after arrest by security forces, mainly in the emergency zones under political-military command. Scores more were extrajudicially executed. The victims, most of whom were peasants, included human rights defenders, community leaders, politicians and trade unionists. Torture and ill-treatment by the security forces were widespread. Five prisoners of conscience were held, four
PERU
of them on false charges of "terrorism". Three prisoners of conscience were released.
A campaign by armed opposition groups of sabotage, forced strikes and killings during the months leading up to the congressional and two-stage presidential elections in April and June, coupled with a severe economic crisis, formed the background to a deteriorating human rights situation. In July President Alberto Fujimori, leader of the Cambio 90 political party, took office. In his inaugural speech he stated that "the unconditional respect and promotion of human rights will be a firm line of action during my government" and promised to set up a national commission to guarantee respect for human rights. By the end of the year the government had not taken the initial step of establishing any terms of reference for such a commission.
The armed opposition group Partido Comunista del Peru "Sendero Luminoso", Communist Party of Peru "Shining Path", remained active throughout most of the country. Shining Path called for boycotts of the congressional and presidential elections and murdered political candidates, government officials, leaders of popular organizations and other civilians, sometimes in execution-style killings following torture and mock trials. According to reports, in April and August respectively the former director of the Peruvian Institute of Social Security and the former labour minister were murdered. In October, seven civilians as well as 13 members of the array were reportedly murdered in Tingo María in a dynaraite and machine-gun attack. A congressional coraraission formed to monitor political violence in Peru reported that 258 police and military persoimel were killed in 1990 as a result of actions by armed opposition groups.
Approximately two-thirds of Peru, containing over half the population, remained under state of emergency measures. In August President Fujimori extended emergency legislation to a further 10 provinces for a period of one month, thereby placing most of the country's population under state of emergency measures. By December, 69 of Peru's 183 provinces were administered by the Comando Conjunto de las Fuerzas Armadas, the Armed Forces Joint Command. President Fujimori appointed a serving army general to the Ministry of the
Interior, which is responsible for all police security services. The Peruvian authorities failed to investigate and punish violations committed by their security forces.
Law 24,150, introduced in 1985, remained the main legal instrument through which the political-military commands exercised their rule in the emergency zones. In practice its provisions facilitated the armed forces detaining people without notifying civil authorities or accounting for the fate of prisoners. The armed forces in the emergency zones maintained almost total independence from the civilian government. Torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions were frequently reported without independent investigations being initiated; military courts, with few exceptions, were not known to have brought to justice security agents for human rights violations.
In the emergency zones habeas corpus was not suspended but the courts did not generally implement this right and the armed forces routinely denied legal representatives access to military establishments known to be holding prisoners incommunicado. As in previous years, the Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General, failed to fulfil its constitutional responsibility to protect human rights: public prosecutors rarely took steps to remedy human rights abuses.
During the year 304 new cases of "disappearance" following arrest by the security forces were reported. Of these, 89 were reported to have been subsequently released or transferred to police custody. Twenty-four were reportedly found dead. The others remained unaccounted for. Most of the victims were members of isolated peasant communities in the emergency zones, although the number of reported "disappearances" increased in urban areas. The armed forces repeatedly denied holding prisoners, a policy which Amnesty International believes contributed to the high number of "disappearances".
Among the hundreds of victims of "disappearance" were Dora Gómez and her children, Nilton and Juan Carlos Gámez Gómez, aged 15 and 13 respectively. They were reportedly detained in April together with six other people when soldiers stopped a group of 30 peasants from Alto Rio Chari in Junin's Satipo province. Their detention was denied and all sine remained "disappeared". In October
PERU
Ernesto Rafael Castillo Páez was detained in the Villa El Salvador neighbourhood of Lima, the capital. Witnesses said that he was handcuffed and forced into the boot of a police car before being driven away. A judge who ordered his release after a habeas corpus petition was filed reported that the register of detentions at the police station where Ernesto Castillo was allegedly taken had been tampered with. The authorities refused to acknowledge his detention and he remained "disappeared".
"Disappearances" were sometimes reported in conjunction with the multiple extrajudicial execution of men, women and children. Over a six-day period in April, 13 people were said to have been killed and eight others "disappeared", including an eight-year-old girl, after their detention by an army patrol in an operation that extended through several peasant communities in Chumbivilcas province, Cuzco department, and in neighbouring Apurimac. Eleven of those killed were dumped on a hillside, their bodies covered with icchu, a highland grass. Following repeated requests from leaders of the peasant communities, judges allowed the 11 bodies to be examined. The bodies bore multiple bullet wounds and marks consistent with torture.
In other cases the "disappeared" were subsequently discovered to be victims of extrajudicial executions. In mid-October a mass grave was discovered in the district of San Pedro de Cachi, in Ayacucho's Hua-manga department, which reportedly contained the remains of at least 16 people. Initial reports indicated that nine of the bodies exhumed from this grave by a commission of investigation were those of peasants reported as "disappeared" on 22 September. They included three young women, Victoria Espinoza, Julia Mendoza and Irene Melgar, and two girls, Delia Melgar, aged 15, and Dina Tello, aged 13.
Extrajudicial executions were sometimes reported in the context of counter-insurgency operations conducted jointly by the armed forces and Civil Defence Committees - peasant-based patrols administered and controlled by the military zone commander. One report claimed that 12 men, three women and a 15-year-old boy were extrajudicially executed on 22 August near Uchuraccay, in Ayacucho's Huanta province, by a combined patrol of civil defence groups and some 50 soldiers from the Máchente and Ccano military base. The
victims had apparently refused to participate in a military operation against Shining Path.
Human rights activists were apparently targeted for "disappearance" or extrajudicial execution. Angel Escobar Jurado, secretary of the Human Rights Commission of Huancavelica, was last seen on 27 February being conducted through the streets by five men dressed in civilian clothing, one of whom was subsequently seen in the company of uniformed army personnel. On 10 June Guadalupe Ccallocunto, mother of four children and active in an organization assisting the families of the "disappeared", was taken away in the early hours of the morning firom her home in Ayacucho city. The organization's offices were subsequently closed as a result of threats received by the staff. Human rights organizations in Lima and Ayacucho believe that she was detained by the army following repeated harassment by the security forces. The whereabouts of Angel Escobar Jurado and Guadalupe Ccallocunto remained unknown: the authorities denied detaining either of them. Both "disappearances" took place during a nationwide wave of attacks on human rights organizations and activists. The offices of both the Andean Commission of Jurists and the Peruvian Section of Amnesty International were damaged as a result of bombings in February and March. At least four human rights activists were repeatedly threatened over the telephone, sometimes with death.
Torture and ill-treatment as means of interrogating and intimidating political detainees were frequently reported. The rape of peasant women, either while in detention or during counter-insurgency operations, was common practice. In August Fidel Intusca, a mine worker, was detained by soldiers and taken to the military base at Puquio, Ayacucho department, where he was accused of collaborating with the armed opposition. In testimony later given to a human rights organization he described being submerged in water, burned on the neck and back, beaten and threatened with death. In late September a mother and her 17-year-old daughter were reportedly detained in a military base and raped repeatedly by soldiers. Both women were subsequently released but were threatened to prevent them from reporting the rape. Details of this case are known but cannot be revealed for fear of further
PERU/PHILIPPINES
reprisals. Effective investigations into cases of rape and other forms of torture following detention were not known to have taken place nor were the perpetrators brought to justice.
No official investigations were initiated into mass killings committed in previous years. For instance, troops killed 11 residents of Calabaza in the department of Junin in May 1989; the following month armed forces raided the communities of Santa Ana and Pampamarca in Ayacucho's Lucanas province, killing 17 people (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Neither incident was known to have been investigated.
In June the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Council of Military Justice heard the appeal of the two Republican Guard officers convicted in 1989 of offences connected with the 1986 massacre of 124 prisoners in Lurigancho prison (see Amnesty International Reports 1987, 1988 and 1990). The Court upheld the 15-year sentence imposed on one officer and increased the second officer's seven-year sentence to 10 years. The Court also heard appeals against 75 police and army personnel who had been acquitted in 1989 of similar offences. Eight Republican Guards were sentenced to prison terms ranging from one month to six months; the remaining 67 military and police officers were acquitted. In October a congressional commission concluded that former president Alan Garcia bore constitutional responsibility for the 1986 massacre of about 250 inmates at Lurigancho and El Frontón prisons and Callao Women's Prison, but in November the Peruvian Congress defeated a move to bring criminal charges against him.
Almost all political prisoners, including those prisoners of conscience acknowledged to be in detention, were held on charges of "terrorism". One of five known prisoners of conscience, Noè Pastor Romo, was found not guilty of "terrorism" but remained in prison on charges of armed robbery. Three prisoners of conscience were released,
Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on numerous cases of "disappearance", extrajudicial execution and torture, urging them to conduct thorough and impartial investigations of the abuses and to bring the perpetrators to justice. The vast majority of appeals received no response from the government. Through
the country's embassies, the authorities replied to inquiries on the killing of Dr Coqui Samuel Huamani in August 1989 and the "disappearance" of Guadalupe Ccallocunto in June, but the information supplied did not clarify the fate of either victim. The organization also appealed for the release of five prisoners of conscience and continued to investigate the cases of 15 people arrested in previous years who may have been prisoners of conscience.
In May Amnesty International representatives held talks with presidential candidates Mario Vargas Llosa and Alberto Fujimori about the organization's concerns and specific proposals for improving human rights. Similar talks were held in June with Vice-President-elect Carlos Garcia. In July Amnesty International wrote to President-elect Fujimori outlining its concerns and calling upon him to implement specific measures for investigating past human rights violations and preventing future abuses. The organization also recommended that the Attorney General's department be strengthened, that effective protection be given to human rights defenders and witnesses, and that the full rights of detainees provided for in domestic and international law be restored in practice. In November Amnesty International wrote to President Fujimori requesting that Ernesto Castillo's whereabouts be disclosed.
In January Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Peru for United Nations (un) review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights delivered in February, the organization included reference to its concerns in Peru.
