SOUTH AFRICA
More than 1,500 critics and opponents of the government were detained without charge or trial for up to six months. Some were allegedly tortured. Those held included prisoners of conscience. At least 18 people died in police custody in suspicious circumstances, and there was evidence of security force complicity in extrajudicial executions of government opponents. A moratoriiun on executions was announced pending a review of the death penalty but there was one
execution in the nominally independent Bophuthatswana "homeland".
In February State President F.W. de Klerk lifted bans imposed 30 years earlier on the African National Congress (anc), the Pan AfriccUiist Congress of Azania (pac) and the South African Communist Party (sacp), and ordered the release of anc deputy president Nelson Mandela, who had been serving a life sentence since 1964. Restrictions on other political and human rights groups opposed to apartheid were also removed and more than 700 government critics and opponents had their restriction orders lifted. Most had been restricted to local magisterial districts and held under overnight house arrest. The national state of emergency was lifted in three provinces in June and in the fourth in October. However, from August various magisterial districts were declared "unrest areas" in which security forces were given emergency powers of arbitrary arrest and detention. Preliminary negotiations began between the anc and the government which were continuing at the end of 1990. As part of the process, exiled anc leaders and others were given temporary immunity against prosecution to enable them to return to the country to participate in negotiations and in August the anc agreed to suspend armed actions by its military wing. In November the government issued guidelines relating to pardon and indemnity for past political offences, making them applicable both to opposition activists and government personnel.
The year was marked by an unprecedented spiral of political violence resulting in thousands of deaths, many caused by fighting between anc supporters and members of the Zulu-based Inkatha organization headed by Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Chief Minister of the Kwazulu "homeland". From July the violence spread from Natal to the area around Johannesburg and elsewhere. Some killings, for example, of black train commuters near Johannesburg in September and of residents of Pholo Park squatter camp in the East Rand in September, created suspicions that a "third force" of political extremists, including security force members, was orchestrating the violence to sabotage the process of negotiations between the government and the anc.
About 450 government opponents were detained without charge or trial under national state of emergency regulations in
SOUTH AFRICA
force since June 1986. Those still in detention were released when the emergency was lifted in the Transvaal, Cape and Orange Free State in June and in Natal in October. Some had been arrested after the government lifted bans on opposition organizations in February. One, Magwedzha Phanuel Mphaphuli, a leading official of the United Democratic Front (udf), was held without charge or trial for 41 days following his arrest in March.
About 200 other opposition activists were arrested in "unrest areas" declared by the Minister of Law and Order between August and the end of the year. In such areas the security forces were empowered to detain suspects without charge for an initial 30 days, which could then be extended indefinitely, with the minister's authorization. Eight members of the Azani-an People's Organization (azapo) were held for several months under this provision after their arrest in Soweto in September.
More than 600 people were detained in Bophuthatswana, where a state of emergency declared on 7 March was still in force at the end of 1990. Those held included anc activists, some 55 of whom were arrested in November after Bophuthatswana President Lucas Mangope accused the anc of conspiring to overthrow his administration by force. Dr Thabo Rangaka, a hospital superintendant, was one of those held but he and the others were all released uncharged within two weeks.
At least 217 opposition activists were detained throughout South Africa under Section 29 of the Internal Security Act, which permits indefinite incommunicado detention without charge or trial in solitary confinement for security police interrogation. The number of such arrests increased after the national state of emergency was lifted. Those held included prominent members of the anc, SACP and other political organizations, as well as human rights lawyers and members of white extremist organizations. Some were held for six months, including J.B. Sibanyoni, a human rights lawyer arrested in June and released uncharged on 14 December.
Some Section 29 detainees were reported to have been tortured or ill-treated. David Madurai, a udf activist held from January to May, said police officers had beaten him, threatened him with electria shocks and partially suffocated him while he was held in Durban.
Welverdiend police station near Carletonville was particularly identified with allegations of torture of political detainees. In October a local doctor was reported to have said that at least 30 youths he had treated had sustained bum marks as a result of being tortured with electric shocks by police. An official inquiry was apparently initiated into police methods at Welverdiend but its outcome was not known at the end of the year.
Torture of detainees was also frequently alleged against the police in Bophuthatswana: in one case in November a police constable disclosed in court that he had been taught at police college to assault prisoners "if a person does not want to tell the truth".
At least 18 people detained for political or criminal investigation reasons died in police custody in suspicious circumstances. In several cases the police said the detainee had committed suicide or had been shot while trying to escape. Some deaths, however, appeared to be the result of torture. Eugene Thokozane Mbulwana, a 15-year-oId, was allegedly severely assaulted at Welverdiend police station before he died three days after his arrest in July. A youth detained with him was later shot dead by police in suspicious circumstances shortly after a statement he had made about Eugene Thokozane Mbul-wana's death was publicized in the press.
Only one death in custody, that of Section 29 detainee Clayton Sizwe Sithole in January, was made the subject of an independent judicial inquiry. The judge concluded that, as the police had alleged, the detainee had committed suicide, but commented that the provisions of Section 29 are "drastic and make serious inroads into the normal rights and privileges of every citizen".
More than 5,000 people were brought to trial accused of politically motivated offences, but the situation of anc members and others accused of violent offences was uncertain due to the government's agreement to grant indemnity to some opponents. Some trials were delayed while the accused applied for indemnity. Sathyandranath "Mac" Maharaj and eight other anc and sacp members accused in connection with an alleged sacp plot to overthrow the government were among those who applied for indemnity. Arrested in July, they were released on bail in
SOUTH AFRICA
November while the government considered their indemnity applications.
There was a notable development in March when the Cape Town Supreme Court ruled that the state should prove that contested pre-trial confessions made by four people accused in a major treason trial had been made freely and voluntarily. Eight of the 14 defendants were then released. Previously, the courts had accepted contested pre-trial confessions unless the defence could prove that they had not been given freely.
Two prisoners of conscience imprisoned for their conscientious objection to military service were released as a result of legal changes which halved the period of compulsory military service and an Appeal Court decision in March. The court ruled that the length of sentences imposed on conscientious objectors was discretionary and not mandatory under the 1957 Defence Act. David Bruce and Charles Bester were released when their six-year sentences were reduced to 20 months. Dr Ivan Toms' 18-month sentence was reduced by half. He had already been freed on bail.
Allegations of security force involvement in extrajudical executions and other unlawful activities were considered by several judicial commissions of inquiry. In February the government appointed Judge Louis Harms to inquire into allegations made in 1989 by a former security policeman awaiting execution, Butana Almond Nofomela (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The Commission took evidence from former members of a security police counter-insurgency unit and from members of a covert military unit, the Civil Cooperation Bureau (ccb). Some of the witnesses alleged that they had been involved in officially sanctioned killings and attempted killings of government opponents. The inquiry's findings were published in November: it concluded that the ccb had taken unlawful action against anc members and others held to be "enemies of the Republic", but said the evidence of the former security police personnel was too unreliable to permit findings in specific cases. However, it urged the Attorney General to investigate further the possible involvement of a ccB operative in the 1986 murders of Dr Fabian Ribeiro and his wife (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
Another judicial inquiry investigated the fatal shootings of 12 people and the
wounding of 281 others by police at Sebokeng in March. In a report published in September, it concluded that the police had acted unlawftilly by shooting without warning into a crowd of peaceful demonstrators, and recommended that the Attorney General should consider charging 34 police officers. The Attorney General had not made known his decision by the end of the year.
In November, while hearing an action for damages brought against two newspapers by the police, the Johannesburg Supreme Court was told by a former Military Intelligence agent that he had attempted to kill anc members abroad with poisons provided by the police.
Despite these official inquiries and the announcement in July that the ccb was to be disbanded, further killings of political activists occurred, giving rise to speculation that the ccb or other clandestine security force units were still operating. In one case, Jeff Wabena, a trade union activist and anc official, was shot dead by an unidentified gunman at a meeting in Mdantsane township on 12 October.
There was a dramatic reduction in the use of the death penalty. One execution was carried out in Bophuthatswana where 19 other prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of 1990. but there were no executions in the rest of South Africa.
In February the government declared a moratorium on executions pending a review of legislation relating to the use of the death penalty. More than 330 prisoners remained on death row in Pretoria at the end of the year. There was also a moratorium on executions in the nominally independent Transkei "homeland", where 89 prisoners remained on death row while a commission of inquiry reviewed the use of the death penalty. In the Ciskei "homeland" a draft bill of rights issued by a new military administration in SeptemlDer proposed prohibition of the death penalty and commutation of all death sentences to life imprisonment.
In July the Criminal Law Amendment Act came into force. This retained the death penalty as a discretionary but no longer mandatory sentence in murder cases, and provided for automatic appeal and clemency procedures for all prisoners sentenced to death. The amended law retained the death penalty for seven offences, ranging from attempted robbery
SOUTH AFRICA/SPAIN
with aggravating circumstances to treason in wartime, but provided for an in camera review by a nine-member panel of judges and academic lawyers of certain categories of cases of people sentenced under the old law. Prisoners and their legal representatives were entitled to make written submissions but not to attend the review hearings. By the end of the year the Department of Justice had indicated that at least 120 cases were to be reviewed.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, for the prompt, fair trial or release of other political detainees and for impartial investigation of all reports of torture and deaths in police custody. The organization pressed for the abolition of the death penalty and welcomed the moratorium on executions, calling for all sentences to be commuted. In a report published in April, Amnesty International also criticized the imposition of judicial whippings by the courts and the involvement of medical personnel in the administration of the punishment.
Amnesty International representatives undertook two visits to South Africa for research purposes and an Amnesty International observer attended part of the proceedings of the Harms inquiry. The organization submitted a memorandum proposing additional human rights safeguards to a Law Commission appointed by the government to draw up a draft Bill of Rights. Amnesty International also submitted information on its concerns in South Africa to the United Nations (un) Special Committee Against Apartheid and other un bodies.
