SOMALIA
More than 50 critics and opponents of the government were arrested and imprisoned as prisoners of conscience but all were released before the end of the year. Fifteen prisoners of conscience arrested in 1989 and several untried political detainees were also freed. At least five detainees, including two held without charge or trial since 1976 and 1979, remained in prison. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment, in two cases allegedly resulting in death. Hundreds of people were victims of extrajudicial executions by government forces in areas affected by armed conflict and in Mogadishu and other towns. Dozens of people were under sentence of death but the number of executions was not known.
In October a provisional constitution was introduced, which was to be submitted to a referendum within a year. It provided for the eventual legalization of political parties other than the ruling Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (srsp). Laws incompatible with the new constitution were abrogated, including the National Security Law, which had provided the legal basis since 1970 for the prolonged detentions and trials of government opponents. The National Security Court was abolished. A new "anti-sabotage" law was, however, being prepared to replace the National Security Law.
Armed conflict continued in the northwest where the Somali National Movement (snm) had been fighting government forces since 1981, and in the central and southwestern parts of the country where the United Somali Congress (use) and the Somali Patriotic Movement (spm) were active. Opposition forces allegedly killed civilian supporters of the government, including some they had taken prisoner.
At the end of December use guerrillas
SOMALIA
seized parts of Mogadishu amidst heavy fighting. Hundreds of combatants and civilians were killed, foreigners were evacuated and President Mohamed Siad Barre's government was in danger of toppling.
In January the government acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, together with its first Optional Protocol, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Economic Rights, and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment.
More than 50 critics and opponents of the government were arrested, but all were released by November. Several playwrights and actors from the Somali National Theatre were arrested in April after President Siad Barre walked out of a play which appeared to criticize his government. They were released after a few days. In July, 45 members of a newly-formed opposition group in Mogadishu, the Council for National Reconciliation and Salvation, were arrested for distributing an open "manifesto". This document criticized the government for human rights violations and urged it to hand over power to an interim government pending multi-party elections. Many of those arrested had previously held official posts, such as former police general Mohamed Abshir Musse, who had been a prisoner of conscience for 12 years, and Haji Musse Bogor, aged 82, a former government minister. The 45 detainees were held in Lanta Bur prison near Baidowa in harsh conditions. They were charged with treason, an offence for which the death penalty is mandatory. However, when they appeared before the National Security Court on 15 luly, they were acquitted and released. Some of them
were briefly redetained in early December.
Fifteen prisoners of conscience and several other political prisoners arrested in 1988 or 1989 were released. Sheikh Abd-ulaziz Ali Sufi, an Islamic preacher and university lecturer, Mohamed Ali Dahir, a businessman and religious writer, and four other prisoners of conscience held since July 1989, were brought to trial on capital charges before the National Security Court in January. The trial was adjourned and they were pardoned by President Siad Barre and released in March.
Several army officers who were arrested in late 1988 and mid-1989 for.alleged links with the opposition spm (which drew much of its support from disaffected army officers of the Ogaden clan), were released in October 1990 without having been charged or tried. One of the officers. Colonel Doctor Abdi Aideed Hirreh, had reportedly been denied medical treatment for injuries sustained in a car crash at the time of his arrest.
The trial of nine prisoners of conscience - including Abdirashid Abdi Kheyre, a businessman, and Farah Mohamoud Elmi, a veterinary science lecturer - arrested in Mogadishu in July 1989 and charged with treason, was postponed several times. The nine prisoners were reportedly in poor health as a result of torture and harsh prison conditions. In mid-October they went on hunger-strike, complaining that they should have been released under the terms of the new constitution. On 23 October demonstrations in Mogadishu called for the release of all political prisoners. The nine prisoners of conscience were released on 2 November, when an amnesty for political prisoners was announced. A total of 1,123 prisoners were released. Their names were not published but they apparently included many convicted criminal prisoners.
Despite the November amnesty, three long-term political prisoners were still held at the end of 1990: Hussein Mohamed Nur, an Ethiopian aircraft technician detained without charge or trial since 1976; Ahmed Dhore Farah, a district judge detained without charge or trial since 1979; and Mohamed Mohamoud Guleid, an army officer imprisoned after an unfair trial for espionage in 1981. Two former government ministers arrested in July 1989 - Major General Aden Abdullahi Nur and General Mohamed Abdullah Ba'adaleh - also
SOMALIA
remained in detention without trial.
There were new reports of torture which, in two cases, allegedly resulted in death. In February Mohamoud Mohamed Mohamoud, an 18-year-old student from Mogadishu, was arrested and tortured to force him to provide information about his brother, a government opponent who had fled the country. After two days in National Security Service custody he was taken to hospital seriously ill and died shortly afterwards. In June a visiting Italian medical scientist, Giuseppe Salvo, died in military custody in Mogadishu shortly after being arrested. A private autopsy found that he had been beaten to death. No official investigations into these deaths were known to have been initiated by the government. In July at least 20 Somali asylum-seekers were reportedly tortured or ill-treated after they were forcibly returned to Somalia and taken into custody. The asylum-seekers had been refused entry by Italian and Egyptian authorities. They were released several weeks later.
Hundreds of people were extrajudicially executed by government forces. In one incident, 17 people arrested by soldiers in the northern port of Berbera on 16 August were extrajudicially executed in the town that night. They appeared to have been arrested and killed in an arbitrary reprisal for snm activities in the area. The victims included two employees of an international relief organization.
Indiscriminate killings of civilians by government soldiers were reported in all areas affected by armed conflict. In Belet Weyn in late May, over 100 men, women and children - unarmed villagers and nomads - were reported to have been indiscriminately killed in reprisal for a use attack. Near Galkayu on 12 June, over 70 civilians were killed in an army reprisal raid. In Bulu Burti on 12 November, several prominent local people were extrajudicially executed and dozens of others arbitrarily killed in reprisal for a use ambush of government troops nearby.
There were also many arbitrary killings of suspected government opponents by the army in Mogadishu and other towns. In July over 60 football spectators were shot dead in Mogadishu's main stadium by members of the presidential guard, who apparently thought that President Siad Barre might be attacked after people in the crowd shouted criticism of his opening
speech. In Baidowa, dozens of people were reportedly shot dead by soldiers on 14 October for demonstrating against the President during an official visit. At least five others were killed and dozens wounded by soldiers during .anti-government demonstrations in Mogadishu on 23 October. No inquiries were ordered by the government into these killings and no action was known to have been taken against those responsible.
Dozens of prisoners were under sentence of death, including some condemned during the year. It was not known how many executions, if any, took place. Some death sentences were commuted in the November amnesty. Two measures taken by the government suggested a possible reduction in the use of the death penalty in future years: the abolition in October of the National Security Court, which had sentenced hundreds of people to death since 1970, and the repeal of the National Security Law, which prescribed mandatory death sentences for 20 political offences. The death penalty, however, remained in force for some of these offences under existing laws.
In January Amnesty International publicly detailed its concerns on Somalia in a 29-page report: Soinaha: Report on an Amnesty International Visit and Current Human Rights Violations. The organization urged the government to release prisoners of conscience and discontinue prolonged detention without trial and to stop torture and extrajudicial executions by the security forces, and recommended specific legal and institutional reforms to safeguard human rights. The report had been sent to the government for comment in late 1989; no response was received but several of the recommendations were implemented during 1990. Amnesty International welcomed the ratification in January of key international human rights instruments, urging that these standards be put into practice. It similarly welcomed the constitutional and legal changes in October, particularly the abolition of the National Security Court and the National Security Law. An Amnesty International visit to Somalia planned for June 1990 was postponed at the government's request and had not taken place by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of all prisoners of conscience. The organization urged that political prisoners
SOMALIA/SOUTH AFRICA
should not be detained unlawfully or tortured, or given unfair trials before the National Security Court. It appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
In July Amnesty International published new details (including the testimony of the sole survivor) of a massacre of 46 political prisoners by soldiers in July 1989 at Jezira beach near Mogadishu (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The report criticized the government for not releasing the findings of an official inquiry into the killings and for not taking action against those responsible. On this and other occasions Amnesty International called on the government to establish independent investigations into extrajudicial executions and bring to justice those responsible.
In January Amnesty International submitted further information about its concerns in Somalia for United Nations review under a procedure established by the Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
