HONG KONG
Five pro-democracy activists were briefly detained and charged under a little-used law with illegally using megaphones and soliciting funds. The refiigee-determina-tion ("screening") process for Vietnamese
asylum-seekers remained deficient despite some improvements. At least 10 people were sentenced to death but there were no executions.
The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (sar), due to come into force in July 1997 when the People's Republic of China assumes sovereignty over Hong Kong, was adopted in April by the National People's Congress in Beijing. It failed to fully recognize and protect specific human rights and to indicate how the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as applied in Hong Kong, would remain in force (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990).
A draft of the Hong Kong Bill of Rights Ordinance, due to be adopted in 1991, did not recognize the international monitoring procedures used in Hong Kong and lacked certain safeguards against the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. It provided for protection of the right to life but did not contain an assurance that Hong Kong's policy of not carrying out executions would be maintained.
Shortcomings in the screening process for Vietnamese asylum-seekers remained, raising the prospect that some of those denied refugee status ("screened out") might include people who could be at risk of imprisonment as prisoners of conscience or other serious human rights violations if returned to Viet Nam. However, some improvements were made to the screening process and the proportion of Vietnamese asylum-seekers who were granted refugee status increased during the year.
A judicial inquest was held into the death of an asylum-seeker. He had died ft'om a ruptured spleen after an incident
HONG KONG/INDIA
in which asylum-seekers were allegedly assaulted by police in the Shek Kong Detention Centre in July 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). During the inquest two police officers reportedly admitted kicking the man. In March the inquest returned an open verdict. The outcome of an investigation into the incident by the Complaints Against the Police Office had not been disclosed by the end of the year.
In December. 23 "screened-out" Vietnamese asylum-seekers who neither volunteered nor objected to return to Viet Nam were flown back under a program established by the Hong Kong Govemment and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Five prominent pro-democracy activists were briefly arrested in Febmary, following a week-long sit-in to protest against alleged flaws in the Hong Kong Basic Law. They were convicted under the Summary Offences Ordinance of having illegally used megaphones to address the public and of collecting money without permission. At their trial in May lawyers suggested that the charges against the five were politically motivated. They refused to pay fines imposed by the court but these were paid anonymously in August. An appeal against the convictions was still pending at the end of the year. In July and September Amnesty International wrote to the Hong Kong Govemment to express concern at aspects of the case, including the uncommonly rigid application of a public order regulation. The Hong Kong authorities replied stating that the prosecutions had not been politically motivated.
At least 10 death sentences - mandatory for murder - were pronounced during the year. The Hong Kong Government continued the practice of commuting all death sentences.
Following the visit of an Amnesty International delegation to Hong Kong in November 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990), the organization published in January a Memorandum to the Governments of Hong Kong and the United Kingdom Regarding the Protection of Vietnamese Asylum-Seekers in Hong Kong. This documented flaws in the screening process, made recommendations for its improvement and expressed opposition to any forcible repatriations until these flaws had been satisfactorily addressed. The
memorandum also called for prompt and impartial investigations into allegations that detained asylum-seekers had been assaulted and ill-treated by police and other officers. In a report in July on these developments. Amnesty Intemational made public its concern that no asylum-seekers should be forcibly sent back to Viet Nam while significant flaws in the procedure remained.
In June Amnesty International outlined its concems on the draft Bill of Rights in a memorandum addressed to the Governor, Sir David Wilson. The organization recommended that anyone involved in criminal proceedings whose rights might have been violated should be allowed to invoke the Bill of Rights, which should not include reservations that infringe on the internationally recognized rights of prisoners and asylum-seekers. The organization also recommended that the Bill of Rights provide for the abolition of the death penalty.
