COLOMBIA
Hundreds of people were executed extrajudicially or "disappeared" after being seized by members of the armed forces or paramilitary groups associated with them. Victims included political activists -including two presidential candidates -and human rights, trade union and church activists. Scores of peasants were arbit-rarily detained, tortured and killed by government troops in counter-insurgency operations. In urban areas "death squad"-style killings of suspected delinquents increased. Political detainees held illegally in army installations were reportedly tortured. Most cases of human rights abuses remained unresolved despite investigative efforts by the Procurator General and some judges. Two army officers were convicted for their part in the killing of 12 judicial officials.
Peace negotiations initiated during 1989 with the guerrilla organization, the Movimiento 19 de Abril (m-19), 19 April Movement, culminated in the group's formal surrender of weapons in March after 16 years' armed opposition. Its members, who were granted an amnesty, formed a political party, Alianza Democrática m-19, m-19 Democratic Alliance. Three other guerrilla organizations also entered peace negotiations with the government.
The principal remaining guerrilla forces, Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (farc). Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (eln), National Liberation Army, maintained their campaigns of armed opposition throughout the year. They carried out scores of kidnappings,
COLOMBIA
bomb attacks on economic targets and ambushes of government forces in which civilians were also killed.
Some of the estimated 140 paramilitary organizations, many of which were created and supported by the Colombian army, offered to disband and return their weapons to the armed forces in exchange for a general amnesty for those accused of human rights violations. Two did disband. However, the government publicly stated that members of paramilitary organizations responsible for criminal abuses must stand trial.
A renewed escalation in political violence in the run-up to congressional and municipal elections in March and presidential elections in May left scores of people dead, including two left-wing presidential candidates. Bernardo Jaramillo Ossa, presidential candidate for the coalition party Unión Patriótica (up), Patriotic Union, and m-19 Democratic Alliance leader Carlos Pizarro Leongómez, were shot dead in March and April respectively. The up withdrew from the elections.
Liberal party candidate César Gaviria Trujillo was elected President and assumed office in August. The electorate also voted to form a constituent assembly to reform the Constitution, and this was elected in December.
Scores of up activists were again among the victims of human rights violations. In February Diana Cardona Saldarriaga, up Mayoress of Apartadó in the Urabá region of Antioquia department, was abducted from her home in Medellin and subsequently killed by men who claimed to be her officially assigned bodyguards from the Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (das). Administrative Security Department, shortly before the genuine escorts arrived. The Procurator General publicly called on the Minister of Defence to explain how the gunmen had obtained confidential information about the whereabouts and plans of Diana Cardona. She was the sixth up mayor to have been killed since the first direct municipal elections in March 1988. Both of her predecessors in Apartadó had resigned following death threats. Two days after Diana Cardona's killing six up members were shot dead by unidentified gunmen in the town of Unguia, Chocó department, at a commemorative meeting.
Paramilitary groups - whose legal basis
was withdrawn in 1989 - continued to operate with virtual impunity and were responsible for the majority of killings and "disappearances". Peasant community leaders in conflict zones were among the victims. Josué Vargas, Miguel Barajas and Saúl Castañeda, leaders of the Asociación de Campesinos de Cararé, Cararé Peasants' Association, and journalist Silvia Duzán were shot dead in February by two gunmen in the community of La India, municipality of Cimitarra, Santander department. Silvia Duzán was interviewing the peasant leaders about their association's attempt to obtain guarantees for the safety of civilians from the military, paramilitary and guerrilla forces operating in the area. Shortly before the killings, a paramilitary leader had reportedly accused the Cararé Peasants' Association of having links with guerrilla groups and had threatened its leaders.
The banana plantation area of Urabá continued to be severely affected by paramilitary abuses. In January a group of approximately 40 armed men, some in military uniform, entered the village of Pueblo Bello in Urabá. They rounded up 43 men and drove them away in two lorries in the direction of the nearby San Pedro army base. In a meeting with Amnesty International representatives in April, the military commander of Urabá denied that the lorries had passed by the army base. However, in April the Procurator General opened disciplinary proceedings against two army officers from the San Pedro base. Investigators had established that they had ordered the permanent road-block outside the army base to be inexplicably lifted shortly before the abduction.
In April, 24 bodies were found in clandestine mass graves on a ranch in Córdoba department. Judicial investigations had previously implicated the ranch owner -together with members of the armed forces - in a series of multiple killings in Antioquia department in 1988 and 1989. Seven of the 24 bodies were identified as inhabitants of Pueblo Bello. Five civilians arrested on the ranch and charged in connection with the "disappearance" and presumed killing of the 43 men were released by a Superior Court Judge in May after a petition of habeas corpus was filed on their behalf. Several warrants for the arrest of the ranch-owner were not carried out by the security forces.
COLOMBIA
María Restrepo Quinceno, the regional Procurator of Urabá who had participated in the investigation of the Pueblo Bello "disappearances", was shot and killed in July together with her bodyguard in Apartadó. Three civilians arrested in connection with the killings reportedly claimed to work for the army and told investigators that an army officer from the Voltigeros Battalion had provided the guns used in the attack on the Procurator.
An increasing number of reports were received of human rights violations committed by counter-insurgency troops deployed in remote rural areas where armed opposition groups were active. In April, two days after an armed confrontation between the farc and members of the army's counter-insurgency Brigada Móbil, Mobile Brigade, in Puerto Valdivia, Antioquia department, six peasants from Puerto Valdivia were arrested by members of the Girardot Battalion. Five days later the peasants' bodies were found in a common grave on a nearby farm. They were bound and showed signs of torture. The Commander of the army's IV Brigade claimed the six were "guerrillas killed in combat". However, the Procurator General opened disciplinary proceedings against 11 members of the army, including two captains, for the unlawful killing of the peasants. The results of the proceedings had not been revealed by the end of the year.
Members of the National Police, which under the state of siege reimposed in 1984 comes under the authority of the armed forces, were also responsible for extrajudicial executions. Fifteen-year-old Fredy Pérez Solano, 17-year-old Jaime Béltran Pérez, Eliécer Suárez Suárez and Saúl Ortíz Nisperuza, members of the Zenú Indian community, were detained by members of the National Police in January near the community of Arroyo de Piedra, in the San Andrés de Sotavento Indian reserve in Córdoba department. Eye-witnesses testified that the four were beaten and forced into a police van. Their bodies were found the next day showing signs of torture as well as gunshot wounds. In June the Procurator General opened disciplinary proceedings against eight police agents allegedly responsible for the killings. However, the Public Ministry's efforts to investigate the killings and bring those responsible to justice did not lead to convictions by the courts. In October the eight police agents
were acquitted by a public order judge in Montería, Córdoba department. The poHce agents were later reportedly dismissed.
The Procurator General also opened investigations into allegations that the Elite Police Corps, created in 1989 with the declared aim of combating paramilitary organizations, was responsible for a series of multiple killings of youths in poor neighbourhoods of Medellin during the government's continued offensive against drug-trafficking organizations. The attacks were carried out in apparent retaliation for the killing of over 150 police officers in Medellin in the first half of the year.
Reports of "disappearances" increased. In July the then Minister of the Interior, Dr Horacio Serpa Uribe, presented a draft bill to Congress designed to incorporate "disappearances" into the Colombian Penal Code explicitly as a crime punishable with five to 10 years' imprisonment. Dr Serpa stated that "...disappearances have occurred continually in recent years. The courts are full of denunciations and the Public Ministry is saturated with investigations, [which arel generally inconclusive." The bill had not been debated by the end of the year.
In June the Procurator General ordered disciplinary proceedings against an army major and three police officers accused of complicity in the "disappearance" of at least 16 people from the town of Trujillo and surrounding communities in Valle de Cauca department in March and April. The "disappearances" were apparently carried out in reprisal for an eln ambush on a military patrol in which seven soldiers were killed. According to the Public Ministry's initial report, the army major, attached to the 3rd Infantry Battalion, ordered the illegal detention and participated in the torture and "disappearance" of the 16 people. A local priest who had been assisting relatives of the "disappeared" in Trujillo, Father Tiberio Fernández Mafia, himself "disappeared" shortly afterwards. His mutilated body was found a week later.
There were an increasing number of attacks on human rights workers. In July Dr Alirio de Jesús Pedraza Becerra, a lawyer, was seized in Bogotá's Suba district by eight armed men who identified themselves to two police agents nearby as members of the security forces. Military and police authorities denied his detention and reportedly obstructed the Public Ministry
COLOMBIVCOMOROS
investigation by refusing to identify the police officers who witnessed the abduction. Following Dr Fedraza's "disappearance". other human rights workers received anonymous threats warning them to stop their activities or face the same fate.
Dr Pedraza had been working on behalf of a number of trade unionists detained and tortured by the army's III Brigade in Cali, Valle de Cauca department, in March. The trade unionists testified that they were subjected to beatings, electric shocks, "sub-marino" (near-drowning) and mock executions. A human rights worker who was detained when she went to the Brigade to inquire about them alleged that she was raped by soldiers and threatened with death. After several days' incommunicado detention the detainees were brought before a judge and eventually acquitted of violating the anti-terrorist statute. Law 180. In May the Public Ministry opened disciplinary proceedings against four officers of the III Brigade, including the Brigade's second-in-command, for illegal detention and torture. The results were not known by the end of the year.
In the vast majority of cases, members of the armed forces accused of human rights violations continued to be shielded from prosecution by their superiors, and criminal proceedings in both civilian and military courts generally resulted in acquittals. However, in June two army officers and six civilian members of a paramilitary organization were convicted of the killing of 12 members of a judicial commission of inquiry in January 1989 in La Rochela, Santander department (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The army lieutenant and sergeant were sentenced to eight and 12 years' imprisonment respectively for "aiding and abetting terrorist activities" after the court found them guilty of providing the weapons used to kill the judicial officials. However, the lieutenant escaped from custody in the Boyacd Battalion in Pasto shortly before the trial ended.
In November the Procurator General and his deputies resigned. They had rec-orrunended that two senior military commanders be dismissed from the armed forces in connection with the siege of the Palace of Justice in November 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). This recommendation was severely criticized by high-ranking army officers and members of Congress. The Procurator General said that
General Jesús Arias Cabrales, then commander of the XIII Brigade, had failed to take the necessary measures to protect hostages, and Colonel Edilberto Sánchez Rubiano, then head of the army's b-2 Intelligence Unit, had been involved in the "disappearance" of Irma Franco, who was taken alive fi:om the building by the army but was not seen again.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the government to take measures to halt human rights violations. The organization repeated calls for paramilitary forces responsible for widespread abuses to be disbanded and for effective investigations into human rights violations leading to the prosecution of those responsible.
In January Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Colombia for United Nations (un) review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
In an oral statement to the UN Commission on Human Rights delivered in February, Amnesty International included references to its concerns in Colombia.
