TURKEY
There were thousands of political prisoners, scores of whom were prisoners of conscience. Himdreds of political prisoners were sentenced to imprisonment and some to death after legal proceedings that did not meet international standards for fair trial. The use of torture continued to be widespread and systematic, in some cases resulting in death. There were reports of extrajudicial executions. Civilian and military courts passed at least eight death sentences. At the end of the year the total number of prisoners under sentence of death who had exhausted all legal remedies had reached 315. Seven Iraqi Kurds, some of whom were recognized as refugees
TURKEY
by the Ofhce of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr), were extradited to Iraq.
At the end of the year a state of emergency was still in force in 10 provinces in southeast Turkey where the security forces were engaged in counter-insurgency operations against Kurdish separatist guerrillas. Many human rights violations by the secirr-ity forces were alleged to have taken place in the context of this conflict. The guerrillas were also reported to have attacked civilians, some of whom they abducted and killed. In August the armed organization Devrimci Sol, Revolutionary Left, claimed responsibility for the execution of three alleged police informers.
In May President Turgut Ozal and the Council of Ministers introduced Decree 424 (replaced in December by Decree 430), which extended the already extraordinary powers of the Emergency Legislation Governor to allow for, among other things, the closure of printing presses, the banning of publications and the forcible resettlement from within the Emergency Powers region of individuals engaged in activities "harmful to the maintenance of general security and public order".
In August Turkey notified the Council of Europe that this decree might result in its derogation from Articles 5, 6, 8, 10, 11 and 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which contain guarantees of freedom of expression and assembly, and important safeguards against torture.
Turkish law allows detainees to be held in police custody for up to 15 days before being brought before a judge, or up to 30 days in the Emergency Powers region. Draft amendments to the Penal Code to shorten such detention periods, proposed in September 1989, had not been enacted by the end of the year. The right of access to a lawyer is provided by Article 136 of the Criminal Procedure Code, and this was reinforced by a circular issued by Prime Minister Yildirim Akbulut in April. However, lawyers in all parts of the country continued to be denied access to clients held in police detention.
Other proposed measures to protect detainees from ill-treatment also remained in draft form many months after they were originally announced. For example, in May the Judicial Committee began examining a draft law under which statements to the police would be admissible as evidence in
court only if taken in the presence of a lawyer. However, no progress appeared to have been made by the end of the year.
Arrests and trials of prisoners of conscience continued throughout the year. Several people were taken into custody and charged under Penal Code Article 142 with "making separatist propaganda". Ismail Be§ikgi was arrested in March in connection with books he had written about the Kurdish minority in Turkey. He had already served more than 10 years in prison for his writings about the Kurds. He was provisionally released in July, and his trial continued. Also in March Mehmet Fehim I§k, a journalist, was arrested for a speech he made which referred to the Kurds' "anti-colonial struggle". He was sentenced to four years and two months' imprisonment. In April the writer Musa Anter, aged 73, was arrested and imprisoned for a speech he had made about the Kurdish minority. In May he was acquitted and released. Dogu Peringek, publisher of the magazine Ikibin'e Dogru (Towards 2000) was arrested and charged in August, also for speeches allegedly containing Kurdish separatist propaganda. He was provisionally released in September, but his trial continued.
In October Vedat Aydin, Ahmet Zeki Okguoglu and Mustafa Ozer were taken into custody and charged under Article 142 in connection with a speech made in Kurdish at the annual general meeting of the Turkish Human Rights Association (thra). Mustafa Ozer was released after one week; the two others were released by the court at the first hearing in December. The trial continued.
Haydar Kutlu and Nihat Sargin, leaders of the banned Tiirkiye Birle§ik Komiinist Partisi (tbkp), Turkish United Communist Party, who had been imprisoned in November 1987, were conditionally released in May, but their trial continued (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990).
Several prisoners of conscience who had been granted provisional release in the early 1980s were rearrested and imprisoned following confirmation of their sentences. Mehmet Ali Polat, Burhan Oktay, Orhan Unal, Nezahat Moza Ozden and Sabahattin izcioglu were reimprisoned during the year for membership of the Tiirkiye Komiinist Partisi (tkp), Turkish Commimist Party.
TURKEY
In November. 10 people attending a memorial service for the founder of the Islamic Nurcu sect, including the owner and eight staff members of the fundamentalist magazine Yeni Asya [New Asia], were detained for 14 days and investigated for "acting against the secular nature of the state" (Penal Code Article 163).
Hundreds of political prisoners were sentenced to imprisonment or death by military and state security courts after legal proceedings that did not meet internationally recognized minimum standards for a fair trial. These courts failed to investigate most allegations of torture made before them and in some cases permitted statements extracted under torture to be used as evidence.
The pattern of widespread and systematic tortme continued, with many new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political and criminal detainees and prisoners. Victims consistently reported similar methods of torture; being blindfolded and stripped naked, beatings on all parts of the body, hosing with cold water, squeezing of testicles and the application of electric shocks.
Among the hundreds of political prisoners who alleged they were tortured during 1990 was Mesut Bozkurt. He was detained at the Izmir office of the magazine Yeni (^dzum [New Solution] when it was raided by police in February, and taken to Izmir Police Headquarters. He alleged that when he refused to sign prepared statements admitting membership of an illegal organization, he was hosed with cold water under high pressure, his testicles were squeezed, electric shocks were applied to his body and he was raped with a truncheon. Because he was blindfolded throughout the 16 days of his detention he was unable to identify the torturers.
People suspected of political offences were particularly at risk of torture in detention. However, as a result of the intensified military campaign to combat the guerrilla activities of the Kurdish Workers' Party (pkk), large numbers of villagers in southeast Turkey with no background of political activity were detained on suspicion of sheltering guerrillas and were reportedly tortured. One example was Mehmet Polat, imam of Bayramh village, who was detained on 19 September. He alleged that he was kept blindfold, handcuffed, denied food and water, and forced to remain
standing for long periods or to lie on the concrete floor of the lavatory. He was stripped naked, beaten on his genitals with a truncheon and forced to drink liquor as an affront to his religious beliefs. When the marks of torture had disappeared he was brought before the court, where he was formally arrested on charges of sheltering Kurdish guerrillas.
Some prisoners died in custody, reportedly as a result of torture and ill-treatment. On 4 June Serdar Cekig Abbasoglu was found dead in Ankara Closed Prison. Three days earlier he had been charged with burglary and brought to the prison from Ankara Police Headquarters. Fellow prisoners alleged that he had been bleeding from his mouth and nose and that his death was the result of torture while in police custody. On 18 November Yakup Akta§ of Derik in the province of Mardin was detained and taken to the Mardin Gendarmerie Regimental Headquarters. On 25 November his family was informed of his death, and received his body from Mardin State Hospital. Officials stated that an autopsy had found that he died of a heart attack. Yakup Akta§ was 24 years old. Those who washed his body before burial reported that there were bruises and cuts on his wrists, arms and back, and that the back of his head was crushed and bloodstained. They also said that there were wounds on his eyebrows and temples. His family demanded a second autopsy, the preliminary results of which emerged in late December and described widespread bruising and cuts on the head. Torture was established in several prosecutions during the year, but most of these cases nevertheless resulted in acquittal because the victims had been blindfolded and the torturers could not be positively identified. Seven court actions were known to have resulted in convictions.
Major Cafer Caglayan, an army officer who was tried in Ankara Third Criminal Court for an incident in January 1989 when villagers of Ye§ilyurt in the southeast were beaten, trampled, kicked and allegedly forced to eat human excrement, was convicted of ill-treatment. He was sentenced in lune to two and a half months' imprisonment, which was converted to a fine of approximately $170, and a similar period of suspension from duties.
There were a number of reported extrajudicial executions, particularly in the
TURKEYAJGANDA
southeast of the country where the security forces were most active. On 28 September soldiers and "special team" members arrived at Kayadeler (Uzkundos) village, near Bitlis, and cleared the mosque where the men of the village were at Friday prayers. Those present, with the exception of ibrahim Doner, whose family had a history of political activity, were told to go home. Shots were heard and two hours later ibrahim Doner's body, together with a pistol and a suicide note, were shown to his brother; Ibrahim Doner had been shot through the head. The brother stated that there were marks of blows on ibrahim Doner's neck and back.
At least eight people were sentenced to death by military and civilian courts during the year. Other death sentences were confirmed by appeal courts. By the end of the year, the number of people under sentence of death who had exhausted all judicial appeals had reached 315. Their sentences could be carried out if approved by the Turkish Grand National Assembly.
Thousands of Iraqi Kurds who fled to Turkey from Iraq in 1988 to escape chemical and conventional weapons attacks continued to be at risk of forcible return to Iraq. Iraq was seeking the extradition of 138 Kurdish political opponents of the Iraqi Government on ostensibly criminal charges: some of them were recognized as refugees by the unhcr. Seven Iraqi Kurds, some of whom were also unhcr-recognized refugees, were extradited to Iraq. Forty other Kurdish refugees were reported to have been forcibly repatriated to Iraq in January; their whereabouts were still unknown at the end of 1990. Over 2,500 Iraqi Kurdish refugees were repatriated between March and June under an amnesty announced by the Iraqi Government. Reports suggested that some had been coerced into returning to Iraq against their will by ill-treatment, intolerable camp conditions and intimidation by Iraqi officers who were allowed to visit the camps.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to call for the release of prisoners of conscience, for fair and prompt trials for all political prisoners, and for an end to torture, extrajudicial executions and the death penalty.
Amnesty International repeatedly calleci on the Turkish Government to protect Kurdish refugees and other Iraqis from forcible return to Iraq. In February the Turkish
Government claimed in a letter to Amnesty International that none of the fraqis was forcibly sent back to Iraq against their will, and that no forced repatriation would take place. They denied having received a request from the Iraqi Government for the extradition of the 138 refugees.
During the year Amnesty International delegates observed hearings in several trials, including those of Haydar Kutlu, Nihat Sargm. Dogu Peringek and the three thra members.
The authorities responded to a number of specific torture allegations raised by Amnesty International. In some cases they stated that investigations or court proceedings were in progress, in others that official medical reports had stated that torture had not been inflicted.
In January the organization submitted information about its concerns for United Nations (un) review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. In March Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns regarding torture in Turkey to the un Committee against Tor-tme, the monitoring body established under the un Convention against Torture. In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about the practice of torture during interrogation in police custody in Turkey.
