COTE D'IVOIRE
At least 250 people, including opposition political party supporters, were detained and held for short periods. None of them was charged or brought to trial. A government opponent convicted on criminal charges in 1989. who may have been prosecuted for political reasons, remained in prison.
The year began with protests against the one-party state. They were led by the Front populaire ivoirien (fpi), the Ivorian Popular Front, which had been refused legal recognition by the government. Following reforms announced in April to allow opposition parties, the fpi was the main challenger to the ruling Parti démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire (pixO, Democratic Party of Côte d'Ivoire, in a series of elections from October to December for the presidency and the National Assembly. President Félix Houphouët-Boigny was re-elected at the end of October.
At least 50 people, including fpi supporters, were detained for their peaceful opposition activities. None was known to have been referred to the procuracy or brought to trial, suggesting that they may have been arrested on account of their political views rather than because they had committed any offence. Some of them were held for more than 48 hours - the period for which the security forces are legally allowed to detain suspects for questioning before referring them to a judicial authority. Many appeared to be prisoners of conscience. All were believed to have been released by the end of the year,
In February five people, including
CÔTE D'ÍVOIRE/CUBA
Tubene Gabriel and Seibi Sie, were arrested and held for up to 12 days for distributing a new fpi newspaper, ¡'Eveneinent, [Events), in Gagnoa and Yamoussoukro. The apparent reason for the arrests was that government officials had not authorized the newspaper's sale. The case against them was dropped and they were released.
On 26 March a group of 127 teachers were arrested in the capital. Abidjan. They were arrested when they drove in convoy into the city centre to protest against the banning of a meeting which had been called to discuss a recently announced reduction in teachers' salaries. They were taken to Akouedo military barracks, outside the capital. On 28 March several of their wives and daughters staged a peaceful protest in Abidjan. They were dispersed by police officers using tear-gas and some were detained. All the teachers and their relatives were released uncharged on 30 March.
On 2 April Bah Bernard Doh and Kouato Charles Magli were among 30 trade unionists arrested for demonstrating in support of a free trade union in Abidjan. All but one of them were kept in custody for 11 days and then released without charge.
More than 40 fpi supporters were reportedly arrested in Abidjan and Daloa on 28 October, when they alleged that the presidential elections were being unfairly conducted. They were released uncharged after a few days.
Innocent Kobena Anaky, a leading member of the fpi who was convicted on charges of tax and customs fraud in February 1989, remained imprisoned (see Amnesty International Report 1990). It appeared that his prosecution might have been politically motivated and that he did not receive a fair trial.
Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government about the short-term detention of trade unionists, teachers, opposition political party activists and others apparently imprisoned for their nonviolent political activities, and appealed for their release. The organization continued to seek information from the authorities about the imprisonment of Innocent Kobena Anaky. on the grounds that he may actually have been charged and convicted because of his non-violent political activities, but received no further response.
