MADAGASCAR
Two political prisoners sentenced in 1983 after what may have been an unfair trial were released in lime. At least 14 other people were sentenced in connection with a coup attempt in December. Some of them were reportedly ill-treated.
Richard Andriamaholison, a former government minister and head of the Gendarmerie, and Marson Rakotonirina, a former army officer, were pardoned by President Didier Ratsiraka in lune on the 30th anniversary of Madagascar's independence, and released. Both had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1983 for planning to assassinate President Ratsiraka after a trial which may have been unfair. Lawyers who attended the proceedings said that prosecution witnesses had been interrogated before the trial by members of the security service, who forced them to make statements under duress.
Dozens of people were arrested following an attempted coup in May, when armed government opponents occupied the national radio station and announced that the govemment had been overthrown. They urged people to demonstrate in support of the coup attempt but a crowd which gathered outside the radio station was dispersed by troops who later stormed the building. Six people were officially said to have been killed and 45 injured in this operation. In addition, 13 of the armed government opponents were captured. On 29 May Alex Oheix, a French national and husband of one of the 13, was arrested. The 13, together with Alex Oheix, were brought to trial in December on charges of endangering the security of the state, illegal
MADAGASCAR/MALAWI
possession of weapons, and other offences. Alex Oheix and his wife, Elisabeth Rasoazanay, were acquitted but the other 12 were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from six to 18 months. The detained men were apparently denied visits from relatives before they were brought to trial. Several were said to have been beaten after their arrest.
Several people arrested for apparently supporting the 13 May coup attempt were also imprisoned: two people received six-month prison terms in August while others received suspended sentences.
Amnesty International was concerned by the alleged ill-treatment of people arrested following the coup attempt in May. The organization continued to investigate the cases of those who were apparently detained for supporting the attempted coup.
