BRAZIL
Death squads killed hundreds of people, often in circumstances that suggested extrajudicial executions. Rural trade union leaders were threatened with death or killed, reportedly by off-duty police officers and gunmen. Members of indigenous communities continued to be subject to armed attacks, in which at least four Indian villagers were killed. Eleven people reportedly "disappeared" during the year. The remains of more than 1,000 people were discovered in a secret burial ground
in Sâo Paulo; at least eight were thought to be "disappeared" political prisoners killed during the 1960s and 1970s. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued. Official inquiries about abuses in prisons made little or no progress, and conditions remained harsh. Peasants involved in land disputes were detained without warrant, charge or trial, held incommunicado and subjected to ill-treatment. Local, state and federal authorities made little progress in bringing to justice those responsible for extrajudicial executions, torture and other human rights violations.
Fernando Collor de Mello, Brazil's first civilian president to be directly elected in 30 years, took office on 15 March.
Death squads, often composed of off-duty or on-duty police officers, killed hundreds of people, including young aduhs and children, and allegedly undertook contract killings for businesses and professional criminals. Authorities in Rio de Janeiro reported that nearly 500 minors were killed in the state in 1990, most of them by death squads. The members of death squads were often difficult to identify, as they reportedly made a practice of killing people who witnessed their activities.
On 30 April in Diadema, a poor suburb of Sâo Paulo, armed men in plain clothes shot and killed Marcello Rosa de Oliveira, aged 17, and his brother Marcos Rosa de Oliveira, aged 18, when the youths did not present labour cards. About an hour later, four or five armed men in plain clothes approached six youths at a nearby street corner. Reports said the six, ranging in age from 15 to 21, were forced to lie face down on the ground. The gunmen then shot five of them dead and seriously wounded the sixth. These killings were typical of those reportedly committed by death squads.
Two military policemen were convicted in September of the 1989 murder of live young people in Nova Friburgo, Rio de Janeiro state, and sentenced to 71 years' and 42 years' imprisonment respectively. The policemen were said to be members of a death squad.
Four other military policemen were convicted in October of the 1988 abduction, torture and murder of Disney Erwin Rodrigues, aged 18, and Simone Amaral Cerqueira, aged 17, also in Nova Friburgo (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Three of the defendants were sentenced to
BRAZIL
more than 30 years' imprisonment each; the fourth, convicted as an accessory, received a sentence of six months. Among hundreds of such cases, these were the only convictions of alleged death squad members that came to Amnesty International's attention during the year.
Wolmer do Nascimento, a director of the National Movement of Street Children, received written and oral death threats in November after he denounced death squad killings of minors in suburban Rio de Janeiro. He subsequently received federal police protection on orders of the Justice Minister.
The northern state of Pará was a focal point for land conflicts in which rural workers, church workers, trade unionists and others were threatened or killed. Official investigations into these killings or those of previous years failed to result in trials by the end of the year.
In April men claiming to be federal police officers abducted three brothers, all linked to a rural trade union, from their home in Rio Maria, Farà. Paulo Canuto de Oliveira and José Canuto de Oliveira were shot dead, but Orlando Canuto Pereira escaped. An official investigation later identified the killers as military police officers. Their trial had not yet started by the end of the year.
At least five other trade unionists were murdered in Farà during the year. Some 250 peasants, rural trade unionists and lawyers connected with land disputes were reportedly killed in Para between 1985 and 1990, but none of those responsible for the killings was known to have been brought to justice.
Trade unionists in Acre state, including successors of the murdered union leader Chico Mendes, received death threats and some went into hiding or left the area. In most cases the authorities did little to provide protection or investigate the threats. Ilzamar Mendes (Chico Mendes' widow), José Alves Mendes Neto (Chico Mendes' brother), Gomercindo Ció vis Rodrigues, Raimundo de Barros, Julio Barbosa de Aquino, Francisco de Assis Monteiro de Oliveira and Osmarino Amáncio Rodrigues were reportedly on a death list of 25 people drawn up by local landowners,
The trial of Chico Mendes' accused murderers took place in December, almost two years after he was killed (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990). Darli
Alves was sentenced to 19 years' imprisonment for ordering the murder, and Darci Alves received the same sentence for carrying it out. This was the first time that anyone was convicted in Brazil of ordering the killing of a rural activist.
Indigenous Indian communities suffered violent incursions by hired gunmen, miners and landowners that resulted in deaths and injuries. For example, two Makuxi Indians, Mario Davis and Damiao Mendes, were killed in June by hired gunmen, allegedly employed by a local landowner. In September miners reportedly attacked a Yanomami-Yekuana village in Roraima, killing the community's leader Lourenço Yekuana and his son, and seriously wounding one other. Despite the widespread and persistent nature of such attacks, the authorities failed to bring to justice those responsible for the killings and failed to implement promised measures to protect members of indigenous communities. Outside observers continued to find access to indigenous areas restricted by the National Indian Foundation, a government agency, making documentation of human rights violations difficult.
On 26 July police officers allegedly abducted 11 people, including five minors, from a farm in Magé, Rio de Janeiro state, It was believed that the police went to the farm to steal valuables from the group, one of whom was alleged to be a drug-trafficker. Although the authorities announced an investigation, the whereabouts of the 11 remained unknown at the end of the year.
In September an unmarked burial ground near Ferus cemetery in Sao Paulo was found to contain the remains of more than 1,000 people, possibly including eight "disappeared" political prisoners fi:om the 1960s and 1970s. Brazilian human rights organizations believed that victims of death squads active against criminal suspects in that period might also have been interred there. In October forensic scientists began work, expected to take at least a year, to identify the remains.
At least 122 "disappearances" which took place between 1964 and 1985 have been documented by Brazilian human rights organizations, but the remains of only a few of the "disappeared" have been recovered. In November the body of José Maria Ferreira de Araûjo, who "disappeared" in 1970, was found in a Sao
BRAZIL
Paulo cemetery, buried under a false name. Local human rights groups were searching for the remains of more "disappeared" people in other cemeteries in or near Sao Paulo.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued to be widespread. The Brazilian Bar Association's branch in Mato Grosso do Sul reported the torture of 10 prisoners in 1990. In April, for example, maximum security prisoner Eribaldo de Araùjo Menezes testified that guards beat and tortured him with electric shocks, left him alone in a wet cell overnight and warned him his life would be in danger if he reported his torture.
Four air force enlisted men, Rober Soares da Silva, Uziel Bernardo da Costa, Walter Félix de Oliveira and Cleuton Euri-pedes Inâcio, were allegedly tortured on 8 August at the Anâpolis, Goiâs, air force base. Six air force officers, assisted by four military policemen, reportedly administered electric shocks to the soldiers, who were hooded to prevent them from seeing their interrogators. The officers were investigating the theft of two revolvers from the base. After extensive press coverage, an official investigation resulted in charges against the base commander, two air force officers and four military police officers. Their trial had not started by the end of the year.
A presidential spokesman commenting on the case said: "In this government, torture never again", paraphrasing the title of a report on torture under the former military government published by human rights organizations.
Additional cases of torture of soldiers were later reported in Piaui and Sao Paulo states.
Official inquiries into the February 1989 beatings of more than 1,000 prisoners at a Sao Paulo detention centre made little progress during the year (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Military and civil police officers were charged with the February 1989 suffocation to death of 18 prisoners at a Sao Paulo police station, but no trial had begun by the end of the year.
After a peaceful demonstration in June, landless peasants from Cruz Alta, Rio Grande do Sul, were allegedly attacked by military police officers. One of the protesters, Ivo Martins de Lima, was shot in the back of the head, reportedly at close range while lying on the ground. He was
later said to be recovering.
The increasing tension between the Landless Rural Workers Movement and the military police in Rio Grande do Sul led to a confrontation in Porto Alegre on 8 August. This resulted in the killing of a policeman by peasants and a 12-hour police blockade of the City Hall, where demonstrators had sought refuge.
In many cases peasants seeking land rights were detained without a warrant, held incommunicado and ill-treated. On 21 July militciry and civil police officers, reportedly armed and dressed in plain clothes, entered the Jandaia estate near Curionópolis, Parà state, and threatened women and children with summary execution if they did not reveal the whereabouts of the men of the community.
Eleven of the men were detained without warrants, including Valdo José da Silva, who was reportedly shot in the back and legs as he tried to flee from police. The other arrested men were taken 100 kilometres to Marabà police station, and were reportedly denied food and water for two days. Four of the men said they were beaten to coerce them into making self-incriminating statements. A habeas corpus petition was filed on their behalf, but the police obtained an order for up to 10 days' "temporary detention". However, the men were kept in Marabà jail for over two months. They were granted a habeas corpus order in October and released.
Sandra de Oliveira Souza and Maria Divina da Silva Santos were detained without any judicial order on the Jandaia estate on 22 July and secretly taken to Marabà police station, allegedly to force them to reveal the whereabouts of their husbands. Lawyers who saw the women on 25 July reported that they were covered with bruises. The two women were released within a few days.
A March 1989 attack by military police battalions on landless peasants at Salto do Jacui (see Amnesty International Report 1990) led to an official investigation, but no disciplinary action resulted during 1990.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International described its concerns about torture and other ill-treatment in Brazilian prisons and police stations.
In Sao Paulo in June Amnesty International launched its publication, Beyond the
BRAZIL/BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
Law: Torture and Extrajudicial Execution in Urban Brazil, which called on the Brazilian Government to stop widespread violations of human rights by civil and military police. Also in June Amnesty International representatives visited Brazil and met government officials, representatives of non-govemmental organizations and the press.
In a nationally televised speech on 22 June, President Collor said, "We cannot and will not again be a country cited as violent in reports by Amnesty International.... We will not allow the 'new Brazil' to accept any form of disrespect for human rights."
In August President Collor and other officials met Amnesty International representatives to discuss the organization's report. The President said that his government did not consider Amnesty International's work an interference in Brazil's internal affairs and promised that his ministers would study the organization's recommendations. Amnesty International subsequently sent the Brazilian Government 12 recommendations for safeguards against torture and other human rights violations.
In September Amnesty International issued a statement on the torture and killing of Brazilian children by police officers and death squads, On the same day President Collor called for a federal investigation of all the cases featiured in the statement. Federal authorities had previously denied responsibility for investigating human rights violations, claiming that this rested solely with state and local authorities.
By the end of the year, however, the reported number of children killed by police and death squads had not dropped, the killings of rural trade unionists continued to be reported, allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees were still being made, and when state and local investigations and judicial proceedings were initiated, they were subject to long delays.
