BOLMA
cuts in the education budget. Scores of demonstrators were arrested and detained for short periods of time.
There was a marked increase in the violent activities of armed opposition groups. In October one Bolivian policeman was killed and another injured during an attack on the United States of America (usa) marines' residence in the capital, La Paz. An armed group identifying itself as Comisión Néstor Paz Zamora - Ejército de Liberación Nacional (cnpz-eln), Néstor Paz Zamora Commission - National Liberation Army, claimed responsibility for the attack. In communiques to Bolivian radio stations, the group demanded the annulment of agreements with the usa to fight drug-trafficking and expressed regret at the death of the policeman. Following the attack dozens of people, most of them students, were detained for short periods and released without charge.
Alejandro Escobar Gutierrez, a Peruvian citizen, was killed in Bolivia. According to morgue officials, his corpse was delivered to the morgue in La Paz between 6 and 7 December by police agents without any explanation. Autopsy reports indicated that his death was caused by gunshot wounds and noted that his body showed clear signs of torture. The authorities alleged that Alejandro Escobar Gutierrez was a member of the cnpz-eln, which had held the Bolivian businessman Jorge Lonsdale in captivity after his abduction in June. A joint military-police operation was undertaken on 5 December to rescue Jorge Lonsdale, during which a number of people were killed or arrested. Four bodies were reportedly recovered: three were identified as cpnz-eln members and one was said to be that of Jorge Lonsdale.
On 20 July Juan Domingo Peralta, a university student, was killed by agents of the Grupo Especializado Antiterrorísta (gea), Anti-Terrorist Special Force, a police unit under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior. According to a statement by the Interior Ministry, Juan Domingo Peralta had been identified as a member of the armed group, Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Zarate WiUka (fal-zw), the Zarate Willka Armed Liberation Forces. The statement said that he was killed during an armed confi-ontation with gea agents while resisting arrest. According to reports, however, no warrant for his arrest had been issued and there was no indication that he was being sought by the authorities. He was not in hiding and regularly attended his classes at the university. Juan Domingo Peralta was the brother of Jhonny Peralta, who was wanted by the police for alleged fal-zw activities. By the end of the year no investigation into the killing was known to have been carried out.
Three of the five detainees originally charged with the killing of two Mormon missionaries alleged in 1989 that they had been tortured by intelligence agents (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). According to reports, no investigation was conducted into these allegations. The trial of the five - Nelson and Felix Encinas Laguna, Constantino Yujra Loza, Gabriel Rojas and Simón Mamani - was repeatedly delayed and was continuing at the end of the year.
The Juicio de Responsabilidades (responsibilities trial) of former president General Luis Garcia Meza and 54 co-defendants, which started in 1984, continued during the year. The charges against them included killing and torturing government opponents between 1980 and 1982 (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1981 to 1983). In October hearings opened against 22 defendants charged with the 1980 killings of trade union leader Gual-berto Vega, national deputy Carlos Flores Bedregal, and political leader Marcelo Quiroga Santa Cruz, and with the related attack on the Centra! Obrera BoHviana (cob), Bolivian Workers Confederation. Eight witnesses for the prosecution identified some of the defendants as participants in human rights violations. Lawyers acting for the prosecution and representing relatives of the victims received death threats during the year, which they
BOLIVIA/BRAZIL
attributed to people linked with former government-sponsored paramilitary groups active during the military government.
Amnesty International wrote to the government urging a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances surrounding the death of Alejandro Escobar Gutierrez. The organization also made inquiries about the deaths connected with the 5 December joint military-police operation and sought information about those who had been detained. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
The organization called for a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of Juan Domingo Peralta's killing by the security forces. Amnesty International reiterated its concern that the authorities had failed to investigate allegations that three of the defendants originally accused of killing two Mormon missionaries were tortured. The organization urged the government to ensure that the defendants receive a fair trial conforming to international standards.
