SIERRA LEONE
Several people were detained without charge or trial, including possible prison-. ers of conscience. There was continuing concern about harsh prison conditions and the high death-rate of criminal
SIERRA LEONE/SINGAPORE
prisoners. At least 14 people were sentenced to death. It was not known if there were any executions.
Saidu Cham, a teachers' leader in Lunsar. Northern Province, and several teachers in Bo, Southern Province, were reportedly arrested in May in connection with a teachers' strike over pay and related demonstrations in which four people were said to have been killed. The teachers were apparently still held without charge or trial in July but no further information about their cases had been received by the end of the year.
Three student leaders were briefly detained without charge or trial in November, apparently for organizing protests against the expulsion from university of six students accused of responsibility for criminal damage caused during demonstrations in June. The three included Mohamed Pateh Bah, who had been elected President of the National Union of Sierra Leone Students in August after the lifting of a 1986 ban on student unions.
Two journalists jailed on criminal charges in 1989 for what some alleged were political reasons were released. Both had worked for the Chronicle newspaper which had criticized government policies. The two men went on hunger-strike to protest against their imprisonment and the conditions at Pademba Road Prison in the capital, Freetown, complaining particularly that they were denied family visits and medical treatment. The authorities undertook to investigate their complaints but the two journalists, Karwigoko Roy Stevens and Lansana Fofana, were released in June and September respectively, the former after a successful application to the Court of Appeal.
As many as 100 prisoners out of a total prison population of about 1,000 were reported to have died from malnutrition and medical neglect at Pademba Road Prison during the first half of the year. The prisoners were held in overcrowded conditions and reportedly received inadequate food and practically no medical care. Many prisoners apparently contracted tuberculosis or skin diseases. Food supplies were halted for several days in October when suppliers said they had not been paid by the authorities.
The government made no public statement about the report of a commission of inquiry into the administration of prisons, which had submitted its findings in December 1989. The commission was set up following reports of grossly inadequate prison conditions leading to the starvation of prisoners in the mid-1980s (see Amnesty International Reports 1984 to 1990). It apparently recommended total refurbishment of the country's prisons and improvements in the nutrition and care of prisoners. It was unclear whether the government made any moves to implement any of these recommendations.
Three prisoners remained under sentence of death and at least 14 new death sentences were imposed for criminal offences. There were no known executions.
Amnesty International sought information from the government about the arrests of teachers and students, and urged the commutation of all death sentences.
