ZAMBIA
Suspected government opponents were detained without charge or trial for periods ranging from a few days to over one month and hundreds of people were reportedly beaten at the time of arrest during riots in June. However, all those arrested and all political prisoners were released in an amnesty in August. At least three people were sentenced to death but no executions were reported.
In June there were three days of violent demonstrations in Lusaka and other towns. According to official figures, 29 people were killed and over 150 injured. Many were shot dead by police or paramilitary forces while looting or breaking the curfew imposed by the authorities. Some were said to have been the victims of
ZAMBIA/ZIMBABWE
indiscriminate shooting by the security forces. Other people were reportedly beaten and arrested.
Shortly after the rioting, President Kenneth Kaunda survived an apparent coup attempt. Six soldiers and one civilian were arrested and held until August before being released in a government amnesty.
Following the riots, the Movement for Multi-Party Democracy (mmd) was formed to campaign for an end to the one-party state. The government initially resisted this demand, However, in September it announced that multi-party elections would be held in 1991 and amended the Constitution to allow political parties other than the ruling United National Independence Party.
The Penal Code was amended in June to allow the courts discretion when sentencing prisoners convicted of murder, which had previously carried a mandatory death sentence. However, there appeared to be no provision for a review of existing death sentences which had been imposed for murder. At least 200 prisoners who had received the mandatory death sentence for murder were believed to be awaiting execution.
More than 40 suspected government opponents were arrested in the wake of the riots. They included 32 University of Zambia students who were arrested in a dawn raid on the university campus the day after the riots had ended, some of whom were reportedly beaten at the time of their arrest. Six other students were arrested a few days later. All 38 were detained under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, which permit indefinite detention without charge or trial, until August. They were then released in the amnesty granted by the government to alleged rioters, curfew-breakers and others. All 38 students were prisoners of conscience.
Others arrested for political reasons included Stephen Mukata, the Nkana Branch Chairman of the Union of Mine-workers, and Peter Chiko Bwalya, a former long-term political detainee. Stephen Mukata was released uncharged after a few days. Peter Chiko Bwalya was eventually charged in connection with an illegal demonstration, fined and released in August.
The August amnesty also resulted in the release of other political prisoners,
including former army commander Lieutenant-General Christon Tembo and three other army officers charged with treason (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Their trial had begun in January but had not been completed. Former High Court commissioner Edward Shamwana and three others convicted of treason in 1983 were also released. Originally sentenced to death, their sentences were commuted to life imprisonment in 1986 after international appeals for clemency (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1983 to 1987).
As campaigning to promote multi-party elections intensified, Frederick Chiluba, the Vice-Chairman of the mmd, and eight local government officials were arrested in Chôma in October. They were charged with holding an unauthorized meeting before being released on bail. Their case had not been heard by the end of the year.
At least three people were sentenced to death for murder but there were no reports of executions.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and expressed concern about alleged beatings in custody.
