LIBYA
Five prisoners of conscience remained in prison. At least 445 other suspected opponents of the government, including possi* ble prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without trial. At least 18 political prisoners were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials, and one prisoner remained in detention after being acquitted. No death sentences or executions were announced.
Five prisoners of conscience serving life sentences continued to be held in Abu Salim Prison, Tripoli. All had been arrested in April 1973 and convicted of membership of the Islamic Liberation Party (ilp), an illegal political party. The five included 'Ali Muhammad al-'Akrami and 'Ali Muhammad al-Qajiji.
At least 445 people arrested for political reasons, including possible prisoners of conscience, were still held without trial at the end of 1990. Of these, 394 were arrested in Benghazi. Tripoli and other towns between lanuary 1989 and April 1990 in connection with demonstrations and violent clashes between supporters of Islamic opposition groups and government forces in early 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Most of those held were said to have been arrested as suspected members or supporters of various banned Islamic opposition groups, rather than for any involvement in violence. They included alleged members or supporters of the Wahabiyya Islamic doctrine; Al-Tabligh, Preaching; Al-}ihad, Holy War; Al-Da'wah al-Islamiyah, Islamic Call; the Muslim Brotherhood; and the Islamic Liberation Party.
All but one of the 394 detainees were reportedly held incommunicado and their whereabouts were unknown to Amnesty International. The exception, 'Adil Rajab Husayn al-Karghalli, a businessman reportedly arrested in March 1989 after returning ft'om Saudi Arabia, was held at Abu Salim Prison. Others detained included 'Abdul-
Naser al-Bashir Abu-Lseyen, a doctor, and Abu Bakr al-Sadiq Mahmud, an engineer, who were arrested in January 1989 in Tripoli and Benghazi respectively; Muhammad al-Furtiya, a lecturer apparently regarded as a religious leader by some followers of the Wahabiyya Islamic doctrine, who was arrested in February 1989 in Misrata and detained along with two of his sons, both in their twenties; and 'Umar Hafidh al-Buri, a computer engineer who was reportedly arrested in March 1990 in Benghazi.
The 51 other political detainees were arrested between 1974 and 1986 and did not benefit from the March 1988 amnesty in which 400 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In 1988 the authorities had agreed to review their cases as well as those of all other political prisoners still held. However, no such review was known to have taken place by the end of 1990. The 51 still held included 'Ali 'Abdullah al-Sanussi al-Darat, a journalist and writer who was reportedly arrested in 1974 or 1975 for political reasons, and Ahmad 'Abdul-Qadir al-Thulthi, detained since 1986, who had reportedly been denied family visits since the beginning of 1989. Most of the others were said to have been allowed monthly family visits.
One political prisoner held since 1984, 'Abdullah Menina, remained in detention despite having been tried in 1985 and acquitted on charges related to illegal political activities (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
At least 18 other poUtical prisoners - 14 civilians and four soldiers — were serving prison terms imposed after unfair trials. Two of the civilians, arrested in 1984, were convicted in separate trials in 1984 and 1987 before courts composed of members of the Revolutionary Committees (local groups set up to support official policies) on charges including having links with opposition groups abroad. The other 12 civilians were Islamic activists reportedly arrested in 1983 and subsequently convicted of membership of an illegal organization by a Revolutionary Committees' court. The whereabouts of the 12 were still unknown. The four soldiers were convicted of attempts to overthrow the government and sentenced to death in three separate military trials between 1970 and 1985. In all
LIBYA/MADAGASCAR
these trials, the defendants were reportedly denied legal counsel and any right of appeal. Their death sentences were commuted by Libyan leader Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi in June 1988.
No death sentences or executions were recorded in 1990. However, in March, following a fire which allegedly broke out at al-Rabita factory, the Libyan Secretary of the People's Bureau in Rome was reported in the intemational media as having stated that several people had been detained and that those responsible for the incident would "be executed". The Secretary did not identify those held, and the govemment did not provide Amnesty International with any clarification of his statement.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience and for clarification of the cases of other political prisoners and detainees. The organization repeatedly sought assurances that all those who were held incommunicado and whose whereabouts were unknown were being treated humanely and given access to their relatives, lawyers and medical attention. Amnesty Intemational also sought information on the reported execution of eight people in Ghut al-Ruman region near Tripoli in April 1989 and the killing of a medical student in Tripoli in January 1989, when security forces reportedly fired at demonstrators. No response to any of these inquiries was received.
The Secretariat of the General People's Congress responded to Amnesty International's attempt to clarify reports ,of mass arrests carried out in October 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990) by stating that Amnesty International should not rely on the Western press because it was biased against Libya. The response also questioned Amnesty International's reasons for expressing concern about political prisoners who used violence. Amnesty Intemational replied that it did not rely on any single source for its information and that it was standard practice for the organization to seek a government's views on its concems prior to making public statements. It also reaffirmed its view that the whereabouts of all political detainees should be made known and that they should have access to legal counsel and their families, and should receive a prompt and fair trial.
