LESOTHO
At least 11 people were briefly detained without charge or trial for political rea* sons: some appeared to be prisoners of conscience. There were new allegations of torture and the authorities admitted that a criminal suspect had been tortured by police in 1989. One prisoner was executed.
Three members of the ruling Military Council and one member of the Council of Ministers were dismissed and detained in February. Three of them were released uncharged within a few weeks but Colonel Sekhobe Letsie was charged with the murder of two government ministers and their wives in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
In March King Moshoeshoe II was forced into exile by the Military Council. The Chairman of the Military Council, Major General Metsing Lekhanya, assumed the king's executive and legislative powers and on 6 November King Moshoeshoe was formally deposed in favour of his eldest son who became King Letsie III, with purely ceremonial powers.
In June a constituent assembly was inaugurated to prepare for a return to civilian government in 1992, but all party political activity remained banned under a 1986 decree. Teachers, students and workers involved in a wave of strikes and demonstrations during the second half of the year were subjected to tear-gas, and whipped and shot at by the police. At least two youths were shot dead by the police during these incidents. In December the police raided the office of a human rights organization in the capital, Maseru, seized documents and interrogated staff.
Five leaders of a nationwide teachers'
strike were arrested in August. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience but were released uncharged after three days' detention.
In January the Court of Appeal ruled that Johnny wa ka Maseko, a newspaper editor, had been unlawfully detained for four weeks prior to his deportation in December 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Michael Sefali, a former government minister detained without charge or trial for eight days in March, brought a damages claim before the High Court alleging that he had been stripped naked and made to stand on crushed stones during police interrogation. The outcome of the case was not known. However, in another case the authorities conceded in May that a criminal suspect had been tortured at Maseru Police Headquarters in July 1989 and agreed to pay him damages. Lakia P. Pholo had been assaulted and made to jog barefoot on crushed stones while handcuffed and with a blanket and tyre placed over his head. He was also subjected to deliberately humiliating assaults. There was no indication that those responsible for his torture had been identified and brought to justice.
An inquest into the 1986 killings of government ministers Desmond Sixishe and Vincent Makhele and their wives resumed briefly in January but was postponed indefinitely when murder charges were brought against Colonel Sekhobe Letsie and a former army sergeant. Their trial concluded in December but no judgment had been given by the end of 1990. During the trial a statement made by one of the defendants in pre-trial custody was ruled inadmissible after he alleged that it had been obtained by torture.
One prisoner convicted of murder was executed in September. At least one other convicted prisoner remained under sentence of death.
Amnesty International welcomed the authorities' decision to prosecute those allegedly responsible for the 1986 killings, which appeared to have been extrajudicial executions, and the releases of teachers and others detained without charge or trial.
