Uganda (the Republic of)
The persisting pattern of gross and flagrant violations of basic human rights under Life-President Amin's rule since 1971 brought increased internal and external pressure on his regime. The actions of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, to which Amnesty International made further communications during the year, had little noticeable effect. The turning point was probably the political murder of the Archbishop of Uganda in February 1977. This led to the regime's diplomatic isolation, increasing international awareness of cruelty and economic chaos, and the organized opposition of exiles.
38
In October 1978 Ugandan troops invaded Tanzania. Large numbers of Tanzanian civilians in the Kagera region were tortured and murdered. Many women and children were abducted to Uganda where the government falsely called them refugees. Tanzania retaliated and the Tanzanian army forced Ugandan troops to withdraw, pursuing them into Uganda.
The Uganda National Liberation Front (UNLF) was formed in Tanzania on 23 March 1979 to unite all Ugandan exile groups. Its stated objectives were "to end the tyranny and destruction of life and property, to establish the rule of law, and to re-establish, maintain and defend human rights throughout the country".
By the end of April 1979, a joint military force of Tanzanian troops and Ugandan guerrilla fighters had gained control of most of the country. They captured the capital Kampala on 12 April 1979, and a new government was installed with UNLF Chairman, Professor Yusuf Lule, as President. The new government affirmed its commitment to human rights and democratic political structures, promising elections within two years. It said its first priorities were to defeat the remnants of Idi Amin's retreating army, and to set about the reconstruction of the country in human and economic terms. An appeal was made for massive international assistance to assist refugees to return and to revive the economy. A policy of revenge against those who had served the Amin government was publicly rejected in favour of a spirit of reconstruction and reconciliation. The government stated its intention of prosecuting through courts of law only those who had committed criminal offences: many of Amin's security officials had fled to neighbouring countries, whence the government was seeking their extradition.
Hundreds of political prisoners were freed from Makindye, Luzira and other prisons when Kampala was liberated ; but most prisoners held in the State Research Bureau headquarters had already been murdered. Large scale massacres of civilians were committed by Amin's retreating forces in the east and north, the best-known victim being Bishop John Wasikye of Mbale. The former president fled the country.
Amnesty International campaigning was confined to publicizing political imprisonment, torture and killing, and drawing the attention of the authorities and those governments maintaining diplomatic and economic relations with the Amin regime to international concern at its human rights violations. It was not possible to adopt individual prisoners of conscience. Very few of those arrested by the State Research Bureau Public Safety Unit, or other branches of the security forces survived for long. Most were tortured and killed. Any intervention by Amnesty International might have decreased their slender chances for survival. Anyone who appeared to criticize or obstruct a security official or who attempted to preserve standards of human dignity, proper conduct of government or commerce, or to protect their family or property, might be arrested and killed with impunity by any security official.
Amnesty International presented a detailed report on this structure of repression to a United States Senate Foreign Relations sub-committee on 15 June 1978 and subsequently published its report internationally. The report described the overthrow of the rule of law; the murder of up to 300,000 people including judges, politicians, civil servants, religious leaders, academics, teachers, students, businessmen, writers, soldiers, police officers, foreigners, women and members of certain ethnic groups, particularly Acholi and Langi; evidence of systematic torture and the failure of all government inquiries into disappearances or deaths. The
39
international Prisoner of Conscience Week campaign in October on the theme of forgotten prisoners featured "indiscriminate violations of human rights in Uganda", and groups working on Uganda country action dossiers organized vigils commemorating the martyrdom of Anglican Archbishop Janani Luwum on 16 February 1977.
In September Amnesty International criticized the so-called Human Rights Committee established by President Amin, since most members were from the security forces, including Commissioner of Police Kassim Obura and Colonel Farouk Minawa, head of the State Research Bureau and later Minister of Internal Affairs, both of whom had been personally responsible for torture and murder. An amnesty was declared in December for exiles to return to their jobs, but Amnesty International stated the unacceptability of the offer so long as gross human rights violations continued.
During 1978 and early 1979, those arrested and in most cases murdered included numerous Acholi and Langi, in reprisal for a broadcast by Milton Obote; dissenters within the armed forces protesting against foreign (Nubian) control; prominent individuals such as the Vicar General of Kampala Monsignor WiUiam Mbuga, bank director Henry Kajura, State Trading Corporation manager John Kasujja, and several hotel managers; thousands of ordinary Ugandans arrested on the slightest pretext and never brought to court; and whole villages massacred -such as Bunyaruguru near Mbarara. From one former prisoner released by mistake Amnesty International learned of routine flogging, electric shocks, physical mutilation, drownings and arbitrary shooting of prisoners at Makindye military prison. New torture centres were also created in Kampala, in the Neeta Cinema basement, where prisoners were reportedly chained and burnt to death in the presence of senior security officials, and in private houses on Kololo Hill, as well as in the notorious State Research Bureau headquarters in Nakasero.
Amnesty International gave assistance to a number of Ugandan refugees and in late 1978 sought and obtained assurances from the Kenya government that no refugees would be repatriated at the request of the Uganda government. There were an estimated 60,000 Ugandan refugees in Africa and elsewhere.
Amnesty International cabled President Lule on 19 April 1979 congratulating him on his installation and the beginning of a new era in Uganda, and referring to Amnesty International's campaigns against the reign of terror in Uganda under Amin's rule. Amnesty International said it looked forward to important Uganda government initiatives to protect human rights in Africa, especially through Uganda's formerly abused membership of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Several members of the new government, including President Lule, were already known to Amnesty International through campaigns and research on human rights violations in Uganda during the previous eight years of Amin's rule.
