Hungary (the People's Republic of)
In December 1978, a new Penal Code was enacted, superseding that of 1961. It is
133
due to come into force in July 1979, but its text is not yet available. Reports based on the debate in the Assembly suggest that a number of minor offences will no longer be punished by the criminal law and that for a number of lesser crimes the penalty of imprisonment has been replaced by other punishments, mostly fines. The minimum period of imprisonment has been raised from 30 days to 3 months, while the upper limits of 15 years, or 20 in the case of multiple offences, remain unchanged.
During 1978, nine people are known to have been executed in Hungary. Despite considerable discussion of the abolition of the death penalty, the National Assembly decided to retain capital punishment in the new Penal Code, which prescribes no time limit for the prosecution of war crimes, still punishable by the death penalty.
It is not known whether the new Penal Code will retain the provisions which made public criticism of official policies an offence punishable by imprisonment. Ujider article 127 of the Penal Code 1961, "incitement to hatred" of a variety of targets, including the state, the nation and religions, was punishable by up to 8 years' imprisonment.
Other legislative changes include a decree on "foreign travel and the passports of Hungarian citizens" adopted by the Presidential Council in October 1978, by which the number of provisions whereby Hungarian citizens may be denied passports has been reduced from six to three. Although this decree is in some respects more permissive than the one of March 1970, people who have a criminal record in Hungary may still be denied a passport. This provision may be being applied to a former Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience, Zsolt Takacs, a 26-year-old electrician from Budapest, who in 1977 married a Swiss citizen in Budapest with the approval of the Presidential Council. His application to join his wife in Switzerland was turned down by the Hungarian authorities. In February 1978 he was arrested while trying to cross the Hungarian-Yugoslav border without authorization. In July 1978 he was sentenced to 1 year's imprisonment under article 203 of the Hungarian Penal Code which makes unauthorized crossing of the border punishable by from 1 to 5 years' imprisonment. In September 1978, this sentence was confirmed by a higher court. Mrs Takacs travelled to Hungary to be with her husband on his release. On 2 March 1979, she received police orders to leave the country within 24 hours. When she approached the Hungarian Embassy on her return to Switzerland, she was reportedly informed that the Hungarian authorities were not prepared to revoke the order banning her from the country, arid that since her husband did not have permission to leave Hungary nor she to be there, she should divorce her husband.
Sandor Rudovics, an Amnesty International prisoner of conscience, was released from prison at the beginning of 1978. In 1976 he was sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment after attempting to cross the border without permission to join his wife and child in Austria. In March 1978, he was arrested again and in May 1978 sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment on charges of "larceny". Amnesty International has received allegations that the charges of larceny were made falsely and continues to investigate. During his previous sentence and after his re-arrest, articles appeared in the Hungarian press attacking both him and Amnesty International's work on his behalf.
According to a statement issued by the Public Prosecutor in February 1979,
134
political offences accounted for 0.2 per cent of the criminal offences committed in the course of 1978. Of this 0.2 per cent, 96 per cent reportedly consisted of "incitement", mostly under the influence of alcohol. In October 1978 Amnesty International learned of the release of Gjorgy Hajas, a 25-year-old Hungarian who was sentenced in July 1977 to 18 months' imprisonment on charges of "incitement" after he had criticized official restrictions on human rights in Hungary.
