Lesotho (the Kingdom of)
All but one of the remaining Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) supporters imprisoned as a result of the treason trials of 1974-75 were released when they completed their sentences during 1978-79. They all qualified for remission of sentence, and included several prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International. The one remaining BCP prisoner, Mofelehetsi Moerane, is due for release in late 1979.
Liberia (the Republic of)
More than 40 people were killed and some 500 injured, according to Liberian government statements, when police clashed with demonstrators and opened fire in the capital, Monrovia, on 14 April 1979. The demonstrators, numbering about 2,000, were protesting at a sharp increase in the price of rice, which had been proposed by the Minister of Agriculture. The Liberian authorities had refused to give permission for a protest demonstration to take place. Following the initial
24
clashes with the poUce, large-scale rioting and looting occurred in the capital. The total number of people detained in Monrovia and the hinterland is unconfirmed, although reports received by Amnesty International suggest that it may run to several hundreds.
Shortly after these arrests, the government issued "wanted" lists and offered rewards of US$ 5,000 for the arrest of five people, including Gabriel Matthews and Oscar Guiah, respectively Chairman and General Secretary of the Progressive Alliance of Liberia (PAL). The President of Liberia, William Tolbert, accused a number of student and opposition organizations, including PAL, of being responsible for the disturbances, and also hinted at some foreign involvement. In April 1979 the University of Liberia was closed indefinitely.
In late April 1979, the Emergency Powers Act was passed by the national legislature. It provides sweeping executive powers for the suppression of "plots, conspiracies, sedition or treason", including the declaration of "defence areas" in which the power of search and seizure cannot be challenged in the courts. It also suspends habeas corpus for one year, and establishes special courts with the power to make their own rules of procedure for the trial and sentencing of anyone accused of violating the act. Conviction for attempting to "subvert, disturb and upset the economic, social and political stability and security of the state" carries a minimum 10-year prison sentence and a minimum fine of US$ 5,000. In late April, the government announced that 32 people had been charged with treason.
In February 1979, seven people including one woman were hanged in Monrovia. They had been convicted of complicity in a ritual murder in 1976. After a retrial and several appeals. Amnesty International unsuccessfully appealed to President Tolbert to grant clemency. The hangings took place in public on 16 February 1979.
