Libya {the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
In March 1979 changes took place in Libya's governing bodies. Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi relinquished his position as Secretary General of the five-member General Secretariat, being replaced by Abdul 'Ati Obeidi, but continued to act as Head of State. Other changes took place within the General People's Committee of 21 secretaries.
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of approximately 80 prisoners of conscience, many of whom are serving heavy sentences in Tripoli Central Prison and in Kuweifiya Prison in Benghazi. In the summer and autumn of
1978,	a special campaign urged the declaration of an amnesty for all prisoners of conscience. These include 39 prisoners arrested in April 1973, tried in February 1977 by a people's court and sentenced to periods of imprisonment ranging from 4 to 15 years. Their sentences were later overruled by the Revolution Command Council and amended to life imprisonment in 37 cases and the death sentence in two cases. The 39 were alleged to be members of illegal political organizations: one Marxist, the other the Islamic Liberation Party. Other prisoners include 11 people arrested in February 1973 and others arrested in April 1976 in connection with demonstrations in Benghazi. Another group of 10 were arrested in late 1975. They were tried by an ordinary criminal court and sentenced to life imprisonment in November 1976 on charges of forming an illegal political organization. In March
1979,	Amnesty International learned that the Supreme Court which examined an appeal against these sentences had acquitted all 10 and they were subsequently released from prison. Amnesty International later learned that these 10 were rearrested and may well face a retrial.
At the end of December 1978, 20 to 30 writers and joumahsts were reportedly arrested when they attended a meeting commemorating the death of a Libyan poet in Benghazi. Those arrested formerly worked for the newspapers ^4/Fa/r^/ Jadid (New Dawn) and Al Vsbu' Al Thaqafi (The Cultural Week). According to reports received by Amnesty International they were beaten by police on arrest and later transferred to Tripoli Central Prison or Kuweifiya Prison, Benghazi. Unconfirmed reports state that the reason for their arrest was that they were suspected of being members of a communist organization. In March 1979, Amnesty International wrote to Colonel Gaddafi requesting clarification of the joumahsts' situation, of the exact charges against them and of when they would be brought to trial.
In its letter to Colonel Gaddafi, Amnesty International also requested further information concerning the situation of the wife and family of Omar El Meheishi, the former member of the Revolution Command Council who is now living in exile in Cairo. His wife and four children have apparently been living under house arrest since August 1975, when Omar El Meheishi fled the country. Since then the children have not been allowed to go to school and only close members of the family are permitted to visit them. All are alleged to be in poor physical and mental health as a result of their prolonged detention.
167
In early 1979 Amnesty International learned of the release of two prisoners, Professor Abdul Mawla Khalil Dughman and Ahmed Bu Rahil, arrested in 1970 apparently for having prepared the text of a leaflet which was critical of Colonel Gaddafi's pohcies. A special appeal for Professor Dughman was launched in April 1978, when he was featured as Amnesty International's Prisoner of the Month.
In March 1979 several newspapers reported that 20 army officers had been summarily executed in Misuratah, following their alleged involvement in a conspiracy to overthrow the government. These reports have not been confirmed by the authorities. Amnesty International continued to urge the commutation of the death sentence passed on two adopted prisoners, Abdul Ghani Khanfar and A1 Mabrouk Abdul Mawla A1 Zoul, charged with membership of illegal political parties. Arrested in April 1973, they were tried by a people's court in February 1977 when Mr A1 Zoul was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment and Mr Al Khanfar to 10 years' imprisonment. Several days later, these sentences were amended by the Revolution Command Council to death. Many appeals have since been made, but they are still beheved to be held in sohtary confinement under sentence of death.
In August 1977, Amnesty International addressed a report to Colonel Gaddafi based on the findings of a mission to Libya in late 1976, which described its concerns. A reply was received from the Secretariat for Foreign Affairs in December 1977 and Amnesty International responded to this in May 1978 reiterating its concerns and requesting permission from the authorities to send a second mission for high-level talks. In March 1979, Amnesty International repeated this request and also drew attention to the main issues of concern in Libya: political imprisonment; inadequacy of basic legal safeguards; and the death penalty. At the time of writing, there had been no response.
