Tunisia (the Republic of)
Tunisia continues to be ruled by President Habib Bourguiba representing the Socialist Destour Party (PSD), the sole legal political party. In June 1978 the Mouvement des Démocrates Socialistes (MDS), led by Ahmed Mestiri, a former minister, sought permission from the Minister of the Interior to establish its own pohtical party. In October 1978 it was learned that permission had been refused.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of 7 5 prisoners of conscience, approximately half of whom are trade-unionists arrested in connection with the one day general strike on 26 January 1978; also for the release of prisoners serving long sentences in Bourj Er-Roumi Prison near Bizerte. These include five who were originally arrested and tried by the State Security Court in 1968 on charges of conspiracy against internal security and membership of an illegal organization. They were given prison terms varying from 2 to 16^2 years. In 1970, all were granted an amnesty following two presidential decrees. But they were subsequently re-arrested and given fresh sentences in 1973 and 1974. Furthermore, in 1974 two additional Presidential decrees dedared the amnesties of their former sentences void.
171
As a result, Mr Noureddine Ben Khader, Mr Gilbert Naccache and Mr Rachid Bellalouna are today serving the 16 year, 16^2 year and 11year sentences imposed on them respectively in 1968, although they have finished serving the 1 to IVi year sentences imposed on them in 1973. Mr Ahmed Ben Othman Reddaoui is currently serving both the 12 year sentence pronounced in 1968 and the 10 year term imposed on him in 1974. Mr Abdullah Rouissi's 1968 sentence of 2 years has expired but he is now serving the fresh 10 year sentence handed down to him in 1974.
On the occasion of the Islamic feast of Aid El Adha in November 1978, five members of the Mouvement d'Unité Populaire were released from prison. All had been adopted by Amnesty International after they had been sentenced by the State Security Court in Tunis in August 1977 to 2 to 3 years' imprisonment on charges of membership of a clandestine organization, propagating false information and defamation of the government. Mounir Kachoukh, who was serving a sentence of 4 years' imprisonment, was released some days later, apparently because of ill-health. Following their release, they were ordered to remain in restricted residence for a period of 10 years and to report each day to the police. Nine other adopted prisoners released in March 1979 after serving their sentences of 5 years and 4 months, were placed under similar constraints.
In Autumn 1978, between 80 and 100 people throughout the country were imprisoned in a new wave of arrests. Some were allegedly involved in writing and circulating an underground version of Ech-Chaab (The People), the official organ of the General Union of Tunisian Workers (UGTT), while others were apparently accused of membership of illegal organizations. Many were reportedly subjected to torture in police custody and most are still in detention. It is not known whether they will be charged or tried. Amnesty International launched several urgent actions on their behalf and is making further investigations with a view to adoption.
In July and August 1978, Amnesty International sent an observer to trials of trade-unionists in Sfax and Sousse. Of the 12 defendants in the trial at Sfax, five were sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment, three received suspended sentences of 2 years' imprisonment and four were acquitted. Amnesty International adopted the five, as prisoners of conscience. In July 1978, an Amnesty International representative observed part of the trial of 101 trade-unionists before the criminal court at Sousse. During this trial, the prosecution demanded the death sentence for 39 people, but the tribunal declared itself incompetent to pass judgment and the cases were referred to the State Security Court of Tunis. Amnesty International issued a news release drawing attention to procedural irregularities in the treatment of these trade-unionists and expressed its concern that most had been arrested and imprisoned for exercising their rights of freedom of association and expression, not for any violent or criminal activity.
In November 1978, the examining magistrate of the State Security Court dismissed the charges against 89 of these people and ordered their release. The remaining 12 are awaiting trial before the State Security Court.
In September and October 1978, 30 union leaders were tried by the State Security Court in Tunis. Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial who was refused permission to attend. No reason was given. The trial began on 14 September 1978 when the 76 lawyers for the defence requested an adjournment
172
of two months in order to study the dossier of 4,000 to 5,000 pages. The tribunal allowed two weeks.
On 28 September many of the families of the detained trade-unionists were refused entry into the State Security Court. No reason was given. As they dispersed, 30 were arrested and 14 were tried two days later by the Tribunal Cantonal (regional tribunal) of Tunis. Thirteen were sentenced to 1 year's imprisonment and one was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. Their sentences were subsequently reduced to 4 months' imprisonment for five of those arrested (including one of the sons and son-in-law of Habib Achour) and to a suspended sentence of 4 months' imprisonment for the remaining nine.
On 28 September, at the State Security Court a lawyer for the defence, Mohamed Bellalouna, former chairman of the Tunisian Bar and former Minister of Justice, requested that all members of the defendants' families should be allowed into the court since the trial was an open one, and objected to the frequent interruptions of the defence counsel speeches. During his speech, Bellalouna was interrupted again by the president of the tribunal and he withdrew from court. He was followed by the remaining 75 lawyers for the defence. On the same day the court appointed 18 of the original 76 lawyers to continue the trade-unionists' defence in the court on the following day.
On 29 September, the defendants refused to accept this, claiming they had had no contact with those lawyers. The lawyers declared themselves unable to defend them as there had been no time to consult the defendants or study the case dossier but also because they had been assigned to different chents among the defendants. Nevertheless, the prosecution demanded the death sentence for all 30 trade-union leaders, including Said Gagui who was at that time in hospital and has since died. In a statement on 24 October Amnesty International said that "the rights of the defence in this trial were gravely abused. . . and although article 12 of the Tunisian constitution 'guarantees the necessary conditions for self-defence' . . . the proceedings fell far short of internationally recognized standards of impartiality as set down in article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Pohtical Rights which the Tunisian government ratiiied in 1969".
On 9 October 1978, the tribunal sentenced two trade-union leaders (Habib Achour, Secretary General of the UGTT, and Abderrazak Ghorbal, Secretary General of the Sfax office of the UGTT)-to 10 years' hard labour; three others were given sentences of 8 years' hard labour; four received sentences of 6 years' hard labour; six received sentences of 5 years' hard labour; 8 received suspended sentences of 6 months' imprisonment; one person was sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment; and six of the defendants were acquitted. An appeal against the State Security Court's verdict was referred to the Chambre de Cassation, which rejected the appeal in November 1978. Amnesty International has taken up for adoption all cases of those imprisoned. They are all serving their terms in Tunis Civil Prison with the exception of Habib Achour and Abderrazak Ghorbal, who on 11 December were transferred to Bourj Er-Roumi Prison.
The State Security Court also announced sanctions against two of the defence lawyers under the provisions of article 17 of the law dated 2 July 1968, which established the State Security Court. Mohamed Bellalouna was banned from practising for two years. Noureddine Boudali was given a caution.
In a separate trial on the events of January 1978, twenty trade-unionists including
173
the Secretary General of the local union, were tried at Tozeur on 20 and 21 December 1978. Nine were found guilty and sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from.l month to 4 years. Eleven were acquitted.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture (some of them testimonies from the prisoners themselves). The forms of torture most commonly alleged are the "swing", and beatings with a length of hose-pipe, wooden stick or iron bar, while the prisoner is in the "swing" position, on sensitive parts of the body such as the soles of the feet, ribs and genitals. Other forms of physical torture reportedly include cigarette bums and enforced standing for prolonged periods of time. Some detained trade-unionists claimed that they had been forced to sit on the neck of a bottle. In other cases detainees were beaten so severely that teeth were knocked out or respiratory or stomach troubles were caused. In at least two cases electricity was used as a method of torture.
Detained trade-unionists also claimed that they had been subjected to psychological torture which included threats of violence, including rape, to members of their families.
Many trade-unionists claimed during their trial that confessions had been extracted under torture or other forms of pressure. In the Sousse trial, a number of defendants requested a medical examination to corroborate their complaints of torture. Some defendants named the people they alleged had tortured them and in at l^ast one instance during the trial a defendant pointed to the person he accused of having tortured him.
On 13 September 1978 Amnesty International wrote to the Tunisian Minister of Justice Mr Salaheddin Baly seeking assurance from the government that medical examinations had been undertaken when requested by detained trade-unionists and that the government would initiate an independent inquiry into all allegations of torture and ill-treatment. There has been no response.
On I June 1978 (Tunisia's Victory Day), Amnesty International sent petitions to President Habib Bourguiba expressing concern at the situation of arrested trade-unionists and requested that all prisoners of conscience be granted an amnesty.
In February 1979, Amnesty International issued a report entitled Tunisia: Imprisonment of Trade-Unionists in 1978. The report describes the circumstances of the arrests which took place as a result of the general strike on 26 January 1978 and outlines the proceedings of the three trials (at Sousse, Sfax and Tunis) to which Amnesty International sent an observer. The report also examines allegations of torture and prison conditions at Sousse, Sfax, Tunis and Nador (Bourj Er-Roumi). The report concludes: "The majority of the trade-unionists were arrested solely for the exercise of their rights of freedom of expression and association, which are guaranteed by articles 19 and 20(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and articles 19, 21 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ratified by the Tunisian Government in 1969) as well as by article 8 of the Tunisian constitution which states that: 'Freedom of thought and expression of the press, printing and meetings, freedom to found societies registered and according to the law, are ensured by the law. The right to form a trade union is guaranteed'.
"Torture and maltreatment of arrested persons were widespread in violation of the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture
174
and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1975). Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Pohtical Rights were also violated.
"Trial procedures, particularly those in the State Security Court, fell far short of the standards established in article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and were also in contravention of article 12 of the Tunisian constitution which states that 'Each person shall be considered innocent until his guilt is proved in court where he is guaranteed the necessary conditions for self-defence'.
"Conditions under which many trade-unionists are or were being held do not conform with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners with regard to hygiene, food, medical services and accommodation."
In March 1979 Amnesty International launched an international campaign on behalf of the imprisoned trade-unionists and other prisoners of conscience.
