El Salvador (the Republic of)
Though repression continued and violence got worse, increased international publicity raised public awareness of violations of human rights.
On 13 October 1978, the International Commission of Jurists published a report on the application of the Law of Public Order, which concluded that "incidents of mistreatment of prisoners by the security forces are sufficiently numerous and interconnected to constitute a pattern or system".
On 15 December 1978, a British parliamentary delegation reported that it had
62
found clear evidence of systematic torture during its visit.
A report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States (OAS), published in March 1979, listed 99 disappeared persons and implicated the Partido de Conciliación Nacional government of General Carlos Humberto Romero, which came to power in 1977 amid widespread allegations of fraud, murder and terrorism in the countryside. The report also drew attention to the situation of political activists who have been forced into long-term exile.
Both the OAS and the British delegations gained access to the "secret" torture and detention cells at the National Guard Headquarters in San Salvador. The British delegation also recorded dramatic testimony that security forces had disposed of other detainees after interrogation by detonating explosive devices which had been lashed to the victims' bodies, thereby adding to the statistics of the "disappeared".
The government has strongly opposed attempts to form rural unions and many peasant organizers have disappeared. Amnesty International issued appeals on behalf of 62 arrested or disappeared peasant organizers and others, including campesinos who had co-operated with a Dutch television team preparing a film on rural repression. It also continued to press for information on 35 investigation cases and has still received no word on the 62 unacknowledged detentions and 30 reported deaths which it called to the attention of President Romero on 6 February 1978.
In a further effort to generate widespread publicity and pressure concerning these and other human rights violations, Amnesty International launched a campaign in October 1978 which focused on repression of trade-unionists and the Church, and organized widespread distribution of a leaflet and extensive letter writing to government officials and professional and trade-union organizations.
The efforts of the Archbishop of San Salvador, Oscar Amulfo Romero, and the Salvadorean Human Rights Committee to publicize human rights violations have led the government to accuse Church activists of having links with communists and subversives. On 20 January 1979, the combined forces of the National Guard, the National Police and the army carried out a dawn raid on 40 young people who were attending a course in basic Christianity. The organizer of the retreat. Father Octavio Ortiz Luna, and four youths were machine-gunned to death. Father Octavio was the fourth priest to die in El Salvador in the past two years. Staged photographs subsequently appeared in the national press accompanied by National Guard allegations that the retreat house was a guerrilla training centre and the youths had opened fire on the security forces. Twenty of the youths were arrested and charged with "preparation ofsubversive material and opposition to authority"; 20 more 12- to 16-year-olds were arraigned in a juvenile court on the same charges. A few hours before the incident. President Carlos Humberto Romero, who was in Mexico for economic talks, stated that there was no religious persecution in El Salvador.
The repeal of the Law of Defence and Guarantee of Public Order was announced in February 1979. The measure was originally introduced in November 1977 to combat terrorism, but in practice it severely restricted the activities of political parties and urban and rural trade unions, and interfered with freedom to publicize human rights violations. President Romero conceded that the measure had proved
63
ineffective in combating terrorism and promised that all prisoners held under the law — which he put at 48 — would be released.
However, a report issued in July 1978 by the office of Archbishop Oscar Amulfo Romero indicated that approximately 102 of the 715 people who had been cited under the law remained in custody or were unaccounted for: 590 had been freed, usually after having been beaten, two had been murdered and 21 had disappeared.
Furthermore, paragraphs 2 and 3 of clause 2 of the repeal decree introduce the possibihty for cases of persons originally held or convicted under the Law of Public Order to be transferred to the jurisdiction of the criminal courts. Arrests and deaths under torture, including the death of Jaime Baires on 4 March 1979, continued to be reported to Amnesty International.
Some observers considered that the repeal of the Law of Public Order was intended to open the way for the release of a number of foreign businessmen who were seized in a year which saw increasing efforts by left-wing guerrilla groups to destabilize the Romero regime. On 29 December 1978 and 21 March 1979, in press statements which made clear the organization's total opposition to killing for the purpose of political coercion, whether by governments or others, Amnesty International appealed to the kidnappers to release their hostages. Ransom demands issued by the Armed Forces for National Resistance (FARN) who hold the foreigners — one of whom was subsequently murdered — included the release of five specified political prisoners who had disappeared following their arrest by security forces, and the resolution of various labour and educational conflicts which had continued throughout the year - occasionally developing into armed confrontation. In March 1979, Amnesty International called for an investigation into the deaths of seven striking workers who died in clashes with government forces in San Salvador on 10 March 1979, and in April protested against the deaths of eight persons within 22 days in the Cinquera region. On 22 March 1979, with the approach of the most recent deadline imposed by the guerrillas, the government released a number of pohtical prisoners, but has continued to deny that the five whose releases FARN is specifically seeking are in custody, despite the fact that numerous former prisoners, including some of those who testified to the British parliamentary delegation, have insisted that at least three of the five have been seen in prison by other prisoners.
Guatemala
In an oral intervention to the session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in February and March 1979, Amnesty International said that disappearances continued to be endemic. Political murder and torture, sometimes at the hands of the official security forces, sometimes following abduction by paramilitary death squads, are widespread. Identification of the victims is often difficult because their bodies are mutilated and found far from the original place of abduction.
The level of killings and disappearances during the year was compared by some to the state of siege years of the Arana Osorio regime (1970-74). Indeed, Guatemalan journalists characterized 1978 as the most violent year in the country's history and reported that 770 unidentified bodies were buried in the Verbena
64
cemetery in the first six months of the year. Since July 1978, when General Romeo Lucas's right-wing coahiion came to power, there have been more than 500 more victims of violence reported, nearly 2UÜ of them showing marks of torture. The authorities would classify the majority of the identifiable victims as leftwing.
Secret cemeteries and mass graves have also been found during the year, supporting the estimate in Amnesty International's 1976 Guatemala Briefing Paper of 20,000 covertly sanctioned murders or disappearances since 1966.
Figures cited above do not include the estimated 100 Kekchi Indians who died in a clash with the army at Panzós, Alta Vera Paz, on 29 May 1978. Army spokesmen claimed that the Indians started the violence, but reliable sources contend that it was the army who opened fire on the campesinos when they came to Panzós to discuss a land tenure problem. Twenty-five women and children were among the dead.
Throughout the year, there have been other incidents of murder and disappearance in the countryside, usually related to land disputes.
People who try to help the peasants either disappear or are murdered outright, like Father Hermógenes López, parish priest of San José Pinula, killed on 30 June 1978. Father López had led several Indian communities in their struggle to retain water rights in the face of a plan to divert water from 40 townships to a Guatemala City water project and had also been active in opposing the impressment of Indian youths into the army.
Sister Raymundo Alonso, a Spanish nun working with peasants of Alta Vera Paz, was briefly imprisoned and then expelled on 7 June 1978 accused of having been responsible for the massacre at Panzós. Father Carlos Stetter, a German priest who had been providing medical aid and supplies to the campesinos of Ixcan, was seized and expelled in December 1978, in what has been described as a "virtual kidnapping", on charges of "having engaged in activities outside his ministry".
Recent labour troubles have centred on efforts to gain union recognition in various plants and industries throughout the country. Mario Muji'a, a young labour lawyer and leader of the miners' march to Guatemala City in December 1977, was adviser to the miners of Ixtahuacan in their continuing efforts to negotiate with management, before being fatally attacked on 20 July 1978 as he entered his office in Huehuetenango.
Labour unrest in Guatemala City culminated in widespread demonstrations and strikes in October 1978, following the government's announcement of 100 per cent rises in urban fares. There were violent clashes with the police, who used tear gas, batons and firearms. One thousand five hundred demonstrators were detained; estimates of the wounded ranged as high as 300 and about 40 people were reported killed.
On 18 October 1978, the Secret Anti-Communist Army (ESA), the latest of the self-styled death squads, gave the press a list of people whom they had "tried and sentenced to death". Amnesty International issued an urgent action for the trade-unionists, student leaders, journalists, academics and labour lawyers named on the list, but two days later one of those listed, Oliverio Castañeda, president of the San Carlos University Students' Association, was killed when five cars carrying men armed with machine guns stopped him in a street in the centre of the capital.
65
within sight of a police detachment and the national palace. Moments before his death, Mr Castañeda told a large public rally in support of the transport workers' strike that 80,000 Guatemalans had died since 1962 as a result of political violence.
On 10 November 1978, Amnesty International issued an appeal on behalf of Mr Castafieda's successor, Antonio Ciani Garcia de Léon, who was detained on 6 November 1978 and later disappeared.
When the Rector of the University of San Carlos called on the government to protect those threatened by the ESA, Minister of the Interior Donaldo Alvarez Ruiz advised those named to take their own precautions. Pressed regarding the disappearance of Antonio Ciani, President Lucas Garcia stated that he would not enter into talks with the University Students' Association concerning Mr Ciani because the University was a centre of subversion which aimed at the overthrow of his government. On 15 February 1979, Manuel Andrade Roca, adviser to the Rector, was gunned down as he left a university meeting room.
On 12 December 1978, Pedro Quevedo y Quevedo, who had been active in attempts to unionize the workers at the Guatemala City Coca-Cola bottling plant, was murdered.
On 24 January 1979, Amnesty International issued an urgent action calling for information on the whereabouts of Enrique Castellanos, labour leader and member of the Consultative Council of the Guatemalan Institute of Social Security (IGSS), abducted on 19 January 1979.
Since the ESA first surfaced in October 1978, two more death-Hsts have appeared. Many of those threatened have been forced into exile, but attacks and killings continue. Deputy Alberto Fuentes Mohr, a distinguished economist and politician with a long record of international service and former Minister of the Interior and of Foreign Affairs under the 1966-70 Méndez Montenegro government, was murdered in Guatemala City on 25 January 1979.
The death of Mr Fuentes Mohr left Manuel Colom Argueta, former mayor of Guatemala Qty and leader of the United Front of the Revolution opposition group, as the most likely candidate to head a leftist coalition in the 1982 elections. Mr Colom was machine-gunned to death in the capital on 23 March 1979. In both cases, Amnesty International called for official investigations into the circumstances of the killings.
Amnesty International also called for an investigation into the death of Manuel López Balan, Secretary General of the Coca-Cola union, knifed to death in Guatemala City on 5 April. On 26 April 1979, Amnesty International issued an appeal on behalf of three women, two of them labour lawyers, whose names appeared on the ESA death lists. They were arrested on 20 April 1979 at the Guatemala City airport for distributing subversive literature (pamphlets in connection with the International Year of the Child) protesting at the enforced exile of a union leader and his seven-year-old son. There are innumerable similar murders and disappearances reported in the press. Sometimes there is reference to official complicity, where the reporter states for example that the kidnappere were in military dress, or were recognized as members of a security corps. At times, there are hints of direct political reasons, for example agitation or party political divergences. More often, no reasons are given and the case is soon forgotten.
66
Throughout the violence of the past year, government authorities have continued to deny that security forces are directly involved in any of these incidents, despite the fact that the death squads act on information which could only come from government sources and operate with such impunity that official tolerance is implied.
Newspapers which try to report this situation are themselves in danger of assault. Several journalists and broadcasters have narrowly escaped kidnapping recently and during the year there have been four machine-gun attacks on the offices of El Grâfico, a newspaper which daily notes the numbers of tortured bodies found throughout the country.
Some people were arrested following the disturbances last October and released after a short detention when writs of habeas corpus were presented on their behalf at a time of great public awareness. Long-term poUtical imprisonment is rare.
