Morocco (the Kingdom of) and Western Sahara
Morocco continued to be ruled by King Hassan II. The government formed in October 1977 under Prime Minister Ahmed Osman changed on his resignation in March 1979. Maati Bouabid, expelled from the opposition party—the Union Nationale des Forces Populaires (UNFP)—when he joined the government, took over the premiership in the Cabinet reshuffle but remained Minister of Justice. At the same time, the formation of a National Security Council was announced, including among others Ahmed Osman and Abderrahim Bouabid, leader of the largest opposition party, the Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires (USFP). The government has faced growing pressure from widespread strikes and economic recession which are exacerbated by the cost of the war against the Algerian-backed Polisario, which is fighting for independence in the Western Sahara. In addition, in February and March 1979 there were reports of mainly short-term arrests and several deaths among students striking in protest against their conditions of study and against the welcome accorded by King Hassan to the deposed Shah of Iran.
Amnesty International continued to work for approximately 180 prisoners of conscience. Among these are members of the UNFP, sentenced at various trials in 1967, 1973 and 1976, and members of various Marxist-Leninist movements sentenced at trials in 1973 and 1977. who are generally known as Frontistes.
168
Some of the latter group—drawn largely from among students and teachers-were active in the Union Nationale des Etudiants Marocains (UNEM), suppressed in January 1973. Although the UNEM was legalized once more in November 1978, its imprisoned leaders, who were convicted of plotting against the internal security of the state, have not been released. One reason why the Frontistes were suppressed was that they opposed Moroccan annexation of the Western Sahara, which had overwhelming public support.
Amnesty International also investigated cases of people of Sahrawi origin living in Morocco secretly detained without charge or trial since 1976. It is thought that several hundred may be detained in the Western Sahara itself; but it is difficult to obtain detailed information. Some are reportedly held in the "Calabozo" Prison in El Ayoun, and some are reported to have undergone "reeducation" programmes. Amnesty International's concern for Sahrawi detainees was expressed in its pubhcation for Prisoner of Conscience Week in October 1978.
Amnesty International continues to be concerned at the situation of more than 80 people detained at Meknes Civil Prison, allegedly for left-wing sympathies. In November 1977, it was announced that they had appeared before an examining magistrate, but they have still not been brought to trial. Some are thought to have been detained for their sympathies with the Sahrawi claim for'independence. Also of concern are reports that a number of military personnel—tried and sentenced to between 3 and 5 years' imprisonment for their association with a coup attempt in 1971—have not been released despite the fact that they have served their sentences. They are allegedly held near Rich.
The majority of prisoners adopted by Amnesty International are held in prisons at Kenitra, Chaouen and Settat. Prisoners at the agricultural prison of Ain Ali Moumen in Settat and at Chaouen Civil Prison were transferred from Kenitra following a hunger strike begun in February 1978 to protest against both their official status as ordinary common law prisoners and the fact that they had been met only once by an independent commission set up to investigate their grievances. This followed a hunger strike in late 1977 in which Saida Menebhi, one of a group of four prisoners held at Casablanca, died. The grievances included poor sanitary conditions, prolonged isolation, repeated interrogation and other arbitrary punishments, and limited medical attention for those injured by earlier tortures.
Conditions at Chaouen and especially at Settat are beheved to be considerably better than at Kenitra and there has been a notable increase in the possibility of correspondence. But many prisoners are reported to be in serious need of medical care despite the fact that some have been moved to hospital for short periods of treatment following hunger strikes, or as a result of earlier ill-treatment, one form of which has been prolonged bandaging of the eyes with rags. One prisoner allegedly held for over four years, Brahim Zaidi, died in prison in the early hours of 25 December 1978, reportedly without having received the medical attention he needed. In November 1978, Amnesty International launched an appeal on behalf of Abraham Serfaty, held in solitary confinement in Casablanca, after prolonged fears for his health. It was later learned that he and the two other adopted prisoners remaining there—both women— had been transferred to Kenitra, where Serfaty is reported to be no longer in isolation.
The Minister of Justice, Maitre Maati Bouabid, suggested in a press interview in January 1978 that Amnesty International should send delegates to Morocco to
169
inspect prisons and observe the working of the coirts. Amnesty International requested permission to do so from the Moroccan government and its Embassy in London but, at the time of writing, had received no formal response.
