Djibouti (the Republic of)
Djibouti entered its second year of independence with continuing economic problems and internal political tensions which were exacerbated by a massive influx of refugees from neighbouring Ethiopia. President Hassan Gouled, ruling with emergency powers, has attempted to maintain stability through a balance of the two ethnic groups, Afars and Issas. All political parties except the Ligue Populaire Africaine pour l'Indépendance (LPAI) are banned.
There have been substantial allegations of torture on at least four occasions since independence. Seventeen members or supporters of the banned Mouvement Populaire de Libération (MPL) were arrested on 15 December 1977 and charged with killing five people in a grenade attack on a restaurant. By April 1979, five had been freed but the others were still awaiting trial. Their torture allegations were supported by medical evidence.
On 14 August 1978, 15 students were arrested in Djibouti while on vacation from their studies in Paris. They were sentenced to 1 or 2 months' imprisonment on 24 August 1978 for offences against state security and against the Heads of State of Djibouti and neighbouring states, arising from articles in their student union publication in Paris. They stated that they were tortured. Amnesty International considered them prisoners of conscience, on trial for non-violent political expression.
On 2 November, seven Issa activists were arrested and accused of possessing weapons and subversive Uterature. They had reportedly tried to form a political parly based on the banned Front pour la Libération de la Côte Somalie, a pro-Somali group which had violent objectives. Amnesty International launched an Urgent Action campaign after receiving information that they were being tortured: five were later freed, but two had not been tried by April 1979. The Attorney General informed Amnesty International that due legal procedures had been followed and no complaints of torture had been received from the prisoners. The President stated that the prisoners had benefited from all legal safeguards and that the government was determined to uphold human rights.
In March 1979, following an armed attack on an army barracks in the town of
17
Randa in which two soldiers were killed, there were mass arrests of Afars and at least 60 people were transferred to detention in Djibouti town. On 20 March 1979, Amnesty International cabled President Gouled seeking assurances that the detainees were being correctly treated and renewed its appeal against torture. When on 29 March 1979 Amnesty International learned that one of the detainees, Omar Mohamed, a 24-year-old soldier, had died two days earlier as a result of torture, it called publicly for the establishment of an independent inquiry into torture allegations and the circumstances of his death. On 7 April, the government stated that 18 people were held at Gabode prison under judicial investigation on charges of conspiracy to murder and were being well treated. The other detainees had evidently been released when these 18 were transferred to civil jurisdiction.
All these tortures reportedly occurred at Villa d'Ambouli (also known as Villa Christophe) in the capital during the 10 days of detention permitted in law before removal to a civil prison for investigation before a magistrate. Contrary to legal safeguards that seek to prevent torture, access to detainees by relatives, doctors and lawyers is generally denied during this crucial period.
Torture methods include "the swing" {la balançoire) in which the victim is swung from a horizontal pole while tied up by ankles and wrists; severe beatings with electric cable, rubber piping, fists and sticks;simulated drowning;deprivation of sleep; burning with cigarettes; and tearing out of fingernails.
