Thailand (the Kingdom of)
The martial law government of Prime Minister General Kriangsak Chamanand has prepared a new constitution which will come into force following the general elections for a National Assembly, set for 22 April 1979. In the transitional period, the wide martial law constitutional provision (article 27) which allowed the Prime Minister, in consultation with the Cabinet and the National Policy Council, to impose sentences summarily on people alleged to have committed serious criminal offences was retained in the interim constitution (article 200).
This extraordinary power to impose harsh sentences without any judicial process has been used with some frequency, even in the interim period before the elections. In January and February 1979, at least eight people were sentenced to death in this way and another 17 were sentenced to long prison terms without
115
trial. Those sentenced to death were executed almost immediately. Amnesty International appealed to the Prime Minister on every occasion when a case was known of the summary imposition of the death sentence, and also in other cases when the death penalty had been imposed by the courts. In June 1978, it submitted a memorandum to the Prime Minister pointing out inter alia that his power of summary execution of offenders without trial contravened international law and that no other national constitution provided such a power. It should be noted that the new constitution which comes into force after the April general elections does not provide this power of summary execution.
The memorandum also urged the government to release those 18 defendants who were being tried in connection with the events at Thammasat University in October 1976 at the time of the military coup and the introduction of martial law. Those 18 persons were the prisoners remaining out of the several thousand people arrested in 1976. They were put to a long and unsatisfactory trial before a mihtary tribunal and were eventually released unconditionally on 19 September 1978. The trial proceedings against them have been abandoned. They were the subject of an Amnesty International campaign in May 1978 to bring about the revocation of the constitutional power to order summary executions and the annulment of martial law decrees which allowed civilians such as the 18 to be tried by martial law courts without adequate deference or appeal to a court of law.
The government introduced in February 1979 a new law which revised the Anti-Communist Activities Act 1972. It will apply nationally instead of only to certain designated areas, as was the previous practice. This law denies protection of the courts to every person suspected of being a communist or a communist sympathizer: such persons can be held for long periods of detention without trial.
Furthermore, martial law decree No. 22 remains in force, the effect of which has been to allow the government to arrest large numbers of criminals and political suspects and hold them without trial on the ground that if they were freed they would be "endangering society". Since the martial law authorities promulgated this decree in 1976, it has been estimated that several thousand people have been detained without trial for "endangering society" and, although there were frequent releases, large numbers were held at any given moment in the past year. It has been estimated that there were at least several thousand people held under decree No. 22 at the end of the year, including criminals as well as others apparently held for political reasons.
The Amnesty International memorandum was critical of the government's "re-education" programme whereby people can be compelled to attend "Democracy Training Schools" and other analogous centres for varying periods of approximately three months, during which they are given lectures on democracy and Thai national institutions. Fairly large numbers are involved and the centres can hold more than 300 people at a time. Amnesty International recommended to the government that "re-education" should not be used as an excuse for detaining people and that such "schools" and centres should admit people only with their consent and without compulsion or threat of punishment.
The memorandum also recommended the release, pending the conclusion of their trial, of defendants held in the case of Supap Pasa-Ong and six other trade-union activists arrested in March 1976, and in the case of Udom Pka-krong and
116
10 other defendants arrested in May \ 916(Amnesty International Report 1978). In general, the memorandum was critical that the trials had been slow and had lasted a very long time.
The Prime Minister did not reply to the Amnesty International memorandum. The recommendations relating to the constitutional provision for summary execution and the release of the 18 "Thammasat" defendants were followed. The government has not acted on the others.
There has been increasing concern expressed by Thai lawyers regarding the effect of martial law. In February 1979, the Lawyers' Association of Thailand conducted a symposium in Bangkok on "Unjust Laws", and the newly elected president Parathara Duangart stated that the main function of the association would be to comment on martial law and "unjust legislation". The Lawyers' Association of Nakom Sri Thammarat province protested in January 1979 against the use of martial law and military tribunals by refusing to defend cases before such tribunals. In Nakom Pathom province, a group of lawyers has protested on similar grounds.
