Chad (the Republic of)
Human rights violations in Chad took place against a background of civil war and major changes in the constitution and government. Although several groups of political prisoners were released by the government of President Féhx Malloum, many others remained in detention; some were accused of supporting rebel groups then active in Chad, others were detained for distributing tracts critical of the government. The situation became increasingly tense at the beginning of 1979 when fighting in the capital, N'Djamena, resulted in many deaths. In February and March 1979, several thousand people were reportedly killed in the south when local communities of Muslim northerners were attacked by southern townspeople.
Major changes affected the government and constitution. In August 1978, Hissène Habré, leader of one of the northern guerrilla groups. Forces Armées du Nord (FAN) reached agreement with President Malloum and was appointed Prime Minister. This agreement represented a reconciliation between the government and Habré's FAN, but it did not involve the main guerrilla group. Front de Libération Nationale du Tchad (FROLINAT), led by Goukouni Oueddei, which controlled most of northern Chad by mid-1978. However, major differences of policy between President Malloum and Prime Minister Habré caused the breakdown of the settlement by January 1979. This resulted in fighting in N'Djamena between supporters of FAN and the Chadian army and gendarmerie, both of which remained loyal to President Malloum. More than a thousand people are reported to have been killed, including at least one member of the government. A number of prominent civil servants also disappeared from N'Djamena in the weeks follow-
14
ing the start of fighting on 12 February 1979. They are believed to have been kidnapped or murdered by members of FAN.
After several abortive ceasefires had been arranged in N'Djamena in late February and early March 1979, the main parties to the dispute were invited by the Nigerian government to peace talks in the northern Nigerian town of Kano. This resulted on 16 March 1979 in an agreement not only between President Malloum and Prime Minister Habré, but also between the leaders of two other important pohtical organizations, the main FROLINAT faction, led by Goukouni Oueddei, and Aboubakar Abderrahmane's Mouvement Populaire de Libération du Tchad (MPLT), formerly known as the "Third Army", which was active in the Kanem area near Lake Chad. The agreement provided for the resignation on 23 March 1979 of both President Malloum and Prime Minister Habré and their replacement by a provisional Council of State of eight men chaired by Goukouni Oueddei. The new government, commonly known as the Conseil d'Etat Provisoire, consisted of two members from each of the main factions represented at the Kano conference; so for the first time Chad has a government in which both the former military rulers and most of their main opponents are represented. The Kano agreement also contained provision for the release of all political prisoners and for the creation of a "demilitarized zone" around N'Djamena. At the end of April 1979, the provisional Council of State was replaced by a new government in which Goukouni Oueddei was Minister of the Interior and Hissène Habré Minister of Defence. The new Prime Minister, Mohammad Shawa, was a member of MPLT.
Amnesty International's main concern in 1978 was the detention without trial of large numbers of people suspected of supporting FROLINAT and other rebel groups. In May 1978, for example, the Secretary of State for Agriculture in the military government, Allahou Taher, whose case was taken up by Amnesty International when he was a political prisoner under the regime of President Tombalbaye, was arrested with some 20 others. They were alleged to have been responsible for the distribution in N'Djamena of a pamphlet supporting the "Third Army". Other groups of people were detained for similar reasons in several towns in Chad in June and July 1978. A number of prisoners including Allahou Taher and several former members of the government of President Tombalbaye, overthrown in April 1975, are thought to have been released soon after Hissène Habré became Prime Minister. However, the release of political prisoners was one of the major issues which divided Prime Minister Habré and President Malloum in late 1978.
It is still not clear whether all political prisoners, or indeed prisoners taken in the course of the conflict, have been freed in accordance with the Kano agreement.
