France (the French Republic)
All Amnesty International adopted prisoners in France are conscientious objectors. The main legal provisions relating to them were not changed.
In early 1979, Amnesty International initiated an international campaign on imprisonment of conscientious objectors in the member states of the Council of Europe, advocating adherence by the member states to the principles of Resolution 337 of the Parliamentary Assembly of 1967 of the Council of Europe, which laid down standards to protect the human rights of conscientious objectors.
There are many convictions of conscientious objectors in France every year. The definition of a conscientious objector under article 41 of the Code du Service National is restricted to those who "are opposed unconditionally to the personal use of arms because of religious or philosophical convictions". The courts include military personnel and meet in camera. It is also an offence to publish information which might incite conscripts to exercise their rights of conscientious objection. Finally, even if a conscript secures permission to perform alternative service it is usually in the Office National des Eaux et Forêts (ONF), which is widely considered unacceptable, and for a period twice as long as the normal military service. Amnesty International considers this practice to be punitive. For these reasons it was decided to make France one of the three main countries for action in the early 1979 campaign.
Amnesty International is concerned at the apparent increase in prosecutions for actions related to conscientious objection even though the accused are not objectors themselves.
The Tribunal de Grande Instance (a civil court) of Nancy in February 1979 ordered the dissolution of an organization of conscientious objectors, the Fédération des Objecteurs (FEDO). Article 50 of the Code du Service National prohibits the dissemination of information in whatever form "likely to incite potential conscripts to benefit from the provision of the law recognizing con-
128
scientious objection". This law restricts the non-violent exercise of freedom of expression and deprives people of information regarding their legal rights. The availability of information is especially important for potential objectors, who under the law have only one month after call-up in which to exercise their right to apply. Members of F EDO have lodged an appeal against the court's decision.
Amnesty International is concerned about the possibility of ill-treatment of Basques forcibly returned to Spain (see Spain). These refoulements date from the decision of 30 January 1979 by the French government to withdraw the status of political refugees from all Spanish citizens. So far seven Basques have been deported to Spain, where they were immediately detained under the anti-terrorist laws. Two of them have subsequently made allegations of ill-treatment by the Spanish police. The Spanish government has attempted to have two more Basques extradited on charges of murder, but the court of appeal in Aix-en-Provence rejected the Spanish government's case. Further charges are rumoured to be pending and the two Basques are still in custody. The French authorities have served a further 15 Basques with restriction orders and they are confined to the town of Valensole. It is not known whether attempts will be made to extradite them or whether they will be expelled.
There has been no alteration in French legislation regarding the death penalty. However, no person was executed during the year and all death sentences have been commuted. The law at present permits the use of the death penalty for a wide variety of civil and military crimes.
