Egypt (the Arab Republic of)
A number of significant political developments have taken place which have had a direct bearing on human rights. Direct negotiations between Israel and Egypt for a peace settlement in the Middle East resulted in several Cabinet changes as ministers resigned in protest, and also in waves of arrests of people who voiced their opposition to the peace initiative. Despite the signing of the peace treaty, Egypt continues in a state of emergency which was previously justified by the state of war with Israel. Its continued enforcement means that security legislation may be applied to pohtical cases. This effectively enables the President to refer political cases to special tribunals as well as to ratify or veto their decisions.
Following the Camp David summit numerous arrests took place, and leaflets condemning the summit were confiscated. Those who had been detained for protesting against the summit were reportedly released, but police investigations
154
are continuing. Between 26 and 30 March 1979—after the peace agreement between Egypt and Israel was signed—further arrests of people opposed to the treaty took place. Amnesty International received the names of approximately 50, including Azza Balbaa, wife of the well-known poet Ahmed Fu'ad, Negm, who was apparently beaten at the time of her arrest, and Abu A1 Ezz A1 Hariri, a former member of parliament representing the legal left-wing National Progressive Unionist party (NPUP). Other members of NPUP were also arrested. On 10 April 1979 Amnesty International wrote to His Excellency Muhammad Nabawi Ismail, the Minister of the Interior, expressing concern at these arrests for the expression of pohtical beliefs, and requested information regarding the prisoners' present situation. It also requested that an investigation be undertaken into the reported ill-treatment of Azza Balbaa. On 16 November 1978, Amnesty International wrote to President Muhammad Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menahem Begin of Israel on the occasion of the award of the 1978 Nobel Peace Prize to the two leaders. The letter to President Sadat suggested that "commitment to peace and human rights, both internationally and nationally, would best be reflected by a warm and humane gesture of respect for the fundamental freedom of all people. We urge you, on this remarkable occasion, to declare unconditionally a general amnesty for all political prisoners held under the authority of your government."
In May 1978, new legislation was introduced and approved by referendum: the law on "national unity and social peace" introduced new restrictions on the media and provisions to discipline journalists found guilty of violating national unity, social peace or the country's democratic socialist principles. In addition, those who held positions of responsibility in pre-revolution political parties may be banned from participating in future political activities. This law evoked much criticism within the country, especially from the NPUP, and a number of arresis took place at the time of the referendum. All those arrested were reportedly released after a short time.
Since the law was promulgated, many journalists have been summoned by the Socialist Prosecutor General and interrogated about material they had written either in Egypt or abroad, but no judicial proceedings appear to have followed. In addition, at least two members of parliament were expelled from the People's Assembly as a result of provisions in the new law.
In late 1978, the People's Assembly considered again the incorporation of principles of Islamic law into Egyptian legislation; draft legislation was discussed in 1977 but shelved because of widespread national and international opposition. Among those who oppose the measure is the Coptic community, which protests, inter alia, against provisions for the death penalty for Muslims who renounce their religion.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of over 100 prisoners being tried by the State Security Court in Cairo and a number of prisoners sentenced in 1978 by a military court.
On 15 July 1978, the Cairo military court passed sentence on 16 people accused of membership of the Egyptian Workers' Communist Party. All 16 were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. An Amnesty International observer attended part of this trial in March 1978. The defendant Ali Zahran was sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment, three others were sentenced to 3 years'
155
imprisonment and one was sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment. The remaining seven were acquitted. In addition, all were ordered to pay a fine of £100. The court decided that it was not competent to pass judgment on three of the cases. At the time of writing, it is not known whether these three have been brought to trial by a different court. They are all beheved to be held in Qanater Prison, north of Cairo.
During the period covered by this report Amnesty International continued to follow the trial by State Security Court of 176 people arrested in January and February 1977 following the food riots which took place on 18 and 19 January 1977. Almost all were released on provisional liberty pending their trial.
The first hearing on 16 April 1978 was attended by an Amnesty International observer. Defence lawyers complained that the dossier consisted of 11,000 pages, cost 500 Egyprian pounds and that insufficient copies had been printed. In addition they requested further time to study the dossier. The cost was reduced and the trial often postponed, usually at the request of the defence. Further additions were made to the dossier at the end of 1978, which led to complaints from defence lawyers that only three complete copies of the dossier existed. The defence also submitted that, as the case did not fall within the jurisdiction of the State Security Court, the accused should be tried by an ordinary court not a special tribunal. The tribunal then ordered all defence lawyers to be fined 50 Egyptian pounds and called on the Egyptian Bar Association to replace them. At the next session of the trial-on 1 March 1979-the defence was represented only by Ahmed A1 Khawaga Chairman of the Egyptian Bar Association, who assured the tribunal that the lawyers' main concern had been to ensure a fair trial for their chents and their rights to an adequate defence. The trial resumed on 17 March 1979 when the court heard the first of approximately 70 witnesses. Amnesty International hopes to send an observer to a later part of the trial.
In the past year Amnesty International learned of one death sentence (passed in absentia) and one execution, in both cases for murder, and received an in-I creasing number of allegations of torture of political detainees. According to these reports, detainees were burned with cigarettes and beaten on the neck and on the soles of their feet, and in one case a prisoner was reportedly suspended by the feet for 42 hours. Amnesty International's request—made in 1977—that the Egyptian authorities undertake an independent inquiry into allegations of torture has not been carried out.
