Germany (the Federal Republic of)
There were no major acts of political violence, although organizations such as the Revolutionäre Zelle remained active. Special anti-terrorist legislation, which increases the discretionary power of the executive over the exercise of civil and political rights and of the prosecuting authorities and the judiciary in criminal proceedings, remained in force.
One of Amnesty International's concerns has been the use of this anti-terrorist legislation against "sympathizers" of organizations involved in violent pohtical activity, and in particular against members of communist and left-wing organizations who have not been involved in political violence themselves. None has been adopted as prisoner of conscience, either because the charges related to the advocacy of — though not the use of — violence, or because they have been punished by a fine, rather than imprisoned. Nonetheless Amnesty International remained concerned that offences such as "defamation of the state" (article 90a of the Penal Code) or "incitement to commit crimes" (article 130) can be used to restrict the freedom of speech of the individual and political criticism. A number of members of the Kommunistische Bund Westdeutschland (KBW) were charged under article 90a with "deliberately insulting and maliciously smearing the constitutional order of the FRG" in a KBW pamphlet in the Bavarian elections in October 1978, In the charges, which do not relate to advocacy of violence, particular reference was made to the description of the elections as a means through which "the West German bourgeoisie wants to legitimize its policy of exploitation, pillage and suppression of the masses, of expansion and preparation for war".
Amnesty International has continued to follow closely cases of defence lawyers charged with disciplinary or criminal offences related to their work for clients accused of politically motivated crimes but has not intervened in individual cases.
In April 1978 the Constitutional Court ruled that some form of the conscience testing of applicants for alternative service to military service was necessary under
131
the constitution. Amnesty International interceded in the case of Dieter Schoffmann, who was not officially recognized as a conscientious objector and faced prison for his refusal to perform military service. Although Herr Schoffmann would also have refused alternative service had he been recognized as a conscientious objector, the charges were brought against him on the grounds that, because his application to be recognized as a conscientious objector was rejected, he had to perform military service. Amnesty International asked the court to dismiss the charge against him. Herr Schöffmann was convicted but his sentence was suspended. He has appealed.
There have been many allegations that prisoners suspected or convicted of politically motivated crimes have been subjected to conditions of imprisonment that damage their health. It has been alleged that isolation and sensory deprivation techniques have been used deliberately to "break" them. None of them has been adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
The question of the extent to which the conditions of imprisonment of politically motivated prisoners come within the scope of Amnesty International's statute regarding "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" is complex, and towards the end of 1977 its International Executive Committee commissioned a study of the prison conditions of persons convicted or suspected of politically motivated crimes, the alleged use of sensory deprivation and the use of isolation, and the effects of these on the health of individual prisoners. This study focused on the prison conditions of members of Xht Rote Armee Fraktion (Red Army Fraction); the Bewegung 2 Juni (the Second of June Movement), and to some extent the Revolutionäre Zelle. In February 1979 Amnesty International sent a Memorandum on Prison Conditions of Persons Suspected or Convicted of Politically Motivated Crimes in the FRG to the Minister of Justice, Dr Hans-Jochen Vogel. A covering letter stated the belief that in individual cases prolonged solitary confinement and social isolation had impaired the health of prisoners and that the prison conditions of those suspected or convicted of politically motivated crimes are matters of concern under Amnesty International's Statute.
Amnesty International concluded that pathological disturbances representing a separation syndrome were apparent in many cases of prisoners detained in solitary confinement and small-group isolation. In some, intellectual and emotional disturbances and disturbances of the autonomic nervous system were so pronounced as to be reminiscent of the effects produced by sensory deprivation in experiments.
Amnesty International concluded further that these effects of isolation militate against reform and rehabilitation, contrary to accepted international norms of imprisonment, and that ways must and can be found to accommodate security needs with humane treatment, avoiding the severe forms of isolation inherent in the prison conditions described in the memorandum. Amnesty International urged the government to seek alternatives to the use of solitary confinement and small-group isolation as regular forms of imprisonment. On submitting its report. Amnesty International asked the government to receive a delegation to discuss the findings and recommendations.
One of the cases dealt with in the submission was that of Werner Hoppe, who since his arrest in 1971 has been held under varying degrees of isolation ranging
132
from total isolation and solitary confinement to association — for a period of a few months — with up to seven prisoners in Stuttgart-Stammheim Prison. As early as 1974 Herr Hoppe's state of health was causing concern and prison doctors pointed to his case as an example of the adverse and possibly lasting effects of isolation. In September 1978 Herr Hoppe was transferred to hospital in what was described by the doctors in charge of the case as "a real psychosomatic crisis endangering his life". In February 1979, Herr Hoppe was released on the ground that he was unfit for further imprisonment.
Amnesty International asked to know the outcome of the investigation of charges of medical neglect of a mentally handicapped prisoner, Herr Braun, who died on 10 February 1978 in Ansbach hospital a few days after sustaining injuries in a Nuremberg prison in unexplained circumstances.
The death penalty is totally abolished.
