German Democratic Republic (the) (GDR)
During the year, Amnesty International worked for approximately 220 prisoners of conscience or people suspected of being prisoners of conscience. Almost all were imprisoned under laws which explicitly restrict the non-violent exercise of human rights. Other concerns include the death penalty and aspects of the judicial process and treatment of political prisoners.
Most people adopted were imprisoned for trying to exercise their right to leave the country. In the past most have tried to exercise this right by crossing the border without permission, a crime punishable by up to 5 years' imprisonment under article 213 of the Penal Code. In recent years, however, there has been a marked increase in the number of those openly seeking permission from government authorities to emigrate, particularly since the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (Helsinki, 1975), which drew the attention of many to the fact that their government had ratified the international human rights covenants proclaiming the right to leave one's country. Government authorities are reluctant to issue exit visas. Those seeking them are usually informed verbally that their application has been turned down and advised to drop the matter. Many applicants demand to know the reasons for the refusal and accuse government officials of failure to observe international human rights agreements. Some continue to submit applications and protest when they are no longer processed or acknowledged. During the past year the conflict between government authorities and those insisting on their right to emigrate frequently led to arrest on charges such as "interference with public activity" (article 214 of the Penal Code), "incitement hostile to the state" (article 106), or "public degradation" (article 220).
129
Many of those repeatedly refused permission to emigrate appeal to organizations outside the country. If their correspondence is discovered they are liable to 2 to 12 years' imprisonment under article 98 of the Penal Code for collecting or passing on information suited to support "activity directed against the GDR or other peace-loving peoples". A number of would-be emigrants were convicted under this article, even when the information in question consisted merely of an account of their own difficulties in trying to emigrate.
Early in 1978 it became known that the GDR government was planning to introduce military education into the school curriculum for the 14 to 16 age-group. This was opposed by the Churches, and three Church members, Harry and Renate Pohl and Uwe Reimann, were arrested in the summer of 1978 after protesting against the government's decision. All three were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for "incitement hostile to the state". The Pohls had written letters criticizing the scheme to government authorities, while Uwe Reimann had reportedly distributed leaflets on the subject through letterboxes. All three were adopted as prisoners of conscience. Uwe Reimann was released at the end of March 1979.
A number of cases taken up by Amnesty International during the year were of people found guilty of distributing documents officially considered as "discrediting" the GDR. While possession of such a document is not punishable by law, to pass it on even to only one other person, is a crime under article 106 of the Penal Code.
It is estimated that between 1,000 and 1,500 political prisoners a year are released before completing their sentence and allowed to emigrate to the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) as a result of the "special efforts" of the FRG government by which a sum of money is paid to the GDR authorities for the release of each prisoner.
Typical of the prisoners adopted by Amnesty International during the period under review is Frieder Kunzel. For two years before his arrest he had been trying to obtain permission for himself and his family to emigrate and had written to a number of organizations outside the GDR appealing for help. In April 1978 he received and passed on to friends a manifesto — published by the FRG weekly Der Spiegel — that had allegedly originated from an opposition group within the Socialist Unity Party in the GDR. The manifesto contained criticism of the political and economic system in the GDR and its association with the USSR. The GDR authorities discovered the circulation of the document and arrested Frieder Kiinzel on 1 May 1978. The arrest was accompanied by a house search that revealed copies of his correspondence on the subject of his emigration. At his trial in October 1978 he was found guilty both of circulating a document slandering the GDR and the USSR and making contact with organizations and individuals abroad in order to discredit the international image of the GDR. He was sentenced to 3 years 6 months' imprisonment under Penal Code article 106 (incitement), article 98 (collecting of information) and article 108, which makes such acts "crimes against the state" also when practised against other socialist countries. He was released in December 1978.
The rights of defence of political prisoners are severely restricted. They are usually denied access to their lawyers to discuss the charges until shortly before the trial and many therefore are ignorant of their rights during the investigatory
130
proceedings. In most cases lawyers advise their clients to plead guilty and the defence takes the form of pleading for a reduction of sentence on grounds of previous good conduct. With very few exceptions the trials of political prisoners are held in camera.
New prison regulations introduced in May 1977 have led to some improvement in prison conditions, particularly in such matters as the number of visits and letters prisoners may receive. There appears, however, to be no substantial change in their physical surroundings. There are special punishments for offences such as refusal to work. The special punishment cells are usually cold, dark basement rooms furnished with only a hard bed and one blanket. During such punishments, food rations are severely reduced and prisoners receive only one warm meal every three days. Although 21 days is the legal maximum in such a cell, the punishment is sometimes repeated at short intervals. In 1978, Amnesty International made special anniversary appeals on behalf of two prisoners of conscience who had been subjected to these special punishments, Werner Schalicke and Rolf Mainz.
Although the penal law retains, the death penalty for a number of offences, no executions were reported.
