Singapore (the Republic of)
The government continues to hold without trial for indefinite periods persons alleged to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the state's security. Release is usually made conditional on the detainees "confessing" to illegal and subversive activities. In some instances, the "confession" has to be repeated publicly on television. Amnesty International has received evidence that intense pressure, including physical and psychological torture, has been used to secure "confessions". Those who do not meet the government's conditions for release may be held indefinitely under the Internal Security Act. Of the 3 5 cases taken up for adoption or investigation, eight have been in detention for over 10 years and all have been in prison for five years or more.
Under the Internal Security Act, people are held for an initial 60-day interrogation period, after which they may be served with a renewable 2-year detention order. For ihe initial 60-day period, detainees are usually held at the Whitley Road Holding Centre, where they are routinely subjected to round-the-clock interrogation in air-conditioned rooms. Up to 100 prisoners are believed to be kept at Whitley Road at any given time. On being served with a detention order, a detainee is transferred to the Moon Crescent Detention Centre, the political wing of Changi Prison. Approximately 50 detainees are at present held at Moon Crescent. Six detainees arrested under the Internal Security Act were later deprived of their citizenship and served with banishment orders "awaiting deportation to the country of (their) choice". One of them, Lee Tze Tong, a former official of the Singapore Busworkers' Union and member of parliament for the Barisan Sosialis Party, has been in detention since October 1963. The other five had been held for nine years or longer.
Amnesty International received frequent reports concerning ill-treatment of political prisoners and inadequate medical care in Moon Crescent and Whitley Road Detention Centres. In February 1978, Chan Hock Hua died of cancer 20 days after his release from Moon Crescent. Amnesty International understands that the authorities had been alerted to Mr Chan's condition by two detainees who are doctors, but chose to ignore their warnings. In April 1978, the authorities introduced a stricter set of regulations which include restrictions on the amount of food relatives can bring for detainees. Prisoners protested against the new regulations by passive resistance and hunger strikes. One of the hunger strikers, Chng Min Oh, was featured as Prisoner of the Month in the Amnesty International Newsletter in May 1979. Mr Chng, a former Chairman of the Goldsmiths' Association, was arrested under the Internal Security Act in August 1970 for participating in demonstrations prior to the 1971 Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference held in Singapore. In August 1978, Mr Chng and 11 other prisoners were transferred to the Whitley Road Holding Centre, where they were subjected to renewed interrogation and severe beatings. After a period in Changi Prison Hospital, Mr Chng was returned to the Moon Crescent Detention Centre.
An Amnesty International mission visited Singapore between 30 November and 5 December 1978 to investigate the extent and conditions of political imprisonment, particularly with respect to long-term detention under the Internal Security Act. The government refused requests for interviews with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Home Affairs and other senior officials responsible for the adminKtration of political detainees.
Ml
On 18 November 1978, 12 days before the arrival of the mission, two of Singapore's long-term detainees. Said Zaharí and Dr Lim Hock Siew, were conditionally released after ISVi years in prison. The two, who were both Amnesty International adoptees, were among 150 persons arrested on 2 February 1963 in "Operation Cold Store". On their release from Moon Crescent, Said Zahari and Dr Lim were exiled separately to two small islands off Singapore, Pulau Ubin and Puláú Tekong. It is the view of Amnesty International that the two men remain prisoners, although they are allowed to receive visitors who are not former pohtical detainees. In an official statement, the government said that the two "cannot be released unconditionally as they have refused to give a written undertaking that they will not involve themselves with the Communist Party of Malaya and the Communist United Front". Ho Piao, also known as Ho Toon Chin, formerly Secretary of the Singapore National Seamen's Union, who was also arrested in "Operation Cold Store" in February 1963, still remains in Moon Crescent.
Shamsuddin Tung, former newspaper editor and parliamentary candidate, was conditionally released on 21 January 1979. He was detained in December 1976 at the close of the general election in which he had been a candidate for the opposition United Front. He had served an earlier period in detention between 1971 and 1973. In October 1978 he was deprived of his Singapore citizenship. The conditions of his release include the requirements that he not take part in political activity, move house or travel outside Singapore without permission of the Director of the Internal Security Department.
Dr Poh Soo Kai, a medical practitioner and former Assistant Secretary General of the Barisan Sosialis, who was arrested in "Operation Cold Store" and subsequently held for 10 years, was arbitrarily re-arrested under the Internal Security Act in June 1976 and remains in detention.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the unconditional release of all those held under the Internal Security Act.
The government imposes the death penalty for a wide variety of offences, including-since 1975-drug trafficking. On 2 August 1978, Amnesty International sent a telegram to President Benjamin Sheares saying it was deeply troubled at the execution of Teo Hock Seng, who had been convicted of drug trafficking. Two further cables were sent to President Sheares in August and September asking for clemency after four other people were sentenced to death for drug trafficking.
Sri Lanka (Demo era tic Socialist Republic of)
On 7 September 1978, President J.R. Jayewardene promulgated the new constitution ot the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Future Presidents are to be directly elected and parliament will be elected by proportional representation. The new constitution contains substantial provisions for the protection of fundamental rights, most of which apply both to Sri Lanka citizens and stateless persons resident in the country. Some of the Tamil minority are stateless. Whereas Sinhala remains the sole official language, Sinhala and Tamil are both recognized as national languages. The constitution for the first time, specifically prohibits all forms of torture, or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. However, there are important restrictions on the fundamental rights guaranteed in the constitution.
112
Under article 15 the government may derogate from the presumption of innocence and the prohibition against retroactive application of criminal law in the interest of "national security". Other constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights such as the right of freedom of association (in any lawful occupation, profession, trade business or enterprise) (article 14(l)(g)) can be restricted in the interest of "national economy" (article 15 (5)). Article 16 provides that laws and forms of punishment recognized in already existing legislation shall remain valid, even if they are inconsistent with fundamental rights guaranteed in the constitution.
On 14 November 1978, Amnesty International wrote to K.W. Dewanayagam, the Minister of Justice, welcoming some of the constitutional provisions and the prohibition of torture in particular. Drawing the minister's attention to two reports of ill-treatment of suspects received in February and May 1978 (Amnesty International Report 1978), not apparently investigated by the government, it asked the minister for an assurance that the government was taking full steps to protect all suspects from acts of police brutahty. It also inquired about the Code of Criminal Procedure Bill, then before parliament, because it had received reports that the bill reintroduced whipping of children and young persons on the bare buttocks, and also reintroduced flogging of prisoners with an instrument known as the cat o'nine tails. The reintroduction of these punishments was opposed by civil rights bodies and opposition parties in Sri Lanka, and on 8 November 1978 the Law Minister announced that the Bill stood amended: "After discussion we have decided to substitute caning for whipping because it would appear that it is something that infringes a fundamental right" {Hansard Parliamentary Debates, 8 November 1978).
On 17 April 1979, Amnesty International wrote again to the Law Minister about the application of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and Similar Organizations Law, and the Criminal Procedures (Special Provisions) Law. In a letter of 30 June 1978, it had criticized certain aspects of this legislation, particularly the provisions for preventive detention for one year and the restrictions on bail as well as on the rights of freedom of association and expression {Amnesty International Report 1978). It urged the government not to extend this legislation beyond its expiry date in May 1979. Its provisions have been applied to members of the Tamil minority who were campaigning for the establishment of a separate state for the Tamil-speaking northern part of Sri Lanka. Eleven young members of The Tamil minority had been arrested in September 1978 and later charged with committing or conspiring to commit an offence und^r section 120 of the Penal Code, an offence for which they were denied bail under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure (Special Provisions) Law. Section 120 of the Penal Code deals with "exciting disaffection to the government" and "raising discontent and disaffection among subjects", and denying bail to persons charged with committing such offences could facilitate imprisonment for the exercise of the right of freedom of expression. The 11 Tamils were arrested for distributing leaflets which requested students to boycott the promulgation of the constitution on 7 September 1978. Three were released without charge, eight of them remain imprisoned awaiting trial. They have been adopted as prisoners of conscience.
