Haiti (the Republic of)
During the year, the political structure of Haiti has undergone no significant change under the autocratic rule of President Jean Claude Duvalier. In parliamentary elections held on 11 February 1979, only one of the 300 candidates declared his opposition to the Duvalier regime. Alesandre Lerouge, a former deputy customs chief in the town of Cap-Hatien, ran under the banner of human rights and defeated a government minister, getting 90 per cent of the vote. In other parts of the country, foreign journalists reported instances of electoral fraud and the widespread arrest and ill-treatment by police and the security militia of demonstrators protesting against the outcome of the elections.
On 7 February 1979, Joseph Maxi, a lawyer and founder member of the Haitian Human Rights League estabhshed in March 1978, was detained by three armed civilians and accused of failing to tell the authorities of his supposed knowledge of a plot against the government. On 26 March 1979, he was released without being charged. Also arrested at the time were Ulrich Desire, Emmanuel Noel, Robert Marc Thelusma and Gustav Colas. They have all been charged as instigators of a plot against the security of the state and may face trial before the Tribunal de Sécurité, a civilian court established in August 1977 to ensure that defendants on security charges are tried without undue delay and with legal safeguards.
On 22 February 1979, Sylvio Claude, a businessman in Mirebalais who had been denied the right to run as an independent candidate in the pariiamentary elections, and a friend, Edouard Benjamin, were detained by a group of Tontons Macoutes at Sylvio Claude's home. According to eyewitness reports, they were both handcuffed and severely beaten while being taken from the house. At the time of writing their whereabouts were not known and no charges had been brought against them. Amnesty International is investigating their cases.
In the past year, there has been no reduction in the security militia, the National Security Volunteers, the Tontons Macoutes or the President's security corps, the Leopards, who have been responsible for illegal arrests, ill-treatment and other breaches of constitutional guarantees. Furthermore, the loi anticommuniste, adopted on 28 April 1969, is still in force, and provides that persons found to have made "any declaration of belief in communism verbal or written, public or private", or propagated "communist or anarchist doctrines by con-
67
ferences, speeches, conversations ... by leaflets, posters, newspapers" will be charged with crimes against the state, tried in a military court and if convicted mandatorily "punished by death penalty".
Amnesty International remains concerned about the fate of over 100 prisoners alleged by former prisoners to have died in Fort Dimanche Prison before the release of 104 political prisoners on 21 September 1977. At that time, the President stated that "there were no more political prisoners in Haiti" and issued a decree whereby the authorities could examine the cases of prisoners whose fate after arrest had remained unknown since as far back as the early 1960s, and, following investigation, issue death certificates to enable families to solve legal and financial problems. It is unknown if any investigations have been carried out by the authorities. It is reported that no family has been issued with a death certificate.
In December 1978 Amnesty International was told by a former prisoner released during the amnesty of September 1977, that he witnessed the execution on 5 September 1977 of nine prisoners held in Fort Dimanche Prison. Reportedly, on 5 September the prisoners at Fort Dimanche Prison were divided into two groups. One group of nine was shot later that day, among them Amnesty International adoptees Rochambeau Nestor and Luc Deselmours, and the others were transferred and released on 21 September 1977. According to other former prisoners, executions in the prison had also taken place in 1964 and 1976.
In August 1978 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States sent a delegation "to study the observance of human rights" in Haiti. Its report had not been published at the time of writing.
In July 1978, the United States federal authorities instituted a large-scale programme of deportation and exclusion hearings in the state of Florida for some 8,000 Haitians who had not been legally admitted into the United States. In August 1978, Amnesty International raised with the United States government its concern that owing to the rate at which individual cases were being examined by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, sometimes more than 100 cases a day, due process safeguards were being violated. Despite the assurance given by the Haitian government to the United States government on 15 February 1977 that "citizens returning to Haiti will not be prosecuted or detained for illegal departure", Amnesty International has, since August 1978, received reports of the short-term detention and ill-treatment and imprisonment of those returning and of those attempting to leave Haiti illegally, as well as reports that the lives of those who have left have been threatened and that their relatives have been harassed by Haitian police, members of the National Security Volunteers and the Tontons Macoutes.
