Mauritania (the Islamic Republic of)
Political events have continued to be largely determined by the conflict over the former Spanish Sahara, annexed jointly by Morocco and Mauritania in late 1975. The Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguia el Hamra y Rio de Oro (POLISARIO) has been fighting an increasingly successful guerrilla war for the independence of the territory, of which Mauritania occupies the southern-most province of Tiris el Gharbia. The cost of the war in human and financial resources led to strong disagreements among civilian and military leaders about its usefulness.
26
On 10 July 1978, a military coup d'état led by Lieutenant-Colonel Mustapha Ould Salek overthrew President Moktar Ould Daddah's government and installed the Military Committee for National Recovery (MCNR) which promised to take Mauritania out of the war.
President Ould Daddah and his ministers were placed under house arrest, but some were soon released. President Ould Salek announced in September 1978 that a special court had been established to try members of the former regime. However, in April 1979, all the imprisoned former ministers were reportedly released, and there were suggestions that Ould Daddah would soon be freed.
Relations between the government and POLISARIO improved after the July coup. In October 1978, POLISARIO freed 150 prisoners of war, and in December the government reciprocated by releasing approximately 100 captured civilian and military members of POLISARIO.
In early 1979, MCNR ordered the arrest of a number of so-called troublemakers following a strike on 2 February 1979 by black teachers against measures to strengthen the "arabization" programme in schools, interpreted by them as discrimination against the black community by the Arab-Berber (or Maure) community which has held a large measure of political power since independence in 1960. Tension increased again in March 1979 when 10 black civil servants were arrested for allegedly distributing tracts hostile to the government. After protests in Nouakchott, the capital, they were released a week later.
On 22 March 1979, President Ould Salek made significant changes in his government, removing three prominent ministers who allegedly held views favourable to a rapid negotiated settlement with POLISARIO. However, on 6 April 1979, President Ould Salek's regime was openly challenged by reportedly pro-Western officers, the MCNR was replaced by the Military Committee for National Salvation (CMSN) and Colonel Ould Bouceif assumed supreme executive powers. A curfew was imposed on the capital, and it was reported that the new military council had banned all political activity.
Mauritius
Several leading members of the radical opposition Mouvement Militant Mauricien (MMM), including nine members of parliament and the mayor of the capital. Port Louis, were arrested in June 1978 during a peaceful demonstration against increased transport fares. They were charged under the Public Order Act and sentenced on 21 July 1978 to 3 months' imprisonment for obstruction. They went on hunger strike in protest against their treatment. Amnesty International requested information and then on 3 August 1978 made representations on their behalf to Prime Minister Sir Seewosagur Ramgoolam. The next day all 14 prisoners were freed conditionally in a special clemency measure.
