Paraguay (the Republic of)
In August 1978, General Alfredo Stroessner took office for his fifth presidential term following the February elections, which were won by the Colorado Party and largely boycotted by the opposition parties. The state of siege, which had been in force throughout General Stroessner's 25 years of autocratic rule and renewed as a matter of routine every three months, to be lifted only on election days, was lifted in three departamentos in May 1978. This provision, which has been used to keep political suspects in indefinite detention without trial, remains in force in the capital, Asunción. The structures for maintaining strict control of political dissent also remain: a ruling party dominating all aspects of national life, extensive police powers of arrest and interrogation, an organized system of informers, and a judiciary which is not independent. Yet the past year showed a more positive balance in the field of human rights than in any year since Amnesty International began work on Paraguay in the early 1960s.
The release of prisoners continued, the vast majority from long-term detention
71
without trial, and until April 1979 Amnesty International received few allegations of severe torture. On 10 December 1978, the Paraguayan Commission on Human Rights was able to organize the first congress on human rights ever to take place in that country. A representative of Amnesty Internation^ and members of the diplomatic community attended as observers and the congress received considerable publicity.
However, longstanding serious human rights problems remain. Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners in long-term detention without trial. The prisoners themselves went on hunger strike in June 1978 and, again when the government failed to keep its promise to release them, in August to October 1978. During the year Amnesty International's adoptees, 56-year-old Anastasia Idolina Gaona (a prisoner since 1965) and agricultural worker Calixto Ramirez Sánchez (a prisoner since 1964) were released with 93 other pohtical detainees. Virgilio Barreiro and Severo Acosta Aranda, both held since 1964, were still detained, as were five other pohtical prisoners held under the political Code Law 209 (In Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons), which prescribes 1 to 6 years' imprisonment for publicly inciting "hatred between Paraguayans and destruction of the social classes".
Apart from demanding their own trial or release, the hunger strikers had requested official clarification of the fate of those people who had "disappeared" after their arrest. In the past year, the authorities have persisted in their refusal to give the families information on the cases publicized in Amnesty International's Deaths under Torture and Disappearances of Political Prisoners in Paraguay (1977). Peasant, farmer Doroteo Grandel, whose case was featured in that leaflet and who was adopted, was released in July 1978 from the military barracks where he had been held for over two years without trial. At the end of August 1978 he was killed by two unknown assailants whom to date the poHce have been unable, or allegedly unwilling, to find.
Amnesty International organized an urgent action on behalf of one disappeared person, and two urgent actions at the time of two hunger strikes, one in June 1978 of 16 prisoners and the other in August 1978 of 17 prisoners. In July 1978, it launched an appeal calling on the President to grant a general amnesty to all political prisoners at his inauguration on 15 August. The appeal was renewed in December 1978.
In April 1979, Amnesty International received information that 13 new prisoners were held in secret detention and that several of them had been tortured; that three other persons, a trade-union leader and two young women, had been arrested on their return from Argentina and subsequently disappeared; and that two persons, whose names are not known, had died as a result of torture in the notorious torture centre for political prisoners — Departamen to de Investigaciones— on 15 February and 1 March 1979. Amnesty International urged the authorities to bring those detained to trial or release them, and to guarantee their physical integrity.
The political prison camp of Emboscada is no longer in use. The remaining prisoners have been transferred to various police stations in Asunción, where political prisoners have traditionally been held in Paraguay.
In July 1978 Amnesty International issued a press statement calling for the release of Dr Domingo Laino, a former parliamentary deputy for the Authentic
72
Liberal Radical Party, who participated in the Amnesty International Death Penalty Conference in 1977. A few days after his return from a visit to the United States, he was dragged from his car in the centre of Asunción and held for over a month in the Departamento de Investigaciones. In March 1979, a new case was being mounted against Dr Laino and the president and founder of the Paraguayan Human Rights Commission, former deputy Carmen de Lara Castro. The case involved three former Amnesty International adoptees, peasant leader Constantino Coronel and two members of the Ecumenical Church Committee which provides assistance to prisoners and their families. This attempt to bring charges against defenders of human rights may indicate a new phase in the repression of political dissent.
In June 1978, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) presented a critical report on the human rights situation in Paraguay to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States (OAS). The report, which in part was based on information submitted by Amnesty International, was adopted with only one vote against (Paraguay). The government agreed in principle to receive an lACHR delegation for an investigation on the spot, but they will give no definite invitation. The Amnesty International delegation which attended the OAS Assembly in Washington raised its concerns with the Foreign Minister, Dr Alberto Nogues, and his delegation, stressing in particular the plight of the prisoners who had remained in detention without trial for up to 14 years.
Peru
In March 1979, Amnesty International published a Peru Briefing Paper that outlined its concerns: periodic large-scale, short-term arrests of trade-unionists, political activists and community leaders of the "pueblos jóvenes" (the poor neighbourhoods surrounding the coastal cities); the taking over of the administration of justice by the army so that civilians are, as a matter of routine, brought before military courts for a broad range of offences; the ineffectiveness of habeas corpus and the lack of appeal to civilian courts; consistent allegations of severe maltreatment during interrogation against peasant communities by members of the investigative police and of harsh measures taken by the Batallón Sinchi, a special assault unit of the Guardia Civil.
One month after elections for a Constituent Assembly, a law of general amnesty was promulgated on 18 July 1978, ordering the release of all prisoners charged with or convicted of "political-social" crimes.
During July 1978, Amnesty International intervened on behalf of workers, teachers, students and shanty-town dwellers jailed after a 48-hour general strike in May; there were up to 6,000 arrests. In similar periods of social unrest marked by large street demonstrations and nationwide strikes in January 1976, July 1976 and July 1977 there had been between 2,000 and 6,000 detentions.
The military regime once again suspended constitutional guarantees and declared a state of siege in order to put down a general strike planned for 9 to 11 January 1979. Emergency measures included the arrest by the military of nearly 800 people in Lima alone, mainly trade-union leaders (some 60 of whom were held under preventive detention five days before the strike was due to commence), and members of the political opposition who supported the strike.
13>
Before the attempted general strike, there was sustained protest against amendments made to the Code of Military Justice by Decree 22339 of 15 November 1978. Articles 101, 103, 332, 757 and 759 were amended to extend the extraordinary powers of military courts over the civilian population in time of peace for non-military offences. Despite its condemnation by leading jurists and members of the Constituent Assembly, the military government persisted in making use of this decree against the opposition and protesters.
Action against trade-union leaders included the temporary detention of former Amnesty International prisoner of conscience, Victor Cuadros, Secretary General of the 40,000-strong National Federation of Miners and Metal Workers and member of the Constituent Assembly. He was detained during the prolonged miners' strike in March 1979 at Peru's biggest copper mines at Cuajone and Toquepala and the nearby Ilo copper smelter plant. More than 100 miners were arrested as the military regime placed the southern provinces of Tacna and Moquegua under a state of emergency. The United States owned Southern Peru Copper Corporation reportedly dismissed 55 union leaders.
In the same period in lima, a number of hunger strikes were organized by former political prisoners in sympathy with political detainees, in particular Zanabría and Arizapana, and by journalists who protested against the closure of 10 publications since January 1979.
Amnesty International intervened on behalf of 57 workers detained in the El Potao barracks in Lima following an incident at the Cromotex factory. On 4 February 1979, a police contingent in armoured personnel carriers reportedly arrived at the Cromotex factory to eject the workers. In the conflict, a police captain and four workers were killed, a number of workers were seriously injured and 57 workers detained.
Among the cases of human rights violations in the rural areas were two serious allegations from the peasant communities of Bagua Chica in the province of Cajamarca and by the peasant co-operatives of Yapatera and Talandraca in Alto Piura.
On 5 December 1978, at 7.30 a.m., some 150 heavily armed members of the special assault unit of the Guardia Civil arrived, together with the three landlords whose 120 hectares of land were expropriated in 1975 under the Agrarian Reform Law. The peasants tried to show them the papers which proved that the land had been allocated to them but the armed guards opened fire on the crowd, threw in tear gas and beat up some of the leaders. One person, Teodoro Pérez Pasapera, a community leader, was killed. A woman who was six months'pregnant was kicked in the stomach and lost her baby; her eight-month-old baby was asphyxiated by the tear gas and died. More than 50 people were detained, 12 of whom had bullet wounds.
On 6 February 1979, some 350 members of the Guardia Civil, the police and the army violently evicted members of the peasant co-operatives in Yapatera and Talandraca in Alto Piura. A peasant, Einer Jara Rufino, was killed, 20 people were seriously injured and 58 were detained and accused of "attack against the armed forces" and "sabotage of the Agrarian Reform Law".
In a case which has dragged on for more than two years. Amnesty International appealed for clemency on humanitarian grounds on behalf of Daniel Raimundo Zanabría, a 27-year-old former university student and agricultural community
74
leader, and Justo Arizapana, 21 -year-old son of peasant farmers, who were arrested in 1976, and were charged with killing a policeman. The defence claims that the death was an accident and that there were political aspects to the case.
In an unprecedented trial in Peru, six alleged torturers were charged before the Fifth Correctional Tribunal in Lima with the torture and murder of Fernando Lozano Menfendez, a 22-year-old law student at the Catholic University who was detained by the Guardia Civil on 26 November 1976 and died the next day; in 1976, Amnesty International had asked for a high-level investigation into his death under police custody. Zoila Pereira Guzman, Lozano's grandmother, pressed the case before the Peruvian courts and her campaign for the torture trial has generated much public support.
