Spain (the Spanish State)
This year witnessed the final transitional stages in the programme of constitutional and judicial reform initiated by the administration of Sr Adolfo Suarez. The most notable achievement was a new constitution to replace the Fundamental Laws of General Franco. The text was approved by both houses of the Cortes (parliament) on 31 October 1978 after several months of debate, and endorsed in a referendum on 6 December 1978. It came into force on 28 December 1978.
The new constitution abolished the death penalty, except under military law in time of war, and forbade the use of torture or inhuman and degrading punishments. Habeas corpus was introduced and the period of preventive detention limited to 72 hours. The right of association and the right to strike were also recognized.
The armed conflict between extremist groups of the left and right and the forces of public order continued, especially in the Basque country. In the period covered by this report there were more than 80 assassinations, mostly of police or army officers. To combat this violence the government has introduced laws which may serve to erode the civil and human rights guaranteed by the new constitution.
Decree-law 21/1978 of 30 June 1978 on crimes committed by armed groups reduces the guarantees of article 17(2) of the constitution under which all detainees must either be brought before the judicial authorities or released within 72 hours of arrest, and of article 17(3) which guarantees access to a lawyer. According to article 55(1) of the constitution this latter right cannot be removed even in a state of exception. Decree-law 21/1978, however, permits the authorities to hold a suspect for as long as necessary to complete their investigations, provided the suspect is brought before a judge within 72 hours of his arrest.
This procedure was modified by a new law, 56/1978 of 4 December 1978, whereby the suspect has to be brought before a judge within 72 hours, but the judge can order a further period of 7 days' detention. Furthermore, under article 2 of this law the judge can order a period of incommunicado detention for as long as he considers necessary to complete the investigation. This law states that the exercise of these powers must not prejudice the right of defence, but there have been persistent allegations that judges are interpreting the right of defence in such a way as to hinder lawyers visiting those arrested under this law. Cases brought under this law must be tried by i\\tAudiencia Nacional.
Law 56/1978 restricted itself to dealing with acts which could be classed as terrorist, but a new decree-law, 3/1979 of 26 January 1979 on the protection of the security of the citizen, extended the range of special laws. The most important part provides that to defend publicly by oral, written or any other means the conduct or activities of any person who is a member of an armed group or associated with such a group is a crime punishable by imprisonment. The examining magistrate has the power to order the unconditional provisional detention of suspects.
141
The interpretation of these laws to restrict a prisoner's right of access to a lawyer was in Amnesty International's view a major factor in the sudden increase in allegations of torture by political detainees. Predominantly these came from Basques accused of belonging to ETA (Euzkadi Ta Askatasuna - Basque homeland and Liberty). However the allegations were not confined to this group or to any one geographical area. However every allegation of torture came from someone arrested under the anti-terrorist laws and held without access to a lawyer.
The brothers Emilio and Julio Gines, members of the Basque coalition, Herri Batasuna, were arrested on I February Í979 in Madrid. Their lawyer, Sr Jaime Miralles, reported that they were hanged upside down from an iron bar and beaten all over their bodies. Medical examination confirmed this. When Sr Miralles argued that this information should be included in the dossier, the judge had him put in a cell for a period of one and a quarter hours. No charges were brought against the Gines brothers.
Charges of torture were also brought against the police by five suspected members of ETA Militar detained on 9 February 1979 in Guipúzcoa. They were held for 10 days without access to lawyers in a Comisaría in San Sebastián. They allege attempted hangings, threats with guns and blows on the ear-drums, testicles, feet and buttocks.
In February 1979, after the French government announced the withdrawal of the status of political refugees for Spanish citizens, seven Basques were sent back to Spain. All were immediately detained under the anti-terrorist laws and interrogated in Pamplona. Two were transferred to Carabanchel Prison in Madrid and have alleged ill-treatment. A fourth case is that of José Manuel Grifoll Sentis, detained in February 1979 under the anti-terrorist laws and accused of being a member oí tht Partido Comunista Español (I). In March 1979, he brought charges against the Barcelona police, alleging that while in custody he had been hung from a bar and then lashed to a chair wl^e police officers periodically cut off his supply of air to produce the sensation oí asphyxia.
In each of these incidents the prisoner was held by the police under anti-terrorist laws without access to a lawyer.
Four members of the Els Joglars mime troupe sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment on 6 March 1978 under the Code of Military Justice on charges of insulting the military were pardoned after completing a year of their sentences (Amnesty International Report 1978). However, the director of the troupe, Albert Boadella, who had escaped from detention to avoid trial in February 1978, was arrested on 22 March 1979 following his return to Spain. It is not known whether Sr Boadella will now face trial — either military or civil. Amnesty International cabled Prime Minister Adolfo Suàrez on 27 March 1979 requesting his assurance that Sr Boadella's rights under the new constitution would be respected.
The government has yet to introduce a new law on conscientious objection. There was only one trial (in February 1979) under the old law. The military authorities were ordered to offer deferments to recruits claiming the status of conscientious objectors. Article 30 of the new constitution foreshadows the introduction of a form of alternative service.
