Mali (the Republic of)
The most noteworthy political events in the past year in Mali were the trials in October 1978 and February 1979 of leading members of the ruling Comité Militaire de Libération Nationale (CMLN) who had been arrested in February and March 1978 for state security offences and corruption.
On 21 October 1978, a special state security court sentenced to death two former members of the CMLN, Lieutenant-Colonel Kissima Doukara, (Minister for Defence, Interior and Security) and Lieutenant-Colonel Tiécoro Bagayoko (Director of the Security Services) for plotting a coup d'état and revealing state secrets. Two others who were tried with them — former Transport and Public Works Minister, Karim Dembele, and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Charles Samba Cissoko - were sentenced to 20 years' and 5 years' hard labour respectively; 14 people were acquitted and 23 others received sentences ranging from 15 years' hard labour to 6 months' imprisonment. Amnesty International appealed to President Traoré to exercise clemency for the two prisoners condemned to death.
In December 1978, a national commission of inquiry was instituted into corrupt financial operations of the officers arrested in March 1978 and of one civilian, as a prelude to a second trial for "economic crimes against the state". On 2 January 1979 the Chairman of the commission. Colonel Joseph Mara, a former Minister of Justice, was arrested for corruption and receipt of bribes in the course of his duties on the commission.
On 9 March 1979, in Timbuctoo, the state security court sentenced Kissima Doukara to death for financial corruption, applying "special legislation for the repression of economic crimes". Karim Dembele and Tiécoro Bagayoko received sentences of 10 years' hard labour and 5 years' imprisonment respectively. Joseph Mara was sentenced to 20 years' hard labour. Four others were acquitted. It is unclear whether or not the sentences passed are additional to those imposed in October. At the time of writing no executions had been carried out.
Amnesty International has one prisoner under investigation, Captain Malick Diallo, a former member of the CMLN, sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labour in 1973.
