Bolivia
During the year Bolivia had two coups: General Pereda, who led the first in July
1978,	was ousted by General Padilla in November 1978. General Padilla has promised to restore democracy and elections are due to be held in the summer of
1979.
Since a general amnesty was declared by the government of General Banzer in January 1978, there have been few pohtical arrests and Amnesty International has not taken up any cases of political prisoners. In October 1978 several prisoners were arrested and accused of plotting a coup against President Pereda. They were all released one month later after the bloodless coup of General Padilla. Since then, no further political arrests have been reported.
In August 1978, President Pereda took the welcome step of repeahng the severe law on security of the state which formerly allowed the government to suspend constitutional guarantees, including habeas corpus.
Although the death penalty is still in force it has not been imposed recently. The newspaper Ultima Hora on 3 March 1979 reported that the last seven people sentenced to death had had their sentences commuted to 30 years' imprisonment. Victor Callisaya Calle, who was sentenced to death for murder in La Paz in 1975, was reprieved by President Padilla in March 1979.
Amnesty International continues to receive reports of excessive violence by the authorities against criminal suspects, particularly in the rural mining areas which are still under military control. In December 1978 soldiers occupied Villa Anta in the province of Pacajes in the department of La Paz and inflicted brutal physical punishment on a number of adults and adolescents. Fifteen people were arrested but were released soon afterwards.
On 5 April 1979 the military junta approved a drastic decree "aimed at defending the process of democratization". In response to a wave of strikes and stoppages the junta declared that all forms of "obstruction of orders in violation of legal procedures" would in future be regarded as directed against social peace and Bolivia's economy, and that workers and employers who failed to comply with
51
official rulings on the settlement of conflicts would be charged with contempt. Brazil (the Federative Republic of)
Amnesty International's main concerns were political arrests and detentions, kidnapping and torture and the implementation of existing legislation, particularly in political cases.
Despite increasing pressure for a return to democracy, the military, who have been in power since 1964, still retain effective control. In April 1978 the then president, Ernesto Geisel, introduced a package of so-called reforms, known as the pacote de abril, after he had closed Congress by a special presidential decree. There are now no direct elections for state governors; there is a government majority in the Senate guaranteed by appointed senators; and constitutional amendments can now be decided by a simple majority instead of the two-thirds previously required.
In late 1978, the Institutional and Complementary Acts were annulled, which reduced the discretionary powers of the President. Because of the abohtion of Institutional Act no 5 the President can no longer close Congress or withdraw parliamentary mandates (cassar) and suspend political rights; furthermore habeas corpus for political prisoners has been re-established. However, the Institutional Acts have been replaced by salvaguardas (safeguards) which permit the President to introduce a state of emergency without consulting Congress. The emergency measures give the President powers similar to those under a state of siege, which cannot be declared without the approval of Congress.
A new law of National Security came into effect on 1 January 1979, which abolished the death penalty, life imprisonment and banishment. The period during which a prisoner may be held incommunicado during police inquiries has been reduced from 10 to 8 days. Lawyers expressed concern that it is now possible for the detention to be communicated only secretly to a judge which, in effect, denies the prisoner full legal guarantees. The new Law of National Security should in general reduce the penalties for "crimes of subversion" but it may increase the number of convictions, because in the past judges preferred to acquit defendants rather than sentence them to lengthy terms of imprisonment.
General Rodrigo Octavio Jordao, a former member of the Superior Military Tribunal (a court of appeal), has criticized the theory underlying the new law: "It is necessary to put an end once and for all to the kind of harmful paranoia about permanent subversion which justifies a pohcy which is permanently arbitrary" {Jornalde Brasil, 26 October 1978).
There are about 70 political prisoners in Brazil. During the year there were approximately 100 releases. Amnesty International is working for 50 political prisoners, more than half of which are adopted as prisoners of conscience. Many recent releases were of prisoners convicted of participation in the "luta armada" (armed struggle) of the past decade and whose sentences were reduced following the reforms. For example, Jessie Jane Vieira was released in February 1979 from the Talavera Bruce Prison in Rio de Janeiro. She was arrested in 1970 after attempting to hijack an aeroplane and was tortured. At her trial in 1971 she was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment.
Not all military courts will co-operate. The military judge in Recife, for example, stated {Veja, 15 February 1979) that he would refuse all requests to reduce the
52
sentences of any of the remaining 16 political prisoners in the local penitentiary of Itamaraca.
There were some political arrests. In August 1978, 22 members of the Convergencia Socialista, a legal movement pressing for the formation of a socialist party, were arrested in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. Four students were arrested at the same time in Brasilia and, according to reliable information, tortured. By December 1978 all had been released pending trial.
Many exiles or banidos (banished persons) have been arrested on their return. The decree of banishment was imposed on 128 political prisoners who were released in exchange for hostages between 1969 and 1971. This decree has now been revoked. Most of the detentions have been short, for interrogation. Some exiles will have to face trial or complete a prison sentence. Ricardo Zaratini Filho, a banido who was living clandestinely in Brazil, was arrested on- 31 May 1978 in Sao Paulo. Zaratini was the first banido to benefit from a special decree revoking his banishment. He was however, tortured while in the Comando de defensa Interna - Departamento de Operacòes Integrados (DOI/CODI), the joint military and political poHce unit in Sao Paulo. He has been sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment and is currently awaiting the outcome of another trial.
Lucio Flavio Uchoa Regueira was the first banido to return to Brazil after the abolition of banishment in January 1979; he was detained for two weeks and was then released to await trial on charges pending since 1971.
There has also been an increase in labour unrest and trade-union militancy which, in the first few months of 1979, resulted in major strikes. Some of the strikes were declared illegal and about 30 trade-union leaders were detained briefly.
Despite assurances from the government that torture has been stopped. Amnesty International received substantiated and serious allegations of torture. One of the worst concerned Edival Nunes da Silva (nicknamed Caja), who was detained without warrant on 12 May 1978 in Recife by a group of armed men. He was taken to the headquarters of the federal police, held incommunicado for one month, and subjected to electric shock torture, enforced standing and beatings. Amnesty International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience when, only 10 days after he had been released, he was re-arrested. He is now being held apart from other political prisoners in a military barracks in Recife. He is accused of membership of an illegal organization.
In December 1978, Amnesty International launched an Urgent Action after learning about the abduction in Porto Alegre, a city in the south of Brazil, of a group of four Uruguayans, two adults — Universindo Rodriguez Diaz and Lilian Celiberti de Casariego — and Lilian's two small children, Camilo and Francesca. The kidnapping occurred on 12 November 1978. At the end of November the children were handed over to their grandparents in Montevideo (Uruguay). The Uruguayan authorities acknowledged that the two adults were being held incommunicado in detention and they claimed that the arrests had taken place on the border. From evidence obtained from eyewitnesses, the couple were arrested in Porto Alegre by Brazilian police who were working apparently in collaboration with Uruguayan security forces. In January 1979, after international protests, two Brazilian policemen were suspended and an inquiry initiated by the local authorities.
There is still no news concerning the whereabouts of the Argentinian Norberto Habbeger, who disappeared while travelling through Brazil in August 1978. The
53
disappearances and kidnappings have led to increased concern about the safety of Latin American exiles living in Brazil. They have also demonstrated that legal procedures and guarantees are still not respected by Brazilian law-enforcement bodies.
In 1978, Amnesty International sent an observer to Rio de Janeiro to the trial of a group of 17 persons who had been accused of membership of an illegal organization, the Movimento pela Emancipaçâo do Proletariado, for propagating subversive material. The evidence was based on confessions extracted under torture and the prosecution's case contained many irregularities. Nevertheless, 10 of the defendants were given sentences of 2 to 3 years' imprisonment. In February 1979, the 10 were released to await the result of their appeal.
Antonio Carlos Ferreira, the editor of the left-wing paper Movimento, was indicted in October 1978 under the Law of National Security for "publishing false and tendentious information in order to turn people against the authorities and to divide the armed forces". He faces a 3-year sentence. In theory all censorship of printed matter has been lifted.
Amnesty International continues to press the government for information about more than 60 persons arrested or abducted between 1969 and 1975 who are still unaccounted for and, in a letter to the new President on the eve of his inauguration, called upon the new government to initiate a full and independent inquiry into the disappearances.
On 15 March 1979, Joao Baptista de Oliveira Figueiredo became the fifth general to rule as President since the military coup of 1964. Despite pressure, mainly from the popular ComitéBrasileiro pela Anisti'a, he did not grant a general amnesty.
