Korea (Democratic People's Republic of) [North Korea]
The only information available to Amnesty International regarding prisoner-related human rights in North Korea concerns protections guaranteed by the 1972 constitution and elaborated in legal codes regulating the details of court organization, criminal procedure, substantive criminal law and the role of lawyers. The 1972 constitution enumerates many basic political, social and economic rights of
96
citizens, including freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly and association. It protects citizens against arbitrary arrest and entitles them to file complaints and submit petitions to the government. The constitution also prescribes certain safeguards for criminal accused. Trials (conducted by a tribunal consisting of one professional judge together with two lay "people's assessors") are generally to be held in public and the accused is guaranteed the right to make a defence. The responsibility of protecting the rights set out in the constitution rests with the courts and a hierarchy of procurators.
While the provisions of the constitution are wide ranging, their effectiveness cannot be substantiated by the information available. Nor can Amnesty International substantiate that the protections guaranteed by the constitution apply to persons accused of political offences. In administering justice, the courts are required by the constitution to act independently of political authority and in strict accordance with the law. In practice, they are not in a position to act independently. This is clearly indicated in a speech made by Marshal (now President) Kim II Sung at a national conference of judicial and procuratorial workers held on 28 April 1958, he said: "the law of our country is an important weapon for implementing the policies of our state. The policies of our state are the policies of our Party. . . Our judicial functionaries are pohtical workers who implement the policies of our Party and all the policies of our state. Law cannot exist by itself without definite basis. Being a reflection of policies, law must be subordinated to policies and must not be divorced from them."
An official indication of the existence of political prisoners in North Korea is contained in a rare announcement by the government stating that it had granted amnesty to an unspecified number of prisoners on 19 July 1978 to mark the 30th National Day. The North Korean Central News Agency reported that the government had decided "to give an opportunity to those who committed crimes against the state and the people to return to the great revolutionary ranks led by (the) Party". There was no indication of their identity or number.
The total number of political prisoners in North Korea is not known. The only cases available to Amnesty International over the past years have been those of two foreigners subjected to political imprisonment from 1967 to 1974. Both were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience and were the subject of international campaigns. Amnesty International prepared for publication in summer 1979 the pereonal account of one of the two prisoners of conscience, the Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda.
In 1966, Ali Lameda had gone to Pyongyang at the invitation of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to work in the Spanish section of the Department of Foreign Publications, which was run by the North Korean Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In that capacity, he met President Kim II Sung and government ministers. But in September 1967, against a background of political upheaval within the North Korean leadership, Ali Lameda was arrested and interrogated. He was imprisoned for 12 months without trial. Following his release he was placed under house arrest, but shortly afterwards he was arrested again and brought to trial. He was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment with forced labour for allegedly having attempted to commit sabotage, to spy and introduce infiltrators while in North Korea, charges for which no evidence was produced.
Sr Lameda was held in Suriwon prison camp, where he was kept in a punish-
97
ment cell apart from other prisoners. However, from brief conversations with prison orderlies and others, Sr Lameda was able to acquire details about the camp and its inmates and the conditions under which they were imprisoned. Ali Lameda was eventually released in 1974 after serving more than 6 years in solitary confinement. He has since returned to Venezuela. His account includes a description of his friend and colleague at the Department of Foreign Publications, the Frefichman Jacques Sedillot, who was arrested at the same time as Sr Lameda and who died in North Korea shortly after his release from prison.
Ali Lameda's account of his experiences and observations in the prison camp is the first such information to be pubhshed concerning political imprisonment in North Korea. Amnesty International has commented in its reports over a number of years that it had encountered great difficulties in obtaining information relating to human rights in that country. The organization has also tried to obtain permission to visit Pyongyang to speak to the government, but has received no response.
