Colombia
Massive political arrests, allegations of torture, reports of extrajudicial killings, persecution of Indian peasants and controversy generated by a new security statute were constant themes in denunciations received by Amnesty International during yet another year under the state of siege, which has been in force with short exceptions since 1948.
Provided by article 121 of the constitution to cope with wartime conditions or serious internal unrest, the state of siege has become permanent. Justice José María Velasco Guerrero of Colombia's Supreme Court, one of several judges who gave dissenting opinions against the constitutionality of the security statute, stated: "A state of siege prolonged for more than 30 years is a frank manifestation that the institutional hfe of the republic is coming to an end."
The state of siege was initially promulgated during the period known as "La Violencia", a virtual civil war between adherents of Colombia's traditional parties, the Conservatives and the Liberals, which claimed the lives of 300,000 people between 1946 and 1958. After a brief mihtary regime under General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla (1953-57), both Conservatives and Liberals agreed on a political formula whereby they could officially alternate in power and share bureaucratic posts in an agreement known as the Frente Nacional (National Front) that was in force from 1958 to 1978.
On 14 September 1977, a general strike (paro civico nacional) paralyzed the country as the four major trade unions, poHtical parties and popular organizations protested against the rising cost of living. Thirty-seven deaths and the arrest of up to 1,000 trade unionists marked this event. On 6 September 1978, a few days before the first anniversary of the general strike, a new security statute (Decreto 1923, Estatuto de Seguridad) was proclaimed. It was one of the first steps taken by the new administration of President Julio César Turbay Ayala, who won power in elections characterized by a 68 per cent abstention.
Articles 11 and 12 of the security statute eliminate appeals, give the judicial process to the soldiers and make it difficult for civiUan lawyers to act for detainees. Articles 4 and 7 severely penalize and curtail pubhc protests or petitions which "intend to put pressure.on decisions of public authority".
There was widespread protest. The Firmes movement (a broadly based popular political front) noted that "the security statute confirms the fears of the people that the state of seige has not only been prolonged indefinitely but confirmed definitively".
From January to March 1979, Amnesty International received reports of human rights violations: massive poUtical arrests, including arbitrary detention of entire famihes, allegations of torture, difficulties created for lawyers of political prisoners, violations of the Code of Penal Procedure, assassinations of local political leaders and members of peasant and Indian organizations.
An arms robbery from a mihtary armoury in Usaquén, Bogota, during the New Year holidays, for which the guerrilla movement Movimiento 19 de Abril (M-19) claimed credit, was the excuse for massive political arrests that began in January 1979. Arrests were extended to members of legal left-wing opposition groups, progressive Christian leaders, independent academics and joumaUsts, students and slum dwellers, members of co-operatives and the Regional Indian Council of the
57
Cauca (CRIC), and foreign nationals, particularly Argentinian and Uruguayan refugees living in Colombia.
Amnesty International launched a series of urgent action appeals on behalf of those detained, among whom were the sociologist Orlando Fais Borda (eventually released) and his wife, television actor Carlos Duplat, the intellectuals Eduardo Pizarro and Augusto Lara Sanchez, Pedro Mogollón and Manuel and Jesús Pesca of the Jesuit-organized Program of Community Enterprises, five Argentinians and three Uruguayans and six Indian peasant leaders.
Before the security statute, a series of decrees had been issued that widened the powers of the military in the administration of justice: DL 2193 of 1976, which extended the jurisdiction of the Consejos Verbales de Guerra (Oral Councils of War) under the Code of Military Justice; DL 2194 of 1976, which severely limited the right of appeal before higher courts; DL 2195 of 1976, which curtailed public protest; DL 2578 of 1976, which allowed for the arrest of any person on mere suspicion "that he seemed likely to commit an offence"; and DL 0070 of 1978, which exempted members of the police and armed forces from responsibility for homicide resulting from certain military operations. This last decree was criticized as tantamount to a reintroduction of the abolished death penalty and a convenient excuse for extrajudicial killings.
Torture has a long history in Colombia. A well-substantiated document. The Black Book of Repression, published by the Sohdarity Committee for Political Prisoners in 1974, presents a detailed account of torture, assassination and repression from 1958 to 1974.
Allegations of torture were made repeatedly, particularly after the passage of the security statute and the military operations in connection with the arms robbery in January 1979.
On 18 March 1979, Amnesty International issued an urgent action on behalf of six Indian peasant leaders of CRIC: Marcos and Edgar Avirama, President and former secretary. Taurino and Miguel Nuscue, Mario Escue and Laurentino Apusta: all six were first held at the headquarters of the Third Brigade in Cali, where they were allegedly tortured for more than 15 days by electric shocks appUed to the head, legs and genitals; immersion in water and mud; burning of genitals with matches; hanging during whole nights; psychological torture such as threatened killing of families; and food deprivation.
On 2 February 1979, Amnesty International intervened on behalf of Pedro Mogollón and the Pesca brothers. In a statement signed on 24 January 1979 Pedro Mogollón alleged he had been tortured at the Cavalry School of the Military Academy in Bogotá. He was arrested on 8 January 1979 by members of the B-2, brutally beaten, bUndfolded, forced to stand for hours, held incommunicado and not given food for several days. Electric shocks were applied to different parts of his body. The Attorney General's office ordered an investigation into his case a month and a half after the torture allegations were made, and concluded that "no external signs of violence" could be verified from their examinations. In his testimony he concluded : "At this time, the external evidence of physical tortures have practically disappeared. But the psychological torture can never be erased. It remains like a knife thrust in the brain."
Amnesty International has received many more allegations of torture from persons detained since January 1979 and recently protested against the dismissal
58
of the Director of the Medical Institute, Dr Odiho Méndez Sandoval, who concluded that torture had been inflicted on 34 students in October 1978. A congressional committee made an independent inquiry into the torture allegations of the students: "solitary confinement, without food or drink for several days . . . left naked in the courtyard during whole nights and not allowed to sit down, forced to stand up by beating and kicking us in different parts of the body . . . electric shocks". It complained of lack of co-operation from the Attorney General's office and the new Director of the Medical Institute (a part of the Ministry of Justice), Dr Silva Pilonieta, who told the committee that the documents prepared by Dr Méndez proving the existence of torture could not be found.
The Catholic Bishops ofCúcuta and Pereira, Pedro Rubiano and Dario Castrillón, declared that "torture allegations have multiplied and the techniques of torture are being perfected".
As a reaction to mounting national criticism and international pressure. President Turbay affirmed in February 1979 in the province of Girardot: "No one, but absolutely no one in Colombia has been tortured. The authorities of the Republic are not torturing anyone. I have ordered the appropriate investigations and I can affirm that torture allegations are a simple stratagem."
On 23 March 1979, in statements to the press. General Luis Carlos Camacho Leyva, Minister of Defence, stated: "The problem of torture is already out of fashion .... International and national opinion has feverishly discussed torture but it has never been determined exactly what the tortures consist of, who carried them out and when people were tortured."
Political assassinations caused some 35 deaths in 1978. Gunmen reportedly hired by large landowners were responsible for deaths of peasants and members of the rural organization, the National Peasant Union (ANUC). Paramilitary groups and army personnel have also killed trade-unionists, leaders of popular movements and left-wing political opposition groups and student activists. In November 1978, the Alianza Anticommunista Americana (American Anti-communist Alliance) issued death threats against various members of the Supreme Court who gave dissenting opinions against the security statute, against lawyers of political prisoners and against the editor of a progressive weekly. Another group called Escuadrón de la Muerte (Death Squad) emerged in January 1979 threatening lawyers who defended political prisoners and the mass media which published denunciations of human rights violations. CRIC reported that, since its foundation in 1971 to defend the legal rights and the lands of Indian peasants of south-west Colombia, some 45 of their leaders had been killed, including Avelino U1 on 26 November 1978, and Benjamin Dindicué, from Tierradentro, on 4 February 1979.
In an open letter to Attorney General Guillermo Gonzalez Charry, the Association of Democratic Jurists protested against the obstacles put in the way of the defence: restrictions have made it difficult for lawyers to talk to their clients, threats have been made against them by the military commander of the School of Infantry, and a number of the lawyers have been detained. They charged that military justice has reversed the legal process: the accused are presumed guilty until the contrary is proved and their lawyers are not defenders but "accomplices" of the accused.
They also protested against a decree of 11 January 1979 establishing the prison island of Gorgona, known for its terrible living-conditions, as a maximum security
59
penitentiary for political prisoners.
A National Forum on Human Rights was held in March 1979 with the participation of poHtical parties, trade unions, civic movements, peasant and Indian organizations, slum dwellers and professional groups, relatives of political prisoners and CathoHc bishops.
Attention was called to the combination of exceptional measures taken by the government during the year. Together with the state of siege provided for by article 121 of the constitution, the security statute and the decree laws, the government has invoked article 28 of the constitution which empowers it to detain persons for up to 10 days without charge. Amnesty International received allegations that article 28 was applied retroactively and improperly. Not only were persons held incommunicado for more than 10 days without legal guarantees, but often their names did not even appear on the Council of State Ministers' list of persons attempting to disturb the pubhc order, as required by the same article. Human rights groups claim that the army has been authorized to detain anyone on mere suspicion which is contrary to article 28. Furthermore, arrests were made as early as 3 and 4 January 1979, although it was not until 8 January that article 28 was invoked and not until 9 January that the Council of Ministers met to authorize the detentions.
The prolonged state of siege and periodic suspension of guarantees are limited by international covenants. For example, the American Convention on Human Rights (Pact of San José), ratified by Colombia, states in article 27 that even in times of the suspension of guarantees the following basic articles among others remain in force: article 4 (right to life), article 5 (right to humane treatment), article 9 (freedom from ex post facto laws), and "judicial guarantees essential for the protection of such rights". Moreover, when guarantees are suspended other state parties must be informed, reasons for the suspension given, and a date set for the termination of the extraordinary measures.
