Vietnam (the Socialist Republic of)
Amnesty International continued to be concerned that many thousands of people were still held in "re-education" camps more than four years after the fall of the former South Vietnamese regime. As far as is known they have not been charged with any offence. The exact number is unknown and the authorities have given no figure other than that of 50,000 they claimed to be holding in February 1977. Amnesty International believes that the number of pohtical prisoners both in prisons and camps is far higher, although releases are reported from time to time. Estimates by foreign observers and released prisoners have varied considerably over the past two years and included such figures as "50,000 to 80,000" {Le Monde, 19 April 1978), "150,000" {Reuter from Bien Hoa, 2 November 1977), "150,000 to 200,000" {Washington Post, 20 December 1978), and "300,000" {Agence France Presse from Hanoi, 12 February 1978). Some estimates may include not only detainees but also people sent from the cities to the countryside. This may be the case with the figure given by Doan Van Toai, an ex-detainee and former student activist now living in France who was imprisoned by both the previous and present governments, and who has claimed a total figure of 800,000. The government strongly denied these claims and stated that very many of those prisoners still in "re-education" camps are guilty of acts of a criminal nature committed in the war before May 1975. In a public statement in November 1978 on the question of human rights in Vietnam, the Permanent Representative of the Sociahst Republic of Vietnam to the United Nations, Mr Ha Van Lau, stated that the government still had "to decide on the fate of a few tens of thousands of officers. The latter held military or political powers and had given orders leading to bombing of villages, massacres of population and torture of political prisoners". Furthermore, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, replying to articles in the international press alleging that in addition to former functionaries and officers others such as intellectuals and religious figures had been arrested, has argued that they were arrested in connection with "serious attempts against public security".
Amnesty International repeatedly urged the authorities to release all those held without trial in "re-education" camps and prisons, pointing out that the govern-
117
ment had broken its undertaking to release all of them within three years of the end of the war. The government argues that it needs to detain such large numbers because of their past behaviour and the needs of national security. Amnesty International does not accept these arguments as any justification for holding them without charge or trial.
Amnesty International made many appeals and inquiries on behalf of individual prisoners whose cases it took up as prisoners of conscience. These include medical doctors, former civil servants and diplomats, journalists, academics, schoolteachers and writers. It also inquired into the reported detention of people caught while trying to leave the country. Although there appears to be no systematic attempt by the authorities to prevent people from leaving the country by boat, reports reached Amnesty International of people imprisoned for having attempted to do so.
Amongst those prisoners whose cases have been taken up in the last year is Bui Tuong Huan, a former university, professor and Buddhist "Third Force" politician. Arrested in November 1975, Bui Tuong Huan has been held without charge or trial in a detention camp in Thanh Hoa province in northern Vietnam. Another is Ho Huu Tuong, a writer, journalist and former Vice-Rector of Van Hanh University arrested in November 1977. He took a prominent role in the struggle against the French, and was imprisoned for 8 years and sentenced to death by the regime of Ngo Dinh Diem.
No large-scale releases are known to have taken place. On 2 September 1978, Vietnam National Day, the Standing Committee of the Vietnamese Assembly "requested that the Council of Ministers continued to consider the releases of persons rounded up for collective reform who have made real progress". Amnesty International wrote on 25 September 1978 to the authorities, welcoming this decision and asking for further details of its implementation. The letter also asked the government to extend the amnesty to include all untried prisoners remaining in detention. Amnesty International has been informed by the authorities of the releases of Nguyen Van Ai, a former Minister of State and Head of the Pasteur Institute of Saigon; Luong Trong Tuong, a Hoa Hao Leader; Vo Long Te, a former provincial Chief; and Roman Catholic Bishop Nguyen Van Thuan, whose case was reported in ihQ Amnesty International Report 1977.
Amnesty International received few reports of trials. In December 1978 the trial opened of seven Buddhist monks of the An Quang Pagoda, arrested in April 1977 (Aninesty International Reports 1977 and 1978), before the People's Court in Ho Chi Minh City. Five of the monks had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. The defendants were accused of exploiting religion to undermine national security, sabotaging the people's solidarity bloc and working against the revolution. Four of the seven monks were also accused of agitation against the law on military service. The People's Court pronounced Thich Quang Do and Thich Thanh The exempt of punishment. Thich Huyen Quang and Thich Thuyen An were given suspended sentences of 2 years' imprisonment, and Thich Thong Hue 3 years' imprisonment.
Amnesty International was concerned by several reports it received of harsh conditions in "re-education" camps and other detention centres and inadequate medical care. In September 1978 it launched an urgent action in response to reports of the deteriorating health of Thich Huyen Quang, one of the Buddhist
118
monks mentioned above. In October 1978 it learned of the death in prison of another Buddhist monk, the venerable Thich Thien Minh. On 29 November 1978, Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, urging that those who are currently being held in detention without trial for pohtical reasons should be given adequate medical facihties and requesting the authorities to institute a full and open inquiry into the death of Thich Thien Minh. No reply has been received.
Amnesty International noted that in December 1978 the National Assembly Standing Committee approved decrees governing procedures relating to the review of the death sentence, but received no further information.
Europe
Most of Amnesty International's adopted prisoners of conscience in Europe continued to be in the USSR or other countries in Eastern Europe which retain legislation prescribing imprisonment specifically for the exercise of human rights in ways disapproved of by the authorities. In the past year, movements advocating respect for international undertakings about human rights were active in the USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Romania, and in all these countries some of their supporters became prisoners of conscience. Unofficial monitors of governmental implementation of the human rights provisions of the Helsinki Final Act in the USSR and Charter 77 supporters in Czechoslovakia were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment. In Poland and Romania there were persistent complaints that human rights activists were detained for short periods, but in some cases repeatedly, and ill-treated while in police custody.
The USSR continued to imprison religious and nationalist dissenters, would-be emigrants and nonconformist writers for exercising their civil and political rights. Psychiatric abuses were still perpetrated for political motives, in spite of authoritative international condemnation.
As in previous years. Amnesty International produced a large number of new case sheets on prisoners of conscience in the German Democratic Republic (GDR). Many of these people were imprisoned for trying to leave the country without permission or even for seeking permission. Political trials continued to take place in Yugoslavia. In Romania, religious dissenters, would-be emigrants and independent trade-unionists were imprisoned during the past year. An Amnesty International delegation went to Romania to discuss these and other matters with the authorities.
Over the past year Amnesty International distributed material reporting in detail humaii rights violations in the USSR, Czechoslovakia and Romania. Lack of adequate information inhibited Amnesty International from reporting in detail on the serious violations of human rights that it believes are common in Albania.
In Western Europe, imprisoned conscientious objectors to military service remained the only constant source of adoption work. Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience in France, Greece, Italy and Switzerland, imprisoned under legislation that allows some categories of conscientious objectors to be considered for release from obligatory military service if they undertake alternative service but denies that escape to others. Several other countries in Western Europe, and the USSR and all East European countries, retained legislation allowing imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service.
In Turkey, criminal prosecutions continued against persons charged with communist activities.
120
Terrorist activities challenged respect for human rights in a number of Western European countries. In Northern Ireland, the internecine dispute continued to divide the community. The Provisional Irish Republican Army attacked civilian targets and members of the security forces. Political murders and maiming persisted. In Turkey violent killings and other denials of human rights were perpetrated by opposing political groups. In Spain, there were more than 80 pohtical assassinations, mostly of police and military officers.
Amnesty International was also concerned by certain government efforts to curb such acts, inasmuch as the official measures almost invariably entailed some restriction on individual rights. The anti-terrorist legislation of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland, the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), Italy and Spain has not, as far as Amnesty International knows, produced a pattern of wrongful conviction and imprisonment. Yet, by increasing police powers over the citizen, such legislation makes violation of human rights more likely and the preservation of respect for human rights too dependent on the good will of the authorities and their ability to resist public pressure for indiscriminate severity.
Emergency legislation enacted in the struggle against terrorism has also facilitated the ill-treatment of detained suspects. In 1977 the government of the Republic of Ireland established a committee of inquiry following Amnesty International's submission of a report of its mission which investigated allegations of ill-treatment of terrorist suspects by the Irish police. In direct connection with Amnesty International's report on its mission to Northern Ireland in December 1977, the United Kingdom government established a committee of inquiry into police practices. In 1978, the governments of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland each pubhshed the conclusions and recommendations of their respective committees of inquiry. Each inquiry confirmed Amnesty International's published view that remedial measures were necessary, and each made detailed and practicable recommendations to that effect. In neither case was Amnesty International satisfied that the government sufficiently heeded the findings of its own well-publicized inquiry, although both were followed by a reduction in the number of allegations of ill-treatment. Although Amnesty International was disappointed by each government's decision not to include in the mandate of its committee of inquiry a detailed investigation of allegations of ill-treatment, as it happened both committees implicitly confirmed that ill-treatment had taken place.
Amnesty International regards these committees of inquiry and the work they did as significant developments in the way governments monitor their own implementation of internationally agreed standards.
In the Federal Republic of Germany prisoners convicted or charged with politically motivated crimes have often alleged that they are subjected to isolation, soHtary confinement or sensory deprivation. During the year, Amnesty International undertook a study of the treatment of imprisoned members of the Red Army Fraction and the Second of June Movement. In February 1979, Amnesty International submitted to the government of the Federal Republic of Germany a detailed memorandum summarizing its findings: that in a number of cases prolonged solitary confinement and isolation had impaired the health of prisoners; that treatment having such an effect could not be justified by reasons of security or otherwise; and that the government should find humane alternatives to these
121
forms of imprisonment.
