Angola {the People's Republic of)
The government was beset by a number of serious problems affecting the economy and internal security. Throughout the year, it sought to improve its relations with Portugal (the former colonial power), with several Western countries and with neighbouring Zaire. This policy affected human rights in a number of ways.
Following a meeting between President Neto and President Eanes of Portugal in June 1978, at least 21 Portuguese nationals detained in Angola since 1975 were reported to have been released and permitted to go to Portugal. Following a rapprochement between Angola and Zaire, President Neto announced at a public rally in Cabinda on 15 September 1978 that several groups of political prisoners were to be released in the interests of "national harmony". Those who were to benefit from this measure, he said, included members of groups known as the Active Revolt and the Revolt of the East, and those who collaborated with the Frenie Nacional de Libertagao de Angola (FNLA) and the Frente de Libertacao do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC); many hundreds oi these would be treed so that they could contribute to national reconstruction. Amnesty International has no information to indicate how many prisoners were released following this announcement, but most members of the Active Revolt are known to have been freed, including Gentil Viana, Dr Manuel Videira and other leaders who had been detained since April 1976. However, many suspected supporters of another radical political organization, the Organizagdo dos Comunistas de Angola (OCA), were still detained without trial in April 1979. I hey included the former student leader Antonio Carran^a and others arrested in 1976, and more than 60 teachers and students detained in late 1977 and the first few months of 1978. A number of cases have been taken up by Amnesty International.
One other result of the reconciliation with Zaire appears to have been the imprisonment of members of Zairean opposition groups based in Angola and the repatriation of thousands of Zairean refugees. In early October 1978, it was
11
reported that Antoine Gizenga, a long-time opponent of Zaire's President Mobutu, had been placed under house arrest in Luanda. Persistent reports also suggest that many members of General Nathaniel Mbumba's Front de Libération Nationale Congolaise (FNLC), which was responsible for the invasions of Zaire's Shaba province in May and April 1977 and May 1978, had been restricted to southern Angola by the end of 1978.
The major problem affecting internal security was the activities of guerrillas of Dr Jonas Savimbi's Uniao Nacional para a Independëncia Total de Angola (UNITA). Based in the south, they were successful in their declared aim to prevent the reopening of the important Benguela railway link to Zaire and Zambia. The government launched a number of military offensives against them towards the end of 1978 and resorted to summary executions as a deterrent. On at least three occasions in December 1978, Angolan radio announced that UNITA or FLEC supporters had been paraded at public rallies and sentenced to death by acclaim. On the first occasion, five alleged UNITA members wére condemned to death by firing squad at a mass rally held in Lobito on 3 December 1978. A week later, other UNITA members were condemned at a rally in Huambo, and in Cabinda a crowd sentenced a group of five FLEC supporters to be shot.
Amnesty International protested against these executions in December 1978 and urged President Neto to ensure that all prisoners were given fair and open trials in future and safeguarded from execution.
Apart from the activities of UNITA, the government had to face repeated incursions by South African military forces based in Namibia, whose operations were mainly directed against the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) bases and Namibian refugee camps in southern Angola. In February 1979, Rhodesian military aircraft bombed the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) camps near Luso in central Angola.
To cope with these and other problems, the central committee of the Movi-mento Popular de Libertacào de Angola (MPLA) in December 1978 increased the powers of the President and of the provincial commissars, who were raised to ministerial rank and appointed to the central committee. Three months before, the government had set up a new Secretariat of State for Internal Order charged with the maintenance of public order and internal security, and directly accountable to the President.
In June 1978, the government introduced a new law which provided for the death penalty against civilians convicted of treason or other security offences. Formerly, the death penalty could be applied legally only against members of the armed forces, although many civilians suspected of involvement in the abortive coup of 27 May 1977 are believed to have been secretly executed.
