Swaziland (the Kingdom of)
The first general election to be held since King Sobhuza H abrogated the constitution and dissolved all political parties in April 1973 took place on 27 October 1978. The election was carried out through the Tinkhundlas, or traditional administrative councils, so that there was no registration of electors or political campaigning, and no secret ballot. Voters at each of 40 Tinkhundla meetings throughout the country chose two out of four candidates approved by the government to be their representatives in an 80-member electoral college, which itself then selected 40 of its number as members of the new House of Assembly and 10 as members of the Senate. A further 10 members of each House were directly appointed by the King. No political parties were able to contest the election, which was denounced by the main opposition party, the Ngwane National Liberatory Congress (NNLC), as "meetings under the trees".
Most political opponents of the government were in detention at the time of the election, including several prominent members of the NNLC. The party's leader, Dr Ambrose Zwane, who was detained without trial in February 1978, was held under a succession of 60-day detention orders until 5 August, when he was able to take advantage of an administrative delay in the preparation of a new detention order to make his escape to Mozambique. Other NNLC members were less fortunate. Dumisa Dlamini, a prominent trade unionist and close relative of the King, has been detained without trial continuously since July 1977. He too has been held under a series of 60-day detention orders. Ambrose Simelane has been detained without trial since February 1978, Africa Mhlanga since April 1978 and Sam Myeni since May 1978. Their cases, together with those of Dumisa Dlamini and seven other detainees, have been taken up by Amnesty International.
A few weeks before the election, a number of leaflets were distributed in Mbabane and other towns in the name of a new political organization, the Swazi Liberation Movement (SWALIMO). Among other things, the leaflets are said to have contained a call for the immediate release of all political prisoners. There
36
were several new arrests shortly before the election, though it is not known whether they were connected in any way with the emergence of SWALIMO. Among those detained was Obert Mpangela Mabuza, leader of the small Swaziland United Front party which contested the 1967 general election. Like most other detainees, he is held at Matsapha Central Prison.
Increasing tension was also evident during the year between the authorities and South African refugees, particularly those connected with the South African liberation movements, the African National Congress (ANC) and the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC). Following the detention in April 1978 of 13 alleged PAC members named as prohibited immigrants, three other PAC supporters were charged with arms offences and tried in the High Court in mid-1978. Two were convicted and jailed for 18- and 21-month terms. The thu-d was acquitted. Shortly after the trial, on 3 August 1978, a 60-day detention order was imposed on Musa Shongwe, the lawyer who defended the three accused. He was still detained at Matsapha Central Prison in April 1979, eight months later. His case has been taken up by Amnesty International.
Four of the 13 alleged PAC members named as prohibited immigrants were still detained in April 1979, one year after they were imprisoned. Nine others had been released to go into pohtical asylum in the United Kingdom, Canada, Denmark and Tanzania. At the end of March 1979, Amnesty International appealed to the government to release the four remaining refugees pending the completion of arrangements for their departure.
