Ghana (the Republic of)
Ghana's transition from military to civilian rule, due to be completed by July
1979,	was accompanied by a number of significant improvements affecting human rights. The first occurred immediately after the enforced resignation of General Ignatius Acheampong on 5 July 1978 and his replacement as Head of State by Lieutenant-General Frederick Akuffo. On 6 July 1978, General Akuffo ordered the release of more than 50 people detained the previous April for disputing the official result of the national referendum on "Union Government" on 30 March 1978. Among those freed were a number of leading politicians, including William Ofori Atta, Komla Gbedemah, Victor Owusu, B.J. da Rocha and Dr John Bilson.
Further releases took place in early August, when the ruling Supreme Military Council freed 14 detainees, including Colonel George Minyila, a former Commissioner for Industries who had been arrested in May 1977 on suspicion of plotting to overthrow General Acheampong, and Dr Kwadwo Amoah, a Ghanaian scholar detained in July 1976 after writing a pamphlet calling for the resignation of General Acheampong and a return to civilian rule. Dr Amoah's case had been taken up by Amnesty International.
In early September, former army captain Kojo Tsikata was freed on health grounds. He had been sentenced to death in July 1976 after being convicted of plotting to overthrow the government. Also in September, it was announced that 93 long-term detainees had been freed from Nsawam Prison near Accra. Two months later, on 16 November, Lieutenant-General Akuffo announced that, as a gesture of "mercy and goodwill" to "promote a national reconciliation", the government had ordered the immediate release of 24 other people imprisoned for allegedly plotting against General Acheampong. They included six prisoners jailed in 1976 whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International on the grounds of unfair trial.
Other indications that Lieutenant-General Akuffo accepted the need to promote national reconciliation and respect for human rights were also evident in the last months of 1978, including an amnesty for political exiles, who were invited to return to Ghana and contribute to the development of the country. At the end of November the ban on political parties imposed in 1972 was lifted and the government agreed to a complete transfer of power from military to civilian control.
21
However, at least 105 people, including several leading politicians, were banned from standing in the election or holding pubhc office.
A state of emergency was declared in early November in the wake of widespread strikes by civil servants and other professional groups but this was lifted at the end of the year. In December, a constituent assembly was established to prepare a draft constitution and by April 1979 arrangements were well under way for presidential and parliamentary elections in June.
Amnesty International remains concerned about a number of detainees held under the Preventive Custody Decree introduced in January 1972. According to the Ghanaian authorities, some of these detainees were arrested on suspicion of criminal offences but no reasons have been given to explain why, if that is the case, they have not been charged and brought before the courts in the normal way.
