Pakistan (the Islamic Republic of)
The continuation of martial law in Pakistan was reinforced when the Chief Martial Law Administrator, General Zia-ul-Haq, took over as President on 16 September 1978, following the decision of President Fazal Elahi Chaudhury not to renew his term of office. General elections, postponed several times, are now
105
scheduled to take place on 21 November 1979.
Under martial law, political activities remain severely restricted and a Presidential Ordinance was introduced in October 1978, prohibiting the formation of political parties opposed to "Islamic ideology or the integrity or security" of Pakistan. Amnesty International estimates that at least 7,000, and perhaps many more, political opponents of the regime are imprisoned as at May 1979 for participation in peaceful political activities, including journalists, trade-unionists, lawyers, former ministers and members of the national and provincial assemblies, as well as thousands of pohtical party workers and demonstrators. The vast majority of them belong to the Pakistan People's Party (PPP), the party of former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ah Bhutto who was executed on 4 April 1979. A few members of other opposition parties such as the Tehrik Istiqlal, the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-e-Pakistan, the National Democratic Party and the National Progressive Party, who oppose the government, have also been arrested for participating in political activities. The vast majority are quickly tried and sentenced by summary military courts (where there is no right of defence by a lawyer) for acts such as "participating in unlawful political activities", "raising objectionable slogans" and "inciting disaffection towards the armed forces", under Martial Law Regulations 13 and 33. They are usually sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from 6 to 12 months and frequently sentenced in addition to flogging of between 10 and 15 lashes. Nearly the whole leadership of the PPP is now imprisoned under martial law provisions or in detention without trial under the provisions of the Maintenance of Internal Security Ordinance. Large-scale arrests of PPP workers occurred in particular in October 1978 (following the house arrest of Mr Bhutto's daughter), and in January and February 1979 (when the Supreme Court upheld the death sentence imposed on Mr Bhutto). Hundreds more were imprisoned and flogged in April 1979 for participating in protests against Mr Bhutto's execution. Those arrested include many women.
Amnesty International is working for 121 pohtical prisoners in Pakistan, nearly all of whom (113 of them) are prisoners of conscience, including Mr Bhutto's wife and his daughter Benazir, now under house arrest. Eighty-five have undergone flogging of between five and 15 lashes. Among them are 18 workers of a cement factory imprisoned and flogged for going on strike (punishable under Martial Law Regulation 23) and Abbas Athar, President of the Lahore Press Club and former Editor of i\\t Musawaat (the paper owned by the Bhutto family). Mr Athar is held without trial for printing Mr Bhutto's reply to the White Papers issued by the government which had criticized aspects of the Bhutto administration. The number of cases Amnesty International has adopted in Pakistan in no way reflects the scale of pohtical imprisonment.
Flogging as punishment for pohtical and other offences was introduced under martial law provisions in October 1977, shortly after the military government had assumed office. It has now become part of a set of severe punishments introduced this year under Islamic law, punishments which Amnesty International considers to be cruel and inhuman as defined in international law.
On 10 February 1979 the President introduced Islamic legislation in a set of ordinances imposing new taxes on wealth (zakat) and on agricultural produce (ushr). Amnesty International is concerned that these ordinances also introduce stoning to death as maximum punishment for adultery (if committed by a partner
106
who is married), and mutilation in the form of amputation of the right hand from the wrist, and of the left foot from the ankle, as maximum punishment for theft committed for the first and second time respectively. Flogging of up to 80 stripes is introduced as the maximum punishment for taking intoxicants (including hquor and drugs). When introducing these harsh new laws, the President emphasized that he beheved the new punishments had a deterrent effect and said that the extreme punishments were unlikely to be applied.
However, Amnesty International knows of two cases where the sentence of amputation was imposed in May 1978. So far these sentences have not been carried out. It is not aware of any case where the sentence of stoning to death has been imposed, but has, on many occasions, opposed the frequent imposition of flogging, which is increasingly applied to political prisoners. This punishment, according to a 10 February 1979 ordinance, is carried out after a medical examination "so as to ensure that the execution of the punishment will not cause the death of the convict". "If the convict is too old or too weak, having regard to the sentence of whipping awarded, the number of stripes shall be applied in such a manner and with such intervals that the execution of the punishment does not cause death." But it has been reliably reported that Rashid Nagi, a PPP member adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, was flogged while still wounded three weeks after he unsuccessfully tried to immolate himself, despite an order of the Lahore High Court to stay the execution. The punishment may also be apphed to female convicts, to be administered while sitting.
On 30 May 1978 Amnesty International cabled the Chief Martial Law Administrator urging him to revoke the punishment of amputation imposed on three young men and on 20 November 1978 wrote to the President, welcoming his decision to commute the sentence of amputation but urging the government to stop immediately the floggings imposed on many pohtical prisoners. It also urged the government to remove these cruel and inhuman forms of punishment from martial law provisions, in accordance with the recommendation it had made earlier that year to the government in its January 1978 mission report (Amnesty International Report 1978). During August 1978 it also wrote to the President and to the Pakistan Medical Association expressing great concern about the practice of flogging of prisoner, and drawing attention to international legal provisions prohibiting doctors' involvement in such cruel and inhuman punishments.
On 4 April 1979 former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was executed in Rawalpindi Jail for alleged complicity in the murder of the father of a political opponent, Nawab Ahmed Khan, in November 1974. The execution occurred despite numerous powerful appeals to save his life from inside and outside Pakistan, including one from former President Fazal Elahi Chaudhury, and despite the fact that the Supreme Court of Pakistan had upheld the conviction by only a four to three majority. Up till the moment of the execution. Amnesty International addressed appeals to President Zia-ul-Haq to save the former Prime Minister's life and that of his four co-accused, Mian Mohammad Abbas, Arshad Iqbal, Ghulam Mustafa and Rana Iftikar Ahmed, and during 1978 and 1979 members sent hundreds of appeals for clemency for the five men to the President.
On 6 February 1979, the Supreme Court had dismissed the appeals of the five men sentenced to death by the Lahore High Court on 18 March 1978. Immediately the Supreme Court decision became known, Amnesty International
107
made a public appeal to the President that the sentences of all five men be commuted, saying that there were particularly strong legal grounds not to execute, in view of the "considerable dangers of conviction without substantial corroborative evidence" in Mr Bhutto's case, where the conviction was almost entirely based on the evidence of accomplices who had been granted pardon in return forgiving evidence for the state (see Appendix to the Short Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Pakistan, January 1978).
On 23 February, Amnesty International sent a mission consisting of Turkish constitutional lawyer Professor Miimtaz Soysal and English barrister Mr Louis Blom Cooper Q.C., to meet officials to discuss the application of the death penalty and attend the beginning of the Supreme Court's hearing of a petition brought by Mr Bhutto to review its decision to uphold the verdict of guilty and sentence of death. The report on their visit was cabled to the Chief Justice of Pakistan and to the Law Minister, Mr A.K. Brohi, on 27 February 1979, and released to the press on 28 February 1979.
Amnesty International, which opposes the death penalty in all cases, said that no execution should ever be carried out where there was a risk that an innocent man could hang. It argued that where judicial opinions of three judges of the Supreme Court stated there was no evidence to prove the guilt of two of the accused, Mr Bhutto and Mian Muhammed Abbas, the executions should not take place, and the death sentence be commuted, either by judicial discretion or executive clemency. It said that equality of treatment between all the accused furthermore dictated that the three other defendants should also be reprieved.
On 24 March 1979 the Supreme Court dismissed Mr Bhutto's petition for review but recommended that clemency be granted to him. Amnesty International cabled President Zia-ul-Haq on 29 March 1979 urgently appealing to him to commute immediately the death sentence on Mr Bhutto and the other four defendants. Mr Bhutto was executed in the early hours of 4 April; the clemency appeals of his four co-defendants are still pending.
In a cable to the President on the day of Mr Bhutto's execution—released to the press—Amnesty International called for an immediate halt to all executions and the aboHtion of the death penalty in Pakistan. It pointed out that the number of executions every year in Pakistan was among the highest in Asia: in February 1979, Mr A.K. Brohi stated that "about 800 people are hanged in Pakistan every year". The following month, President Zia-ul-Haq indicated that he had dismissed all clemency appeals against the death penalty since coming to office. Amnesty International stressed that there were substantial legal and humanitarian grounds for granting clemency to hundreds executed every year, many of them civilians convicted by military courts applying summary rules of evidence. For example, Nazir Ahmed Shah was sentenced to death on 4 March 1978 by a military court under retroactive legislation for an attempt to hijack. On 3 October 1978, Amnesty International cabled the President urging him to grant clemency to this prisoner. During the period under review, it also appealed that the death sentences imposed by military courts on Mohammad Sharif, Zahir Shah, Abdul Wakeel, Zahur Ahmad and Musfar Ali be commuted.
Amnesty International is concerned that new legislation allows for even wider appUcation of the death penalty. Apart from the introduction of the punishment of stoning to death under the 1979 Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood)
108
Ordinance for adultery, Martial Law Regulations 15 and 16 were introduced on 21 July 1978, extending the application of the death penalty to a person who "incites the public to seek the territorial or administrative dismemberment of Pakistan" and to a person who "seduces. . . or attempts to seduce any member of the Armed Forces of Pakistan. . . from his duty or from his allegiance to the government".
Amnesty International received dozens of reports alleging torture of pohtical prisoners in Pakistan. On 9 March 1979, it cabled Chaudhury Zahur Elahi, Minister of Political Affairs, expressing concern about allegations that Jam Saqi, former Joint Secretary of the banned National Awami Party, was being tortured following his arrest on 10 December 1978 under martial law. It urged that immediate steps be taken to ensure his safe treatment in jail and to allow him family visits immediately.
Amnesty International worked for the release of more than 70 journalists and press workers who were arrested during May 1978 for criticizing government policies (Amnesty International Report 1978). Nearly all were released in June 1978, although nine other well-known journalists have since been arrested, most under martial law provisions. During May and June 1978, Amnesty International also wrote to government officials urging them to implement the recommendations it had made to the government in its short report on its January 1978 mission, but none of these recommendations has so far been implemented by the government.
