Asia
Long-term imprisonment without trial of large numbers of people is still prevalent in Asia, although the past year has seen changes in some countries. The government of Indonesia has shown that it can press ahead with the releases of the tens of thousands of prisoners held without trial since 1965; but it remains to be seen whether or not the government will meet its commitment to release, by the end of 1979, several thousand political prisoners whom it has no plans to try. Nor has the release programme kept the Indonesian government from arresting new categories of political dissidents, including Muslims, students and those advocating provincial autonomy. The government of Bangladesh has stated it released 10,000 pohtical prisoners since assuming office. But official statistics show that over 3,000 remain imprisoned, some held without trial, others convicted under martial law, in spite of that government's repeal of martial law in April 1979.
It is now over four years since the government of Vietnam began holding large numbers of people in camps for political "re-education". The most recent figure given by the Vietnamese authorities, in February 1977, was 50,000. But Amnesty International considers the figure to be far higher. While the government insists that many are being detained because they are guilty of criminal acts, there is no doubt that a large number are held for political reasons. It appears that people will remain in detention for some time yet, despite the government's original assertion that the period of "re-education" was to last only three years in all.
Although the full dimensions of political imprisonment in China are not known, indications are that the number of people detained for political reasons over the past 10 years has been considerable. Amnesty International knows of cases of poUtical prisoners detained since the early 1950s. Others have been held since the late 1950s and early 1960s. In 1978, when the government was taking measures to redress some of the miscarriages of justice committed in the past, Chinese officials acknowledged that the number of people wrongfully imprisoned was still very large. And although many releases and "rehabilitations" took place during the year, arrests on pohtical grounds have continued. From the autumn of 1978 until March 1979 the authorities permitted wall-posters calling for freedom of expression and human rights to be displayed in the streets, but restrictions were again placed on their pubUcation and several human rights activists were arrested after that period.
Long-term detention without trial is also a feature of Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei, Taiwan and Afghanistan. In Malaysia, more than 50 political prisoners have now been detained for more than 10 years. In Singapore, of the relatively small number of political prisoners held without trial, almost all have been detained for over five years, 10 for more than 10 years. In Brunei, eight prisoners
80
have now been held for up to 16 years. In Taiwan, of the estimated several hundred political prisoners currently detained, more than 40 have been imprisoned since the 1950s. Many of these long-term prisoners are isolated in the notorious prison camp on Green Island, off the south-east coast of Taiwan. Amnesty International also knows of political prisoners detained for many years in Afghanistan, at least one of them for more than 20 years.
Also of concern to Amnesty International this past year was the scale of detention in Laos, where more than 40,000 people are reported to have been detained since 1975 without charge or trial in "re-education" camps. Of these, 10,000 to 15,000 are civil servants and army officers of the former administration.
Amnesties were announced in the Philippines, South Korea, Bangladesh, Nepal and Thailand, but in some of those countries there have been new arrests and the overall pattern of political imprisonment has not altered significantly.
Several governments in Asia continue to impose particularly severe restrictions on access to information. It has been especially difficult to obtain information regarding pohtical imprisonment in North Korea, Kampuchea and Burma.
Amnesty International has been particularly concerned at the cruel punishments provided in Pakistan's new legislation. Previously introduced as possible penalties for theft and robbery are the amputation of a hand, or of a hand and a foot. Moreover, flogging continues to be used frequently. Several hundred pohtical prisoners, including many adopted by Amnesty International, were flogged for taking part in peaceful pohtical activities. The death penalty can now be used against married persons found guilty of adultery.
According to official figures of the Law Minister, at least 800 people are being executed in Pakistan every year. This number is among the highest known to Amnesty International in Asia. But the apphcation of the death penalty has also been of particular concern to Amnesty International in the People's Republic of China where, up till January 1979, there were frequent reports of executions of political prisoners. In Taiwan, the first execution in five years of a prisoner charged with subversion was carried out in May 1979. The application of the death penalty in cases of prisoners convicted on criminal charges has also been of continuing concern to Amnesty International in Japan, Thailand, Singapore, India and Bangladesh. Amnesty International is disturbed about allegations, which it is investigating, that in some Asian countries political prisoners have been killed after arrest. Such allegations have been received from the Phihppines and Afghanistan.
During the period under review. Amnesty International sent high level delegations for the first time to Afghanistan, Brunei, Malaysia and Singapore to discuss reports of serious human rights violations in those countries. The organization published a major report on Political Imprisonment in the People's Republic of China. It has also released the text of a detailed report on its mission to India, and prepared its first publication on North Korea, the account of a former political prisoner which describes his period in detention. In the summer of 1978 Amnesty International submitted evidence to the United Nations on human rights violations in Democratic Kampuchea, and in May 1979 on Afghanistan, arguing in both cases the existence of a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights in these countries.
Regarding the ratification of the United Nations Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Asian countries have
81
a most disappointing record. Japan has signed both Covenants. The Philippines has signed and ratified only the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. It is therefore of particular importance that the Indian government acceded to both United Nations Covenants on 10 April 1979, although with an important reservation about the apphcation of preventive detention.
Afghanistan (the Democratic Republic of)
The People's Democratic Party (PDP) government, headed by President Noor Mohammad Taraki, came to power through a coup in April 1978 in which hundreds of people died. On 9 May 1978, it declared that it would observe the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the UN Charter. On 18 December 1978, President Taraki announced that his government had released 12,223 prisoners since coming to office, but these do not appear to include pohtical prisoners. Since the April coup, thousands of political prisoners have been added to the many already detained by previous regimes, notably that of President Daoud, who was himself killed in April 1978. Widespread arrests have been made among all political and religious opposition groups which oppose the government.
On 10 March 1979, President Taraki denied that there were between 14,000 and 20,000 pohtical prisoners, saying there were no more than 1,356. But Amnesty International estimates that several thousands are imprisoned for political reasons, although the precise number is difficult to assess since substantial arrests continue and since reliable information about pohtical arrests outside Kabul is hard to obtain. An Amnesty International delegation visiting Afghanistan in October 1978 estimated that at least 4,000 and perhaps many more political prisoners were then held and thousands of political arrests have been reported since that mission. At least 1,000 pohtical prisoners, mostly lower-ranking party officials, were reportedly arrested in Kabul following an uprising in the city of Herat in late March 1979, where there was increasing opposition to the government's left-wing policies.
President Taraki's government, which signed a treaty of friendship and co-operation with the USSR government on 5 December 1978, announced a substantial programme of agrarian reform (decree no.8 of 1 January 1979) aimed at land distribution among the poor peasants and semi-nomadic tribes. It has also announced radical educational reforms to eradicate illiteracy among both men and women within five years. These domestic and foreign policies have caused considerable opposition, particularly among conservative Islamic and nationalist groups. Both the government and the more extreme religious opposition have declared a jihad (holy war) against each other, and armed rebelhons were mounted in late 1978 in various provinces outside Kabul, particularly m Kunar, Badakshan, Parwan, Paktia, Nangahar and, most recently, in Herat. Most religious opposition is led by the Jamiaat-i-Islami and the Hezbi-i-Islami, and Mushm rebels have claimed to have killed members of the armed forces, whereas villages suspected of housing such opponents of the regime have reportedly been bombed by air-force planes. These recent events were accompanied by arrests of prominent Islamic leaders, among both the majority Sunni and the minority Shiite Muslim groups, in late 1978 and in 1979. In some cases, whole families of pohtical prisoners were arrested, including women and children, a practice about which Amnesty International had already expressed serious concern in October 1978.
82
On 27 September 1978, Amnesty International wrote to President Taraki welcoming the government's declaration to adhere to the principles of the UN Declaration and proposing that a delegation visit Kabul to introduce its work and to discuss political imprisonment. From 19 to 24 October 1978, the delegation, led by Turkish constitutional lawyer Miimtaz Soysal, visited Kabul and had detailed discussions with Vice-Premier and Foreign Minister Mr Hafizullah Amin. This was the first time such a delegation had visited the country.
During their talks with Mr Amin, the delegates expressed concern that political prisoners were still detained for their association with the previous governmervt and for belonging to the former royal family, and that they included women and children. They were informed that the government had decided to release the 72 or 74 women and children on 19 October 1978, and had further released three ministers of former President Daoud's government, but had no firm plans for trial or release of the others. Amnesty International recommended that the government undertake as a matter of priority the release of the remaining prisoners, in whose cases no specific criminal charges had been brought. At the time of writing none had been released.
They also inquired about pohtical prisoners arrested by previous governments for political reasons, many of them for allegedly holding conservative religious views and in nearly all cases held without trial. They asked about one political prisoner, former Finance Minister Abdul Malek Abdul Rahimzai, arrested more than 21 years ago and still held without trial. They were told that only those who were "not against the principles of the revolution" would be released. Amnesty International expressed deep concern that these prisoners, many of whom had already spent many years in prison without trial, now faced indefinite detention and said it was disturbed that the government had no plans to review their cases. In a memorandum based on the findings of its mission. Amnesty International urged the government to consider releasing all untried political prisoners arrested under previous regimes by declaring a general amnesty.
Amnesty International also discussed with the Foreign Minister, the many leading poUticians, diplomats, army officers, university professors, teachers and journalists it knows to have been arrested on suspicion of holding right- or left-wing views different from those of the government. Among them are Rawan Farhadi, a former ambassador and senior diplomat, and Rahim Mahmoodi, the editor of a pro-Chinese newspaper, Eternal Flame. Following its mission, it received one unconfirmed report that Mr Rahimzai was released shortly afterwards, but as far as Amnesty International is aware, all others remain imprisoned without trial.
The July 1978 split between the Khalq (People) and Parcham (Flag) factions of the government was followed by the arrest in mid-August 1978 of the Minister of Defence, Major-General Abdul Qader (who had played a leading part in the 1978 coup bringing the present government to power); the Minister of Planning, Sultan AH Kishtmand; the Minister of Public Works, Major Mohammad Rafee; the former Chief of Staff of the army, Lieutenant-General Shahpoor Ahmedzai; and the Head of Kabul Hospital, Dr Mir Ah Akbar. They were charged with staging a plot against the government, and copies of their alleged confessions were published in the Kabul Times of 23 September 1978. Family members of the accused were also reported to have been arrested. The mission asked the Foreign Minister about allegations that, in the cases of at least- two of these prisoners, the
83
confessions liad been obtained under torture, and that fears had been expressed that Major-General Qader, who had been named as leader of the alleged plot, was no longer alive. As the delegates were refused permission to see the accused in jail, they were unable to verify official assurances that Abdul Qader was "alive and well" in prison. The Minister said that the accused in the alleged plot would be tried before a military court at a time to be announced by the Revolutionary Council. The mission was told that the trial would be open and that representatives of international organizations could attend the proceedings. Amnesty International's memorandum drew attention to the UN Resolution prohibiting torture and asked for a pubUc assurance by the government that these prisoners were alive, were not being tortured and were allowed regular family visits. It also recommended that they be tried in open court in accordance with international standards. But no further information has been received from the government about them or their trial, and concern has increased about their health and treatment in detention.
Amnesty International also expressed concern to Mr Amin that some families are not allowed any communication with political prisoners after arrest. Some families feared that their relatives were dead. The memorandum urged the government to allow all political prisoners regular family visits and correspondence immediately, as well as other rights laid down in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
On 18 December 1978, Amnesty International wrote to President Taraki presenting him with the text of its memorandum and welcoming the releases of female members of the royal family. The memorandum was also presented to Foreign Minister Amin and copies were sent to the Ministers of Justice and the Interior, whom the mission was not able to meet. It asked that the government's comments be sent by 1 March 1979. No comments were received by that date and Amnesty International wrote to the Foreign Minister on 8 March 1979 requesting information about the cases of political prisoners it had discussed during its mission. It expressed concern about reports of new large-scale arrests involving religious leaders, in particular Mohammed Ibrahim Mogadeddi, arrested on 18 January 1979 with his entire family, including infants. It also asked the government about reports in the international press in January 1979 to the effect that more than 100 political prisoners had been executed without trial in Kabul. It has not received a reply and is continuing to investigate several allegations that some political prisoners, of whom no word has been received since their arrest, have disappeared or been killed, including Maulana Baes, a religious leader of the Marxist-Leninist Setem-i-Melli (National Oppression Group). The government has denied it knows of Baes's whereabouts, although Amnesty International had received reliable reports of his imprisonment in late 1978. Amnesty International has also recently adopted its first prisoners of conscience.
On 31 May 1978, Amnesty International made a submission to the United Nations presenting evidence of a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights in Afghanistan. It describes widespread arrests of political prisoners from all opposition groups, allegations of torture, and 33 cases of well-known Afghan citizens held in detention without trial. The submission contains the text of Amnesty International's memorandum and a list of 11 persons it believes to have been killed in the custody of the present government.

84
On 11 April 1979, Amnesty International sent a cable to Mr Hafizullah Amin, congratulating him on his appointment as Prime Minister and urging the government to declare a general amnesty for political prisoners on the occasion of the first anniversary of the "Saur revolution" on 27 April 1979 to include—in particular—old and sick political prisoners and women and children.
Bangladesh (the People's Republic of) ,
On 18 February 1979, President Ziaur Rahman and his newly constituted Bangladesh Nationalist Party obtained a substantial majority in the general elections. These were held while martial law was in force, although, in November 1978, the President had repealed the Political Parties Regulations, which had impeded the activities of opposition parties. The election results confirmed the mandate given to Major-General Rahman in June 1978, when he was elected President.
In December 1978, the President had announced that "in all possible cases, all pohtical detainees would be released" and that his government would lift martial law soon after the elections. In a cable of 15 January 1979 to the President, Amnesty International welcomed these announcements, but called on the government to release all untried political prisoners immediately.
On 6 April 1979, the President Hfted martial law. However, the Fifth Constitutional Amendment, passed by Parliament the same day, confirms the legality of all laws made and action taken during the three and a half year period of martial law. Political prisoners tried by martial law courts without appeal remain imprisoned. Amnesty International sent a cable on 9 April 1979, welcoming the government's decision as an effective step towards the restoration of fundamental rights and urging the government to release the pohtical prisoners still held.
The government has never given the total number of political prisoners but in December 1978 the President announced that since coming to power in November 1975 his government had released "more than 10,000 political prisoners". In its April 1977 mission report on Bangladesh Amnesty International estimated that the total number of political prisoners was then between 10,000 and 15,000: many have since been released. According to statistics in the Bangladesh press, 5,693 political prisoners were released between April 1977 and April 1979; Amnesty International's estimate that several thousand remain in detention has been confirmed by government statements. On 27 May 1979, the Home Minister Lieutenant-Colonel Mustafizur Rahman stated that there were 3,201 pohtical prisoners, of whom 2,862 had been charged under martial law and 339 were detained under the Emergency Act. Amnesty International is investigating 13 poUtical prisoners imprisoned for more than 4 years without trial and five other prisoners.
Two special laws remain in force which provide for detention without trial: the Emergency Power Rules and the Special Powers Act (which also allows for trial by special tribunal). In a letter to the President of 9 April 1979, Amnesty International expressed concern that poUtical prisoners continued to be detained under the provisions of these laws, and that leaders of political parties, such as the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal (National Socialist Party), the Awami League and the Democratic League, are serving long prison sentences". In its April 1977 mission
85
report, Amnesty International criticized the procedures applying before martial law courts and special courts, which it said "fell far short of international standards". In a letter to the President, Amnesty International urged the government to abohsh immediately all martial law courts and special tribunals, to repeal the Special Powers Act, and to consider releasing all political prisoners convicted by those courts, in view of the unsatisfactory nature of the trials.
It also drew the President's attention to the powers of these courts to impose the death penalty. In November 1978, appeals were dismissed against the death sentences of Chand Mia, Kanchar, Shamshuddin, Abdul Lai, and Raud of Bajitpur, five prisoners who had been sentenced to death by martial law courts and special tribunals. The Supreme Court had earlier stayed the executions of 82 prisoners who had been sentenced to death by martial law courts. Amnesty International urged the government to grant clemency to all these prisoners. On 7 August 1978, Amnesty International cabled Vice-President Abdus Sattar, appealing for clemency for Khondoker Ehteshamuddin Hamed Iqbal, and, on 28 September 1978, made an appeal for mercy to the Home Ministry for eight prisoners, reported to be members of the Samobadi party, sentenced to death by a martial law court in 1977.
Amnesty International became increasingly concerned by reports of the deaths of political prisoners. Abdul Ghani died on 24 October 1978 in Rajshahi Jail, Jaimul Abedin in Comilla Jail and Hamildar Matin in Dacca Jail—in all cases, it was alleged, owing to lack of adequate medical treatment. All three prisoners were members of the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal. It was also reported that Mati Mia died suddenly in Dacca Central Jail on 9 October 1978 and that the government instituted an official inquiry into the circumstances of his death. In the same month, prisoners in Dacca Central Jail went on a hunger strike in connection with the death of a political prisoner. They presented 39 demands which included improvement in medical facilities, food and living standards. On 31 December
1978,	an incident occurred in the same jail in which 30 persons were injured. The government promised a judicial inquiry. In its April 1977 mission report. Amnesty International described provision for prisoners as "bordering on conditions that are inhuman".
On 11 August 1978, Amnesty International wrote to Home Minister Lieutenant-Colonel Mustafizur Rahman, inquiring about the work of the Advisory Board for Dacca Central Jail and, on 20 November 1978, wrote to the Minister again, welcoming the reported establishment of a jail reforms commission and urging him to include the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners among the commission's terms of reference. Its letter to the President of 9 April
1979,	while welcoming the establishment of various commissions of inquiry, expressed deep concern that findings of previous commissions had not been published (including the commissions set up to investigate the killing of four former ministers of the Awami League in Dacca Central Jail on the night of 2-3 November 1975, and the commission to investigate the Dacca Central Jail incident on 22 June 1977, when between 25 and 30 political prisoners were seriously injured), despite the President's assurances that relevant parts of the commissions' reports would be made public. No effective steps have been taken by the government to improve the conditions in which pohtical prisoners are held. Amnesty International urged the government to take immediate steps to improve
86
medical facilities and living conditions for political prisoners and to publish the findings of all inquiries.
