Switzerland (the Swiss Confederation)
Amnesty International's major concern remained the imprisonment of con-
142
scientious objectors. A referendum of December 1977 rejected an amendment to the constitution which would have permitted the introduction of a limited form of alternative civilian service.
Figures issued by the Federal Military Department show a continued increase in the number of convictions: 345 in 1977, 391 in 1978.
In early 1979, Amnesty International started an international campaign against the imprisonment of conscientious objectors in the member states of the Council of Europe, advocating adherence by member states to the principles of Resolution 337 of the Council's Parliamentary Assembly of 1967. Because there are so many convictions and no alternative civilian service, Switzerland is among the three main countries included in the Amnesty International campaign.
Turkey (the Republic of)
On 26 December 1978 the government imposed martial law in 13 of Turkey's 61 provinces in response to the violent death of over 100 persons during religious and political riots in the south-eastern city of Kahramanmaras, which were the culmination of widespread politically motivated killings during the past few years. The killings, carried out by extremist political groups, were originally confined to political activists of the left and right, but more recently have included people noted for their moderate political views, such as Abdi Ipekci, editor of the newspaper iVi///i>ef, who was assassinated on 1 February 1979. The killings continued, in spite of the arrests of many suspects under the martial law regulations, and in the period 18 January to 14 February 1979 there were 58 political assassinations.
Prosecutions continued under articles 141 and 142 of the Turkish Penal Code, which prohibit forming organizations "aimed at establishing the domination of a social class over other social classes" and "making propaganda for the domination of a social class over other social classes", but no one is known to Amnesty International to have been imprisoned during the year as a result. Trials take a long time and even when they result in convictions the defendants remain free until their appeals have been heard. No adopted prisoners freed while their trials continue were returned to prison. In one case, a former adopted prisoner avoided re-imprisonment by leaving the country. Amnesty International groups continue to work for the release of four prisoners of conscience, all of whom were sentenced to imprisonment under articles 141 and 142.
Although there were no allegations of torture during the year. Amnesty International sent a letter to Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit on 18 August 1978 inquiring about the results of any investigations into allegations of torture in September 1977 and April 1978.
Though Amnesty International has no information about executions during the year, it appealed to the Prime Minister and to President Fahri Koruturk on 21 November 1978 for commutation of the death sentence passed on Sener Yigit for the murder of the wife and daughter of the Austrian ambassador. In April 1978 Prime Minister Ecevit told representatives from Amnesty International that the Republican People's Party was committed to the abolition of the death penalty.
