China (the People's Republic of)
In November 1978, Amnesty International published a major report on political imprisonment in the People's Repubhc of China, which describes aspects of the human rights situation up to June 1978 and examines the constitutional, legal and penal systems under which political dissenters are detained. The report outlines several aspects of political imprisonment which are of concern to Amnesty International: the existence of loosely worded laws permitting large-scale imprisonment on pohtical grounds and a constitution which provides for deprivation of rights for certain categories of people; the use of the continuous "mass mobilization campaigns" to identify those who dissent from official policy; the practice of detaining pohtical offenders for long periods before trial and of obliging them to write autobiographies and confessions during pre-trial detention; the lack of formal guarantees of the right to defence and the fact that political defendants are usually tried in camera or by "mass public trials" where no defence is possible; some aspects of detention conditions which fall below national and international standards for the treatment of prisoners; and the fact that some pohtical prisoners are "retained" or made to work in penal establishments at the end of their term of imprisonment.
The report presents case histories of prisoners, currently under adoption or
87
investigation. Among them are Lin Xiling, a girl student arrested as a "rightist" in 1957 at the age of 20 (Amnesty International Report 1977); Chamba Lobsang, a Tibetan monk sentenced to life imprisonment in 1960 on the charge of "exploiting the masses in the name of religion"; Deng Qingshan, a young peasant sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in 1970 for "slandering Chairman Mao"; and others detained for their beliefs.
Amnesty International submitted the draft of its report to the government in June 1978 and offered to pubHsh any comments or corrections, but none were received. Requests for talks with government representatives remained unanswered.
When releasing the report, Amnesty International welcomed the statements made by Chinese officials since spring 1978 about the need for legal reform and for a review of past miscarriages of justice. During judicial conferences held in the autumn of 1978, Jiang Hua, the President of China's Supreme Court, said that there were still many people wrongfully imprisoned in the country and reminded officials that the extraction of forced confessions was prohibited. In October, Zhao Cangbi, the Minister of Public Security, stated the urgent need to revise some categories of existing laws and to draft a criminal code, a civil code and a code of criminal procedure. He said that this would be done by "a special unit. . . organized by the judicial and public security group" and would start in winter 1978-79.
In early 1979 several revised laws were published, including new Regulations on Arrest and Detention which replaced those adopted in 1954. The new regulations are more specific and include guarantees against prolonged detention without charge. They specify that after arrest a person should be either charged within three to 10 days or released, and that if the authorities do not "handle the case in accordance with stipulations", the detainee or his family "has the right to demand his release".
Amnesty International has noted these changes and welcomed the steps taken to- rehabilitate some categories of people arbitrarily imprisoned or deprived of their rights and to prevent discrimination on the basis of "class background". At the time of writing, it was still too early to know the scope of the legal reforms but it appears that some of the announced reforms were to have a restrictive application. For instance, information given by the Chinese media in early 1979 indicated that the 1978 decision for the rehabilitation of people classified as "rightists"'Concemed only those mistakenly labelled as "rightists". Among other reports, one from Shenyang (Liaoning province) on 31 January 1979 stated that, by 25 January, 67.7 per cent of the 153 rightists' cases in the province's "propaganda front" had been found to be "wrong" cases and were corrected. A decision was also adopted in January 1979 to "rehabilitate" people deprived of their rights as "landlords", "rich peasants", "counter-revolutionary" and so on, but restoration of rights would not apply to those who were not deemed to have properly reformed.
Amnesty International has continued to appeal for the release of individual prisoners of conscience and has taken up new cases for adoption or investigation. Among them are Tibetan prisoners reported to have been "retained" in prison after serving their term of imprisonment. They include Lobsang Norbu, an interpreter for the Chinese People's Liberation army, and two of his friends, Akar
and Tung Ying. The three were sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment in 1964 as "counter-revolutionaries" for planning to flee the country. They were last reported to be still "retained" as "prison labourers" in Sangyip Prison (Lhasa) seven years after completing their sentences. Those "retained" in this way usually live and work in the prison and are deprived of pohtical and civil rights.
Various groups of prisoners were released in 1978-79. One group consisted of 34 Tibetans imprisoned between 1959 and 1966 who were released in November 1978. They did not include the Tibetan prisoners known to Amnesty International. The release of another 376 Tibetan prisoners, who had been held for "taking part in the 1959 armed rebellion", was also announced in March 1979: their names were not pubhshed.
Three well-known prisoners of conscience were released in January 1979. Known under the collective pseudonym "Li Yizhe", they are Li Zhengtian, Chen Yiyang and Wang Xizhe (Amnesty International Reports 1977 and 1978). Criticized and placed under surveillance after publishing a poster in late 1974, they had been formally arrested in March 1977 and held since then without charges or trial. During an interview in February 1979, they said that they had been held in isolation in different detention centres in Canton, and that they would now continue their research on the results of repression after the Cultural Revolution.
While many people were released or "rehabilitated" during 1978-79, arrests on political grounds were continued. Some of them concerned alleged followers of the "gang of four" who, like the four "radical" party leaders themselves, were generally held on charges of scheming to seize power and of committing crimes of violence. Others were detained for the non-violent exercise of fundamental freedoms.
In early 1979, Amnesty International made urgent appeals concerning death sentences and arrests. At a series of trials held in Peking in January, a number of "criminals and counter-revolutionaries" were sentenced to death; some were sentenced with stay of execution for two years, but others were executed immediately, four of them (believed to be former Red Guards) after being sentenced at a pubhc rally. They were convicted of murder, looting and rape during the Cultural Revolution (1966-68). Among nine other people executed in January for criminal offences, five were aged between 18 and 21, most convicted of murder or rape. Amnesty International urged the authorities to commute all death sentences on humanitarian grounds.
On 18 January 1979, a 32-year-old woman named Fu Yuehua was arrested by the poHce in Peking and subsequently disappeared. Since autumn 1978, Fu Yuehua had been active in supporting demands for democracy and human rights. Amnesty International urged the authorities to disclose her whereabouts and the charges against her. Further appeals were made later, but no official information had been given 10 weeks after her arrest. It is reported that she was unemployed at the time of her arrest, having been arbitrarily dismissed from her post several years before. According to reports, while presenting complaints about her case to the authorities she came to know many cases of injustice and took an interest in them. Shortly before her arrest, she is said to have taken an active part in demonstrations by peasants in Peking in early January.
Apart from Fu Yuehua's arrest in January, the movement for free speech and
89
human rights which started in autumn 1978 in Peking was tolerated until March 1979. In late March, however, there were arrests and bans on posters, books and other pubUcations regarded as "opposed to socialism and to the leaderehip of the party". During the previous four months, several unofficial groups had been founded in Peking and started publishing small newspapers. Similar groups were said to exist in other cities.
On 29 March 1979, the day before the Peking Revolutionary Committee announced new restrictions on posters in the capital, the leader of one of the unofficial groups, Wei Jingsheng, was arrested. He is a 29-year-old electrician, an editor of Exploration and the author of a famous poster, entitled "Democracy, the Fifth Modernization", which was posted -on the "Democracy Wall", in Peking in late 1978. His arrest was followed by others, including that of Ren Wanding, the 35-year-old Vice-Chairman of the Human Rights Alliance, a group which pubhshed a political programme of 19 points in autumn 1978. According to eyewitness reports, Ren Wanding was arrested by plain-clothes pohcemen on 4 April 1979 with three other members of the Human Rights Alliance while trying to paste up a poster on the "Democracy Wall" criticizing an article in the People's Daily which had justified the new restrictions. Amnesty International has appealed for the release of Wei Jingsheng, Ren Wanding and others arrested for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of speech and opinion.
