Bulgaria (the People's Republic of)
The constitution guarantees freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly and of association. These freedoms are restricted by certain articles of the Penal Code which prescribe imprisonment for their non-violent exercise, giving priority to the protection of the interests of the state and the state apparatus over those of the individual.
Article 108 makes propaganda or agitation against the state an offence punishable by up to 5 years' imprisonment, while article 109 prescribes terms of imprisonment of from 3 to 12 years for "forming or being a member of an organization whose activities are aimed at committing offences against the state". Article 113 makes those who commit these offences against another workers' state liable to the same penalty. In one case a person who had allegedly criticized the Soviet Union was sentenced under this article. Article 273 makes it an offence punishable by up to 2 years' imprisonment or corrective labour to "disseminate untruthful remarks which might incite mistrust of the state power or cause confusion in society".
In May 1978, Ljuben Sobadschiev, a worker from Ruse employed by the Bulgarian Danube shipping line, was arrested with two other young men, Petar Kamaraschev, also from Ruse, and Ivan Tsonev from Dve Mogili. Reportedly they had produced leaflets in 1977 which criticized official economic policy and complained of food shortages and which were distributed in a local supermarket. At the time of their trial in August 1978, Amnesty International issued an appeal on behalf of Ljuben Sobadschiev, a former prisoner of conscience and the only member of the group then known to Amnesty International. The three men were charged under articles 108 and 109 of the Penal Code and Mr Sobadschiev and Mr Kamaraschev were also reportedly charged under article 113 with having insulted a fraternal country. The three men apparently refused the services of the lawyer appointed by the state and insisted on conducting their own defence. Ljuben Sobadschiev was sentenced to 4Vi years' imprisonment and Ivan Tsonev and Petar Kamaraschev to 2 years' and 1 year's imprisonment respectively.
Freedom of movement is restricted under article 279 of the Penal Code, which makes an attempt to leave the country without permission an offence punishable
123
by up to 5 years' imprisonment and a fine of up to 3,000 levas. Early in 1977 Evgenii Galabov, Vladimir Gusenko and Ljuben Hadji-Dimitrov were tried in Sofia and sentenced to 1 year, 3 years' and 4 years' imprisonment respectively on charges of having either planned themselves to leave the country illegally or, knowing that relatives of theirs planned to do so, of failing to inform the authorities. Ljuben Hadji-Dimitrov and Vladimir Gusenko were also reportedly accused of possessing anti-communist literature and disseminating untruthful statements. According to the most recent information, Ljuben Hadji-Dimitrov has had his sentence reduced by one year, but Evgenii Galabov's sentence was extended so that he was released only at the beginning of 1979.
Amnesty International continues to work on four cases of persons serving long sentences for alleged "espionage". They all have relatives abroad with whom they maintained contact and in three cases they had applied to visit them or to emigrate shortly before their arrest. The four prisoners are Solomon Ben-Joseph, Nicholas Chamurlisky, Dr Peter Kondofersky and Yusuf Husnu, each of whom has suffered serious ill-health during the year.
In addition to imprisonment, the Penal Code prescribes for certain offences the penalties of corrective labour and banishment. Seven of Amnesty International's adoption or investigation cases are known to have been banished to remote towns or villages. They include Christo Kolev, a trade-unionist and anarchist communist with a long record of political imprisonment before, during, and after the Second World War. From 1971 to February 1978 Christo Kolev was banished to the villages of Pet Mogili and Balvan after attending a friend's funeral at which he gave an impromptu speech and placed a wreath on behalf of the Anarchist Communist Federation to which he and his friend belonged. In February 1978 he was informed that his sentence of banishment had been lifted a month previously, and he moved to Sofia to be with his aiUng 96-year-old mother. Five months later, following visits made to him by former prisoners of conscience, he was once again banished to Balvan, without trial or formal accusation; his mother, gravely ill, was sent to join him. It is likely that he was banished under article 39 of a new militia law, enacted on 1 March 1977, by which an adult convicted of having committed "crimes against the state" may be prohibited from leaving a specified town for up to six months. In August 1978, Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for Mr Kolev's release but, according to the most recent information, he is still banished to Balvan. Those banished have in the past been released only after several years of assigned residence in remote places.
Although article 35 of the constitution stipulates that all citizens are equal before the law and article 53 guarantees freedom of conscience and religion, Amnesty International has in recent years received allegations that members of the Turkish minority and Pomaks — ethnic Bulgarians of the Muslim faith — have been persecuted and imprisoned on religious grounds. In November 1978, Amnesty International adopted a Pomak, Bairam Redjepov Gaitov, a 40-year-old woodcutter from the village of Kornitza, in the district of Pirin, married with four children. Together with other members of his village he had protested against the attempts by the authorities to induce them to change their names, abandon their religion and join the Communist Party. In March 1973, the village was reportedly surrounded by mounted police, who attacked the villagers assembled in the village square and allegedly shot seven men. Mr Gaitov was arrested by the police along with
124
several other villagers, beaten and taken to Sofia investigation prison. He was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment for "membership of a group formed to commit offences against the state" and "dissemination of false information with the aim of undermining the state". It is reported that he spent the first two years in sohtary confinement, and that he was beaten and ill-treated in prison with the aim of extracting an admission of guilt from him. His wife and daughter were deported to a village in the Vidin province and compelled to do forced labour. His 16-year-old son was taken to an agricultural school, where pressure was allegedly put on him to denounce his father. It is reported that when he refused to do so, he was beaten so brutally that he never recovered and has been declared unfit for military service. Amnesty International also received reports alleging the persecution and imprisonment of Pomak villagers from the districts of Blagoevgrad, Pazardzhik, Smolyan, Plovdiv, Razgrad and Turgovishte.
In a number of respects trial procedures for political offenders do not conform to recognized norms. Persons accused of political offences have allegedly been severely beaten to extract confessions and persons suspected of political offences threatened with psychiatric confinement. The defendant's choice of lawyer has in some cases been denied and in othersseverely limited. Witnesses have reportedly provided testimony against the accused during investigation proceedings, which at the trial they withdrew, claiming that it was false and had been obtained under pressure. It appears to be the general rule that political trials are held in camera.
Amnesty International's most detailed information on prison conditions concerns Stara Zagora, the chief maximum-security prison, where a number of prisoners of conscience are held. Despite the alleged improvements in conditions referred to in the Amnesty International Report 1978, there are allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners by guards. Persistent reports of serious ill-health also indicate that medical care is inadequate. Prisoners appear to have access to a doctor only in cases of acute illness and there is no provision for dental treatment. Reports by former prisoners of conscience in Stara Zagora claim that cells are overcrowded, with only 3.5 metres square for four people, that they contain concealed microphones to record prisoners' conversations, and that prisoners suffer from extremes of cold and heat in winter and summer. Cells used for solitary confinement are reported to be without daylight and to lack beds or washing facilities. Prisoners are also apparently required to work long hours exposed to harmful chemicals without adequate industrial protection.
Recent information suggests that political prisoners are also punished by terms of forced labour, some in mines.
Former prisoners of conscience continued to allege that a number of people who have shown themselves to be critical of government policies have been detained in psychiatric hospitals on political rather than medical grounds. Hospitals where psychiatric abuse allegedly occurred include the Boulevard Lenin Psychiatric Clinic in Sofia and the psychiatric clinics of Sevlievo and Lovetch. On the basis of official diagnoses such as "schizophrenia" and "a weakened moral-volitional complex" political detainees are alleged to have been subjected to treatment with neuroleptic drugs and electro-convulsive therapy.
The Penal Code 1961 retains the death penalty for 29 crimes.
125
