Togo (the Togolese Republic)
On 14 November 1978 the government announced the arrest of a number of people, including 36 army personnel and relatives and associates of the first President, the late Sylvanus Olympio, who was assassinated in 1963, in connection with an attempt in October'l 977 to assassinate the President, Gnassingbe Eyadèma. Among these were members of the prominent De Souza family. One of the ex-President's distant relatives, Lieutenant-Colonel Merlaud Lawson, was reported to have fled the country to avoid arrest. These events reveal recurrent themes in Togolese political life during the Eyadéma regime: continued opposition to the President from some of the political and financial elite and friction between Togo and Ghana. The latter arises from a frontier dispute over the Ewe-speaking areas of Ghana which is exacerbated by President Eyadêma's allegations that Ghana has allowed its territory to be used for "destabilization" manoeuvres against Togo, including the 1977 assassination attempt. In late 1978, the 36 army personnel were reported to have been released.
There were reports of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial. Available information suggests that many citizens were detained for their political or religious acts or behefs: failure to wear a party badge; the expression of opinions critical of the President or the Rassemblement du Peuple Togolais (RPT) or even the practice of one of the numerous reUgious cults banned under the edict of 29 May 1978. In February 1979, Amnesty International appealed to President Eyadèma for the trial or release of some 30 prisoners and took up six investigation cases. Five of the detainees are believed to have been released since the appeal; but Amnesty International has not yet been informed of the release or whereabouts of the others. In late April, discussions were under way for a proposed Amnesty International mission to Togo.
In March 1978 the government released Abou Boukari Karim, a former student leader, who had been detained without trial for more than seven years and whose case had been taken up by Amnesty International. Boukari's health was badly affected by his years in prison and he died in a Lomé hospital in December 1978. His death prompted opposition student movements to protest against the harsh conditions in Togo's prison. Amnesty International has received reports of intimidation and beatings of prisoners, sparse diet and general lack of medical facilities.
