Zimbabwe (Rhodesia)
Progress towards black majority rule was accompanied by intensified warfare
41
between the Transitional Government and the Patriotic Front (PF), and by serious deterioration in human rights.
In May 1978 there appeared to be reasons for optimism. The Transitional Government, newly estabhshed as a result of the internal settlement agreement of 3 March 1978, had started to release political detainees and was expected to grant an amnesty to some at least of the country's sentenced political.prisoners. The death penalty also, it was reported, would no longer be used against political offenders owing to the personal intervention of Bishop Abel Muzorewa and the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole, members of the Transitional Government's four-member Executive Council.
At the end of April 1979, the picture was bleak. Many of the detainees freed in mid-1978 were detained again and more sweeping powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial were introduced and used to detain hundreds, perhaps thousands, of people in the 90 per cent of the country placed under martial law since September 1978. By the time the first majority-rule elections were held in mid-April 1979, the expected amnesty for convicted political prisoners had not been granted and, following a further spate of political trials, their number was greater than ever. Under the Transitional Government, as under the previous Rhodesia Front administration, it was common for convicted political prisoners to be kept in prison even after finishing their sentences. Nearly all convicted political prisoners were subjected to administrative detention orders of unlimited duration immediately they completed their prison sentences.
By April 1979, it was also clear that the death penalty was still being used against political prisoners, although the secrecy which has surrounded executions since April 1975 made it impossible to estimate with accuracy how many hangings had taken place.
In the month immediately following the formation of the Transitional Government, some 800 long-term political detainees were freed in accordance with the undertaking contained in the internal settlement agreement. However, more than 100 political detainees were not released. The detainees included such prominent political figures as the Reverend Canaan Banana, once Vice-President of the African National Council, and Enos Nkala — both of whom had been nominated by Bishop Muzorewa as members of his delegation to the Geneva Conference on Rhodesia in October 1976 — and John Chirisa, a leading member of the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU), detained in July 1977 immediately after being acquitted of political charges.
New detentions began as soon as it became evident that there was considerable popular opposition to the internal settlement agreement. Some 300 ZAPU supporters were arrested in September 1978 when both ZAPU, led by Joshua Nkomo, and the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) - led by Robert Mugabe — were again banned by the authorities. Some were released after a short time but administrative detention orders were imposed on many, including former detainees like Amos Msongelwa and Munetsi Kadenhe, who had been detained without trial from 1964 to 1974. Others, like Alex Mpofu Nharara, who was detained in September 1978, and Enock Bashitiyayo, who was detained in November 1978, had been freed from detention only the previous April. By April 1979, the number had risen to more than 300 and was increasing rapidly.
Wide new powers of detention were introduced in September 1978 with the
42
introduction of martial law, which was first applied only in a few areas, but within three months was extended to cover about 90 per cent of the country. Under the martial law regulations, powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial were given to all members of Rhodesia's security forces - broadly defined - and any person assisting them, including presumably white civilians called upon to help security forces on occasions, and also to members of the "private armies" recruited by Bishop Muzorewa and the Reverend Sithole ostensibly to act as auxiliary security forces. People detained in martial law areas may be held indefinitely without charge or trial and are not permitted visits from relatives or lawyers. The International Red Cross, which is permitted to inspect conditions at Wha Wha Detention Centre and other places where long-term detainees are held, has not been granted access to martial law detainees or their places of imprisonment. These include not only prisons and detention centres under the supervision of the Department of Prisons, but also police and military camps, where detainees come under the direct authority of the security forces.
No official figures have been issued for the number of people detained under martial law regulations but the total is beheved to be several thousand. In December 1978, for example, there were beheved to be more than 1,000 martial law detainees in the Midlands area alone.
The martial law regulations make provision for the introduction of a new system of special courts martial, established in areas under martial law and given jurisdiction to try political cases. The special courts martial are empowered to impose any sentence considered appropriate, including the death penalty, as long as it does not exceed the maximum sentence which could be imposed by the High Court if the offence in question were covered by existing criminal law. However, unlike the death penalties imposed by the High Court, those passed by special courts martial are not subject to judicial review in the Appeal Court but only to consideration by a specially estabhshed Review Authority which may meet in camera and whose membership is not known.
Another characteristic of the special courts martial is that their officers need not have any legal qualifications or experience. They need only be composed of "suitably qualified persons," a term not defined and which probably means any nominee of the local military authorities. It is impossible to know how many people have been tried and convicted by special courts martial because of the lack of official data and because the great majority of people who appear before them are not legally represented. However, it is known that at least 12 death sentences had been imposed by martial law courts by late January 1979.
The use of torture has been a longstanding problem in Rhodesia. With the increase in fighting and powers of detention extended under martial law to all members of the security forces and those assisting them, it became even more serious. Many reports were received by Amnesty International concerning not only the torture of detainees under interrogation but also systematic ill-treatment of civilians in the rural areas who are taken to police and military camps for questioning about the movements and activities of nationalist guerrillas. The purpose appears to be not merely information but terror. Torture is used to supplement other methods employed by the authorities to isolate the guerrillas and deny them contact with rural Africans: the forced removal of civihans into "protected villages" and "consolidated villages", the wholesale destruction of property
43
and livestock; the imposition of collective fines; and the confiscation and control of food supplies.
The war became increasingly bitter throughout the year and atrocities against the civilian population were committed by all parties. However, one encouraging sign in February 1979 was the unconditional release of four white prisoners by ZANU in Maputo, Mozambique. The four, all of whom had been taken prisoner by ZANU guerrillas in Rhodesia and held for periods up to one year, were formally released to representatives of Amnesty International in what Mr Mugabe described as "a humanitarian gesture" by ZANU. All four said that they had been well treated in custody. Following the release of these prisoners, an Amnesty International mission visited Salisbury for discussions with government officials about violations of human rights.
Throughout the year, Amnesty International groups continued to work for individual prisoners of conscience and to provide assistance to them and other victims of human rights violations. In August 1978, Amnesty International presented a submission on Rhodesia to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights' Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Southern Africa. In April 1979, Amnesty International presented a statement on human rights violations in Rhodesia to a joint meeting of the United States' House of Representatives' Sub-Committees on Africa and on International Organizations.
