Iran (the Islamic Republic of)
Amnesty International's concerns have been greatly affected by the political upheaval culminating in the Shah's departure in January 1979 and the return of Ayatollah Khomeini, who during his years of exile had become a focus of opposition to the Shah.
Amnesty International had frequent correspondence with the previous authorities concerning death sentences, allegations of torture and arrests. On 13 July 1978 it made an inquiry about the death of a student, Ayub Moadi, alleged to be the result of ill-treatment inflicted on him at the Babolsar police station. Mr Parvis Radji, the ambassador in London, rephed: "While being held at the police station in Babolsar, he fell ill of an apparent heart condition and was
156
immediately rushed to Shapour hospital in Babol. Mr Moadi failed to respond to treatment and died at 4 p.m. of the same day."
None of those who were the subjects of appeals against death sentences were executed and no official executions of political prisoners took place to the knowledge of Amnesty International until the change of government in February 1979. There were, however, a large number of deaths—probably thousands—as a result of the suppression of demonstrations against the Shah and his government and, even after his departure, against the government of Dr Shapour Bakhtiar, who was appointed by the Shah.
In November 1978, an Amnesty International research mission spent two weeks in Iran interviewing released prisoners, relatives of prisoners and lawyers. The information obtained confirmed allegations spanning the past 15 years that the torture of political prisoners had been practised systematically throughout the country and that although it appeared to have decreased since early in 1977, when the Shah announced that the use of torture had ceased, it had not stopped altogether. In a press release on 11 December 1978 Amnesty International published details of some recent cases of torture reported to its delegates. Methods of torture described included whipping with cables, the beating of the soles of the feet, kicking, punching, burning of parts of the body with cigarettes, prolonged sleep deprivation combined with forced standing, the application of nettles to sensitive parts of the body and long periods of solitary confinement.
Most political prisoners known to Amnesty International had already been released in a series of amnesties before the Shah's departure. The few remaining were freed when Dr Mehdi Bazarghan, the Prime Minister appointed by Ayatollah Khomeini, took over the government early in February 1979. During February and March 1979 several thousands of people, alleged to be supporters of the previous government, were arrested and detained without charge. Those regarded as having a direct responsibility for torture or deaths were tried by Islamic revolutionary courts and executed. When Ayatollah Khomeini announced on 16 March 1979 the suspension of the revolutionary courts, which temporarily stopped executions, at least 65 executions had taken place; 49 of former officials of the Shah's regime and 16 for ordinary crimes, mostly offences against Islamic sexual laws. Trials and executions were resumed early in April 1979. By the end of that month over 100 executions were known to have taken place.
On 18 February 1979, Amnesty International appealed to Dr Bazarghan for a halt to executions. Further appeals were addressed to Dr Bazarghan and Ayatollah Khomeini on 22 February 1979. These appeals, which were the subject of a press release on the same day, referred to the special need for open trials and appeal procedures in cases which might result in death sentences. On 6 March it wrote again to Dr Bazarghan, expressing its concerns, and on 9 March further appeals were made to him and to Ayatollah Khomeini.
In April 1979 a research mission went to Iran to investigate Amnesty International concerns, in particular the continuing executions and lack of proper legal safeguards in the trials of political and other prisoners.
