Zaire (the Republic of)
Political events were dominated by the crisis which developed in Shaba province in May 1978 and by the fragile state of the country's economy. The government looked to France, Belgium, Senegal and Morocco for assistance with the first problem and to the International Monetary Fund for help with the second. A major attempt was also made by President Mobutu Sese Seko to mend Zaire's
40
relations with neighbouring Angola from within whose borders was launched the attack on Shaba by the Front de Libération Nationale Congolaise (FLNC).
The fighting in Shaba continued throughout May and early June 1978, by which time the FLNC forces had been repulsed. The rebellion and its repression resulted in the deaths of a large number of military personnel and civilians. More than 800 people were killed in the town of Kolwezi alone, including both Zairean civilians and white expatriate workers.
In the aftermath of the rebellion large numbers of people were arrested in Shaba province. All foreign journalists were expelled. A curfew was introduced and Shaba province remained under military rule until early 1979. Many reports were received of random brutality by soldiers. Most arrests appear to have been of the Lunda ethnic group, from which the FLNC derived much of its support. In June 1978, some 1,300 detainees were transferred from Lubumbashi, the capital of Shaba province, to Lokandu military camp near Kindu in Kivu province where they were detained without trial for several months. In late July 1978, 27 people detained in this camp are reported to have been executed. Conditions at the camp were extremely harsh and detainees received little food, some dying from starvation. The remainder were reportedly released in late 1978.
Amnesty International took up the cases of some 40 political prisoners and untried detainees during the year. They included former soldiers convicted of conspiring against the President in September 1975, others convicted in March 1978, and university students from Lubumbashi detained in late 1977. In June
1978,	Amnesty International made representations to President Mobutu about the situation of Nguza Karl I Bond - the former State Commissioner for Foreign Affairs sentenced to hfe imprisonment in 1977 - who was reported to be in poor health as a result of his detention at Kotakoli military camp. Several weeks later, on 11 July 1978, President Mobutu granted an amnesty for a number of political prisoners, including Nguza Karl I Bond, who was subsequently reappointed to his former position in the government in a major government reshuffle in March
1979.	Among the other prisoners released as a result of the amnesty were several people convicted in September 1975 and several of the students whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International.
On 24 June 1978, President Mobutu announced a general amnesty for political exiles and refugees and invited Zaireans living outside the country to return home without fear of prosecution. As a result of this amnesty and the improvement which took place in relations between Zaire and Angola in mid-1978, large numbers of refugees returned to Zaire, particularly from Angola, where they had fled during the Shaba rebellions of 1977 and 1978. Despite the President's assurances, it is reported that a number of refugees suspected of supporting the FLNC were detained and summarily killed as they returned.
Amnesty International's main concerns are the widespread use of detention without trial, allegations concerning torture of detainees and harsh conditions of imprisonment. The death penalty is also frequently used for political offences and for crimes such as armed robbery.
