Nepal (the Kingdom of)
The government continues to imprison persons for political reasons under the Pubhc Security Act 1961 (PSA) and the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act (the Raj Kaj Act). The PSA allows administrative detention without judicial review. Detainees held under it may be imprisoned for a maximum of 3 years. However, Amnesty International knows of one case where a prisoner was rearrested immediately after the expiry of his three year detention and was held for a total of eight years.
Most long-term prisoners are held on specific charges of a political nature, often sedition, under the Raj Kaj Act, which is defined to include bringing "into hatred or contempt or (exciting) disaffection towards His Majesty or members of the
104
royal family", but they are commonly held for long periods without trial. Basudev Koirala, a member of the Nepali Congress Party, was sentenced to 3 years under the Raj Kaj Act in February 1979, almost two-and-a-half years after his arrest. Ram Chandra Tiwari, who was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience in February 1979, was arrested under the Raj Kaj Act in November 1976 soon after his return to Nepal from a period of exile in India and is still awaiting trial in Jaleshwar Jail.
Short-term pre-emptive arrests for political reasons occur regularly. For instance, of 45 persons arrested under the PSA in Pokhara on 27 November 1978 in anticipation of a visit by the former Prime Minister and leader of the Nepali Congress Party, B.P. Koirala, ail but two were released within the month. Amnesty International beheves that at present there are approximately 150 pohtical prisoners in detention in Nepal, most of them being held without trial.
The former Prime Minister, B.P. Koirala, who was acquitted of five of seven charges of treason and sedition under the Raj Kaj Act in February and March 1978 (Amnesty International Report 1978), was permitted to leave the country on parole in February and December 1978 for medical treatment abroad. Mr Koirala returned to Nepal from abroad on 6 March 1979. On 28 April, he was placed under house arrest and five other Nepah Congress Party members—including former minister Ganesh Man Singh, and Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, who was Speaker of the parliament until 1960—were taken into police custody under the Public Security Act. The arrests came after a three-week student strike had culminated in a demonstration in the town of Hetaura in which two people were killed by police gunfire. Mr Koirala and his colleagues were alleged to have organized the demonstration.
In addition, the government has appealed against Mr Koirala's acquittal on the five charges under the Raj Kaj Act and he still faces trial on the remaining two charges. Under the Act, sedifion carries a maximum penalty of three years and treason is punishable by death. Mr Koirala is charged with treason for his alleged involvement with Yagya Bahadur Thapa, a former Nepalese army captain, in promoting armed rebellion.
On 9 February 1979, shortly before Mr Koirala's return to Nepal after receiving medical treatment, the government executed Captain Thapa and Bhim Narayan Shrestha, who had been found guilty of an attempt on the life of the King. On 15 February 1979, Amnesty International sent a telegram to King Birendra expressing its deep concern about the executions and urging the King to issue orders to ensure that Nepal's longstanding tradition of avoidance of the death penalty was observed. Nepal is the only country in South Asia known to Amnesty International to have abolished the death penalty for ordinary crimes. The only other execution known to have taken place in Nepal since 1945 occurred in 1962, when Durganand Jha was hanged for an alleged attempt to kill the King.
