ARGENTINA
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Néstor Kirchner Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes International Criminal Court: ratified
There were reports of attacks and threats to individuals involved in trials of former members of the security forces. Some trials for human rights violations were concluded. Prison conditions did not improve. Indigenous communities' economic social and cultural rights continued to be violated.
Justice
Several former members of the security forces accused of committing human rights abuses during the military governments (1976-83) went on trial. Judges, prosecution witnesses, non-governmental organizations and relatives of former victims involved in the trials were attacked and threatened in the last four months of the year. The trials followed a ruling by the Supreme Court in 2005 that the Laws of Final Stop and Due Obedience were unconstitutional.
In September the Senate passed a bill implementing the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court-
Prison conditions
Conditions of detention continued to be harsh in most prisons and detention centres and detainees were ill-treated- Detainees were reportedly seriously injured in fires in prisons and police stations, allegedly because of lack of help.
Q In March, Walter Daniel Lescano died as a result of burns acquired during a fire in the punishment cell where he was held in the men's prison in Santiago del Estero, Santiago del Estero Province. He had complained of ill-treatment by prison guards. An investigation was reportedly initiated into the circumstances surrounding the fire. Q InJanuary, three detainees—Sergio Daniel Romero, 16-year-old Matías Martinez and 17-year-old Ricardo Edgar Pared - died and one, Hugo Ariel Escobar, suffered serious burns in a fire at the 7th Police Station in Corrientes, Corrientes Province. The four detainees had been handcuffed to the cell bars after being beaten by members of the police. An investigation was reportedly initiated.
Ai country reports/visits
Statements
•	Argentina; Possible "disappearanceVFear for safely - Jorge Julio López (Al Index: AMR 13/004/2006)
•	Argentina: Human rights cases endangered by new wave of threats (Al Index: AMR 13/005/2006)
Amnesty International Report 2007
55
