Zaire (the Republic of)
The year under review (July 1977-June 1978) began and ended with fighting in Zaire's southern province of Shaba (formerly known as Katanga). The first invasion of Shaba began in March 1977, when the forces of the Front de Libération Nationale Congolaise (FLNC), led by General Nathaniel Mbumba, occupied several towns in the province. The FLNC received its support mainly from the Lunda ethnic group, and has sometimes been described erroneously as the same force of "Katangan Gendarmes" as those who had supported the secession of Katanga in the early 1960s and who then sought refuge in neighbouring Angola. The invasion was only repulsed after Morocco sent a detachment of 1,500 troops to assist the Zaire army. By the end of May 1977, the Zaire forces were once more reported to be in control of Shaba Province, and the FLNC troops to have retreated to Angola. However, in early 1978, it was again reported that the FLNC were preparing an attack on Shaba. The actual invasion began in May 1978, when the FLNC suddenly occupied the mining town of Kolwezi. Once again the invaders were driven out after foreign intervention: this time Belgian and French paratroops were sent in to evacuate European expatriate workers trapped in the area of fighting. However, the French force also took part in military actions against the rebels.
Although the fighting in Shaba Province, and particularly the massacre there of several hundred Europeans, was the central point in international reports on Zaire, political unrest was also widespread in other regions of the country. Nevertheless, the crises in Shaba were important in influencing events generally throughout Zaire.
President Mobutu Sese Seko's position as Head of State, which he has held since he seized power in a military coup in 1965, was confirmed when he was re-elected for a further seven-year term as President in December 1977. He was the only candidate and was returned to office with - according to official figures - more than 98 per cent of the votes cast. As President, he heads both the ruling National Executive Council and the National Legislative Council, to which members were elected in November 1977. In July 1977, Kasenda Mpinga was appointed "First State Commissioner", or Prime Minister, and he retained this post when the Government was re-shuffled after the Presidential elections in December 1977.
93
In the aftermath of the Shaba conflict, from March to May 1977, several Zaire army commanders and leading political figures were dismissed from office, accused of treason and, upon conviction by court martial, sentenced to death. They included Mampa Ngankwe Salamayi, former commander of military operations in Shaba Province, who was found guilty of treason, endangering state security and misappropriation of public funds. He was sentenced to death in August 1977, but it is not known whether he has been executed. In the same month, Monguya Mbenge, former Governor of Shaba Province, was sentenced to death in absentia by the Lwalaba operational war council. He was condemned to death for inciting military personnel to disaffection. He was charged after publishing a book favourable to General Mbumba and the FLNC, while living in exile in Belgium.
In August 1977, the arrest was announced of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Karl I. Bond, who had previously been regarded as the second most powerful figure in the Government. Karl I. Bond was arrested at the same time as his uncle, the Mwata Yamvo or Paramount Chief of the Lunda ethnic group in Shaba Province. They were both accused of treason. Both men belonged to the same ethnic group as the FLNC invaders, and Karl I. Bond in particular was suspected of having prior knowledge of the March 1977 invasion of Shaba Province. In addition to being Paramount Chief of the Lunda, the present Mwato Yamvo is also the brother of the late Moise Tshombe, leader of the secessionist movement in Katanga in the early 1960s and later Prime Minister of the Congo before President Mobutu came to power.
In September 1977, Karl I. Bond was tried by the Court of State Security and convicted of undermining Zaire's external security, failing to reveal his knowledge of rebel (FLNC) plans to invade Shaba Province, and offending the Head of State. He was condemned to death, but two days later, after President Mobuto had received appeals from a number of international sources, including Amnesty International, requesting him to commute the death sentence, it was commuted to life imprisonment. Since September 1977, Karl I. Bond is reported to have been held at Kotakoli military camp in the Gemena District of Equateur Province. In May and June 1978, reports circulating in Europe suggested that he was severely ill with diabetes, and that he had been denied adequate medical treatment while in prison. Other reports, alleging that he had died in detention, were denied by the Zairean authorities.
Within a few months of Karl I. Bond's trial, the Zaire Government was once more facing internal rebellion, this time in Bundundu Province, only a few hundred kilometres east of Kinshasa. Although the cause of the rebellion was not clear, in early January 1978 members of the Babunda ethnic group joined a movement opposed to the Zaire central Government. The movement was reported to be a revival of the Mulele rebellion of the mid-1960s. Later in January, members of the Zaire army were sent in to put down the rebellion, and large numbers of people are reported to have been summarily executed. In Idiofa, the main town in the district, 14 people were hanged in public. Reports of the total number of people murdered in the area vary, but suggest that at least 500 were killed by the Zaire security forces, and that hundreds more were detained.
In February 1978, President Mobutu announced that he had discovered a plot to disrupt Zaire's economy, kill several members of his family, and force
94
him to resign from the Presidency. Initially, some 250 members of the armed forces are believed to have been detained in connection with the plot. In early March 1978, 79 people went on trial in Kinshasa, and the cases of five others were heard in absentia. The defendants included 62 members of the armed forces and 17 civilians, but all of them were tried together before a military War Council. The prosecution's case appears to have been based almost entirely on the evidence of one alleged conspirator, Major Kalume Amba, who had accused most of the others of complicity. Despite objections by their lawyers, the civilian defendants were tried by the military court. Defence lawyers pointed out that the sentences demanded by the prosecution, including 28 death sentences, were harsher than those permitted under the Zaire military code. However, the military judges, led by the army's Auditor-General, over-ruled such objections and most of the defendants were convicted, largely on the evidence given by Major Kalume Amba. At the end of the eight-day trial, the court passed 19 death sentences (five of them in absentia) and sentenced 51 other defendants to prison terms ranging from one to 20 years. The next day - 17 March 1978 - 13 of those sentenced to death were executed by firing squad. The one woman who had been sentenced to death was not executed: her sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. President Mobutu stated in a national broadcast: "I will no longer tolerate actions to stop Zaire punishing criminals in the way they deserve under the pretext of safeguarding human rights." Amnesty International had appealed to the President to prevent any executions from taking place.
Between the two Shaba crises of May 1977 and May 1978, the Zaire authorities detained a large number of people for long periods without trial. They came from all ranks of society and from different parts of Zaire, although many people in Shaba and Bandundu Provinces in particular were detained. Amnesty International was informed of the detention without charge or trial of a number of students from the university campus at Lumumbashi, who were arrested for producing tracts against President Mobutu and were held at Kasapa central prison. Amnesty International learnt also of the cases of former Government ministers and officials who have been detained for as long as two years without trial.
More than 30 soldiers are still in prison, accused of having taken part in an attempt to overthrow President Mobutu in June 1975. They were convicted by a military court which sat in camera in September 1975, and seven of those convicted were sentenced to death: their executions are not yet reported to have taken place. Amnesty International does not believe that these soldiers were given a fair trial. They are reported to be held in Angenga military prison in Lisala District.
In December 1977, Amnesty International received reports that a former member of the political bureau of the MPR was being tortured at Binza, near Kinshasa. Amnesty International appealed on behalf of the victim, Mwami Ndatabaye, who is a Kivu traditional chief, and asked President Mobutu to prevent any further ill-treatment of him. He was eventually released. Amnesty International also received other reports of ill-treatment, particularly after the end of the first Shaba war in May 1977 and after the end of the rebellion in Bandundu Province in January 1978.
