Japan
During 1977-78, Amnesty International has been concerned about the use of the death penalty as punishment for a variety of criminal offences in Japan.
Largely in connection with acts of violence committed in Japan, the Government of the Prime Minister, Takeo Fukuda, has widened the application of the death penalty. On 12 May 1978 the Japanese Diet (Parliament) passed legislation introducing the death penalty for killings which occur during the hijacking of aircraft or the seizure of diplomatic establishments. The new legislation came into force on 5 June 1978.
In a letter to the Prime Minister on 21 June, Amnesty International expressed its concern and regret at the introduction of legislation broadening the availability of the death penalty in Japan. The letter explained that Amnesty International opposes the imposition of death sentences in all cases and urges the abolition of the death penalty in all countries. Noting that in Japan a high proportion of those convicted of capital offences are executed, Amnesty International urged the Government to recommend that all death sentences be commuted. Between 1969 and 1973 seventy-one people were executed in Japan for crimes which included
167
homicide and homicide related to robbery or rape. In March 1977 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Masao Akahori, who has been imprisoned under sentence of death since his conviction for murder in 1958. In its letter of 21 June Amnesty International again urged that his sentence be commuted on humanitarian grounds.
In the same letter, Amnesty International warmly welcomed the Japanese Government's decision, taken on 30 May, to sign the United Nations International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights. Amnesty International welcomed the fact that this decision would lead to the establishment of internationally recognized standards for the protection of human rights in Japan. Amnesty International urged the Government to take early steps to ensure the full ratification of the Covenants and that Japan would accede to the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Amnesty International urged the Japanese Government to take these steps in order to make certain that the two Covenants have the greatest possible effectiveness in the protection of human rights in Japan.
