Sri Lanka (the Republic of)
On 21 July 1977, the United National Party won an overwhelming election victory on a program which included the provision of effective guarantees for the enforcement of fundamental rights in the Constitution, and the release of political prisoners serving prison sentences for their alleged participation in the 1971 insurgency. On 9 August 1977 Amnesty International wrote to the newly elected Prime Minister, J.R. Jayewardene, congratulating him on his appointment and drawing his attention to the recommendation made by Amnesty International in its 1975 mission report on Sri Lanka, calling for the Criminal Justice Commission Act to be revoked and for the review of the cases of political prisoners serving prison
188
sentences imposed by the Criminal Justice Commission under the provisions of the Act.
At the beginning of September 1977, the Vice-Chairman of the International Executive Committee of Amnesty International, Professor Miimtaz Soysal, met the Acting Minister of Justice, Mr Ranaraja. He urged the Government to initiate a review by the ordinary courts of law of all cases of prisoners convicted by the Criminal Justice Commission (Insurgency Branch). Amnesty International was informed that the sentences of such prisoners were under review and that Amnesty International would be sent a report on their position. In the 1975 mission report, Amnesty International had argued that "there should never be a compromise of the standards of criminal justice such as was undergone in the Criminal Justice Commission".
On 21 October 1977, the National State Assembly repealed the Criminal Justice Commission Act and, on 2 November 1977, the Prime Minister announced that all prisoners convicted by the Criminal Justice Commission were granted a pardon. The 130 political prisoners still held were immediately released. They included Rohana Wijeweera, the leader of the Janata Vimukhti Peramuna (People's Liberation Front), one of five prisoners serving a sentence of life imprisonment for involvement in the events of 1971. Amnesty International cabled the Prime Minister on 4 November 1977, congratulating the Government on its decision and asking for details of the release of these prisoners. Their release was confirmed by the Government. Amnesty International again wrote to the Prime Minister on 8 November 1977 to congratulate the Government on the effective steps it had taken for the repeal of the Criminal Justice Commission Act, in line with the recommendation Amnesty International had made in its 1975 mission report, and for the release of political prisoners, whose trials by the Criminal Justice Commission Amnesty International had criticized.
A constitutional amendment passed by the National State Assembly in October
1977	introduced a presidential form of government, giving wide executive powers to the office of the President. Subsequently, on 4 February 1978, the Prime Minister took office as President of Sri Lanka for a period of six years. His inauguration was marked by the announcement of an amnesty, commuting all sentences of death to life imprisonment. Amnesty International has since confirmed reports that some members of opposition parties were subsequently detained for short periods for displaying black flags when the President assumed office. At present, however, Amnesty International has no cases of adopted prisoners in Sri Lanka.
On 19 May 1978, the National Assembly adopted, by a special urgent procedure, two important Bills, introduced the previous day: the Proscribing of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and Similar Organizations Bill and the Criminal Procedure (Special Provisions) Bill. These were enacted after incidents in April and May
1978	in which five police officers were killed in the area where the Tamil minority lives. The incidents followed serious racial disturbances affecting the Tamil minority which had occurred in the post-election period, during August 1977. Introducing the new legislation, the Prime Minister, Ranasinghe Premadasa, is reported to have stated that "tough new legislation" was ". . . needed to prevent a handful of persons from holding the country to ransom" (The Times, London, 20 May 1978).
189
On 30 June 1978, the Secretary General of Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, inquiring about specific provisions of the two new laws, such as the introduction of preventive detention for a period of up to one year, applicable to people suspected of participating in activities or supporting organizations proscribed by the President on grounds which Amnesty International called "vaguely defined". Under the laws, bail is denied to people suspected of committing offences under their provisions. The Secretary General expressed particular concern that the wide provisions of the new laws could seriously restrict the right of freedom of association and expression. In the letter of 30 June, Amnesty International stated once more its humanitarian and legal objections to long-term detention without trial and expressed concern that the new laws permit detention "in such a place and subject to such conditions as may be determined by the Minister", since this could allow for detention under conditions in which political prisoners could be ill-treated and tortured. Amnesty International asked the Minister of Justice about two specific allegations of serious police brutality which it had received, concerning prisoners arrested in February and May 1978, and requested an assurance from him that the Government would take steps to protect people under suspicion from police brutality fully in future. Amnesty International also asked the Minister for details of 38 young Tamils whose names had appeared in the Ceylon Daily Mirror of 20 May 1978 as wanted by the police. Amnesty International asked the Minister for details of the specific charges against them, since among the names were those of seven prisoners of conscience whose cases Amnesty International had adopted when they were detained under the previous administration, together with the cases of 21 other Tamil prisoners investigated by Amnesty International at the time.
On 22 May 1978, the Secretary General of Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, Kanapathipillai William Dewanayagam, inquiring about cases pending before the National Assembly under the provisions of the Parliamentary (Powers and Privileges) (Amendment) Act of 1 February 1978. This empowers the Assembly itself to deal with allegations of breach of parliamentary privilege, which it may punish with imprisonment. Two editors have been fined by the National Assembly for alleged breach of privilege and fears have been expressed that these new powers inhibit legitimate criticism of the Government.
