Mali (the Republic of)
Mali is still ruled by the military Government which first came to power in 1968, when the civilian Government of President Modibo Keita was overthrown and many of its members imprisoned. The leader of the military coup, Colonel Moussa Traouré, has been head of state since 1968, and has survived several attempts to oust him from within the military Government (the Comité Militaire de Libération Nationale - CMLN). In 1974, the Government introduced a new Constitution, allowing for a return to civilian rule, and in 1976, a new political party, the Union Démocratique du Peuple Malien (UDPM), was founded to provide support for the Government. Nothing further has been done to restore civilian rule.
The year 1977 was marked by a large number of arrests, following demonstrations which took place at the funeral of former President Modibo Keita, who died while still in detention on 16 May 1977. The arrests in May and June 1977 are reported to have been ordered mainly by the Director of the Security Forces, Lieutenant-Colonel Tiécoro Bagayoko, who is believed to have favoured particularly repressive measures against supporters of the former civilian régime. However, only a year later, by May 1978, all the prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International in Mali had been released, and the former Director of the Security Forces was himself in detention.
At the end of February 1978, there were important changes in the composition of the CMLN. On 28 February 1978, President Moussa Traouré ordered the arrest of three leading members of the CMLN, all of whom were generally regarded as advocates of continuing military rule — the Director of the Security Forces, Tiécoro Bagayoko, the Minister of Defence, Interior and Security, Lieutenant-Colonel Kissima Doukara, and the Minister of Transport and Public Works, Lieutenant-Colonel Karim Dembele. The President made allegations of corruption against them, but a more serious reason given for their arrest was that they were planning a military coup within the CMLN for early March, to assassinate President Moussa Traouré and other members of the CMLN who supported the return to civilian rule. They are reported to have planned to replace Moussa Traouré as head of state with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Colonel Samba Cissoko. After the arrests, crowds in the capital, Bamako, demonstrated in support of Moussa Traouré and against, in particular, Tiécoro Bagayoko, who was popularly regarded as responsible for the cruel way in which the security forces treated detainees and political prisoners.
In early March 1978, there were further arrests. The Minister of Foreign Affairs was arrested when he returned to Mali from a visit abroad, and so were more than 30 leading members of the armed forces and the police. President Moussa Traouré continued to stress the charges of corruption against those arrested, and stated that if evidence were found to support the charges, the detainees would be brought to trial.
60
While Tiécoro Bagayoko was Director of the Security Forces in 1977, several hundred people are reported to have been detained — mostly in June 1977. Among them were a Malian lawyer of international reputation, Demba Diallo, and several former members of Modibo Keita's Government — Attaher Maiga and Moussa Drame, both of whom had previously been imprisoned between 1968 and 1974. During that time they were adopted by Amnesty International, which took up their cases again in 1977. Most of the detainees were released during July and August 1977; a group of 33, including Demba Diallo and Attaher Maiga, were released in November 1977 in an amnesty to mark the ninth anniversary of the coup which had overthrown Modibo Keita and brought the CMLN to power on 19 November 1968. None of the detainees had been brought to trial.
During 1977, Amnesty International had some 28 adopted prisoners in Mali. Approximately half of these were former colleagues of Modibo Keita who had been detained without trial since November 1968. They included the widow of the former President. The remaining prisoners were all arrested in 1974 and accused of producing and distributing a tract entitled "La farce électorale du 2 juin 1974", criticizing a referendum which the CMLN organized to approve a proposed new Constitution. These prisoners were tried in 1975 and sentenced to varying terms of imprisonment. They were mostly due to be released in 1978.
Most of Mali's political prisoners were held in prison and military camps in the country's northern Saharan region. Many former colleagues of Modibo Keita were held at Kidal Prison, north of Gao, but some prisoners were held in Taoudenni, a salt mine in the far north of Mali. Taoudenni is reported to be the harshest of Mali's detention camps, and many prisoners die within a few months of arriving there. The majority of political prisoners reported still to be held at Taoudenni are believed to be members of the Tuareg ethnic group who were originally detained by order of President Modibo Keita after a Tuareg rebellion against the central Government in 1964.
By late 1977, most of the prisoners detained since 1968 and several of those held since 1974 were known to be seriously ill and in need of urgent medical attention. After asking the Malian authorities to grant an amnesty on 19 November 1977 (only a partial amnesty was granted), Amnesty International's Secretary General appealed to President Moussa Traouré in December 1977 to release all long-term detainees who were seriously ill, or at least to give them access to proper medical facilities. He also requested the Malian head of state to consider asking an international organization to conduct a thorough study of conditions in Malian prisons.
Amnesty International adoption groups with Malian prisoners also made special appeals to the Malian authorities in December 1977. In his New Year message to the nation at the end of 1977, President Moussa Traouré announced the release of all political detainees, including Mariam Keita, the widow of former President Modibo Keita, and at least 11 members of the former Government who had been detained since 1968. Amnesty International congratulated the President on these releases and later encouraged him to free all Mali's remaining sentenced political prisoners. After the arrest in February and March 1978 of those members of the CMLN who were opposed to releasing the remaining political prisoners, President Moussa Traouré ordered an amnesty on 1 May 1978 for the 11 prisoners who had been imprisoned since 1974.
61
By May 1978, all Amnesty International's adopted prisoners of conscience in Mali had been released, although the organization continued to investigate the case of one former member of the CMLN who, after assisting in the coup which overthrew President Modibo Keita, was himself arrested in 1971 and accused of conspiring against the military Government. Several of his alleged accomplices have died while in detention, but after a secret trial in 1973, former Capitaine Malick Diallo was sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labour. Amnesty International has not been able to ascertain whether Tuareg political prisoners are still being held in Taoudenni prison camp or whether they benefited from the amnesties at the New Year and on 1 May 1978.
