Bulgaria (the People's Republic of)
A number of articles of the Bulgarian Penal Code make people liable to imprisonment if they exercise their human rights by publicly criticizing the country's economic and social system or its political leadership. Article 108 provides for a sentence of up to five years' imprisonment for "anti-state agitation", while Article 109 prescribes terms of imprisonment of from three to twelve years for membership of any organization whose activities are "aimed at the destruction of the people's democracy". Article 273 forbids "dissemination of untruthful remarks which might incite mistrust of the state power or cause confusion in society": it is punishable by up to two years' imprisonment or corrective labour.
203
During the past year Amnesty International has adopted as a prisoner of conscience Eugenii Galabov, sentenced in January 1977 by the district court of Sofia to one year's imprisonment for "anti-state agitation" and "dissemination of untruthful statements". He was denounced to the state security police by a colleague after he had criticized the restrictions placed by the Bulgarian authorities on freedom of movement. During the hearing he was charged with having failed in his duty as a citizen because he did not report the alleged intention of his wife and son not to return to Bulgaria after travelling abroad. In July 1978 Amnesty International received information that Eugenii Galabov had had his sentence extended.
Amnesty International also adopted Wladimir Gusenko, a forty-eight-year-old electrician from Sliven, sentenced in January 1977 to three years' imprisonment for "anti-state agitation". The court found him guilty of having distributed foreign newspapers and magazines containing criticism of the social and political system in Bulgaria to a small circle of friends.
Ilija Minev is another of Amnesty International's adopted prisoners of conscience in Bulgaria. He was sentenced to five years' imprisonment on a charge of "anti-state agitation" in early 1976. This was based on a number of letters which he had written during 1975 in which he accused the Bulgarian authorities of a wide range of violations of human rights. He addressed the letters to Richard Nixon (then President of the United States of America) and to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva. The letters were intercepted by the Bulgarian state security police and Ilija Minev was subsequently arrested. He has a long record of political imprisonment. In 1946 a people's tribunal sentenced him to death as a supporter of the royalists. The death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment and he was released under an amnesty in 1964. Subsequently, he and his wife Angelika were banished to the village of Bozurovo, until his arrest in 1975. A few months after he was arrested, his wife left Bozurovo without official authorization in order to visit him in Sofia Central Prison. She, too, was arrested and charged with "anti-state agitation" and was sentenced in 1976 to one year's imprisonment.
Ljuben Sobadaschiev, married with two young children, and employed by the Bulgarian Danube shipping line, was arrested on 16 May 1978. At the time of writing, he is being held in pre-trial detention in Sofia on charges of forming a group with aims hostile to the state (Articles 108 and 109 of the Bulgarian Penal Code). He apparently discussed the human rights situation in Bulgaria with a number of friends and publicly distributed leaflets, alleging that the Bulgarian authorities had violated provisions of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. He had previously served a five-year prison sentence during the early 1970s for the same offence. Amnesty International has adopted him and also Petar Kamaraschev and Ivan Isonev, who were sentenced to one and two years' imprisonment respectively at the same trial on the same charges.
During 1977 and the first half of 1978 Amnesty International groups took up for investigation cases of Bulgarian citizens tried and sentenced to long terms of imprisonment on charges of "espionage". One such case is that of Yusuf Husnu, a member of the approximately one-million-strong Turkish Muslim minority in Bulgaria. In the early 1970s, Yusuf Husnu's sister emigrated to Turkey and married a Turkish citizen. Soon afterwards he made his first application to join his relatives
204
in Turkey. This was rejected, as were all his later applications, on the grounds that the Turkish-Bulgarian Treaty of 1968 stated that applications by Turkish Muslims living in Bulgaria to join their relatives in Turkey would be considered only if the latter had left Bulgaria before 1952. Yusuf Husnu often sent letters to his sister and to other relatives in Turkey, alleging that Turkish Muslims in Bulgaria were being persecuted and asking them to approach Turkish officials to help him emigrate to Turkey. He was arrested in 1976 and spent more than 10 months in pre-trial detention in solitary confinement. His trial took place at the beginning of 1977 in the military court of Sofia. He was found guilty of "espionage" and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International is concerned at the strong possibility that he has been imprisoned because he exercised his right to freedom of expression rather than on account of "espionage".
Amnesty International is also investigating the case of another Turkish Muslim, Halil Ismailov, who was 21 at the time of his arrest in 1970, when he was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment for "espionage". His trial took place in camera and none of his relatives was allowed to attend it. Amnesty International has received information that Halil Ismailov, who is now in Stara Zagora Prison, had frequently written letters to Turkish citizens, criticizing the harsh treatment of Muslims in Bulgaria and asking them to help him to emigrate. Amnesty International is concerned that he, too, may have been imprisoned for exercising his right to freedom of expression and that the charge of espionage may have been false.
Two other prisoners convicted of "espionage" in recent years are also of concern to Amnesty International. Dr Peter Kondofersky was convicted of "espionage" in 1971 and sentenced to 12 years'imprisonment. Amnesty International's research into the case indicates that the real reason for his imprisonment is that he had regular contact with friends and relatives in France and that he had persistently refused to join the Communist Party or attend official trade union meetings. (His brother, too, had refused to join the Communist Party and was sentenced in the early 1970s to five years' imprisonment for "anti-state agitation".)
Solomon Ben-Joseph, a former Government official, was convicted of economic espionage in 1974 and sentenced to twelve and a half years' imprisonment. According to Amnesty International's information, the charge of "espionage" was false and he had been imprisoned because, among other things, he had expressed sympathy for Israel.
Both Peter Kondofersky and Solomon Ben-Joseph have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. They are serving their sentences in Stara Zagora Prison, the country's best-known maximum security prison. Information about their condition there confirms persistent allegations that inmates do not get adequate medical treatment. Dr Kondofersky suffers from severe heart trouble, yet it is reported that he received insufficient after-care in the prison following surgery in 1973 and has several times been refused permission to be treated in a hospital. Solomon Ben-Joseph has reportedly been refused treatment for a tumour on the oesophagus and recurring abdominal pains. In June 1978, Amnesty International urged the Bulgarian Minister of Internal Affairs, Dimitar Stoyanov, to look into his case and ensure that he receive adequate medical treatment. According to Amnesty International's information, although Stara Zagora Prison holds 1,300 inmates, it has only one prison doctor and one medical examination room.
205
Amnesty International has received reports that the treatment of inmates of Stara Zagora Prison has improved since 1975 with regard to food, hygiene, the conduct of the guards and access to the prison library and shop. However, the organization has received allegations that some 40 or 50 Muslims {Pomaks) in the prison have been ill-treated. So far as Amnesty International knows, these Pomaks are in prison because they refuse to change their Muslim names to Bulgarian names and because they take part in "illegal" religious festivities. According to report, many of them were kept in solitary confinement in the past year, with reduced rations for periods longer than the maximum 14 days allowed by Bulgarian penal law.
Former prisoners of conscience from Stara Zagora Prison have alleged that Pomaks have been put for as long as three days in a special concrete cell, "one metre square", which has a curved floor often covered with water. In winter the water freezes, and it is reported that prisoners put in this cell have suffered from kidney diseases and pneumonia.
According to recent reports by former prisoners of conscience, since the end of the 1960s a number of dissenters have been confined in psychiatric hospitals for political reasons. The allegations are that the psychiatric ward of the clinic in Boulevard Lenin in Sofia has a special department where political detainees have been interned; in recent years, many of the inmates of this department have been people charged with "anti-state agitation" and with attempting to cross the frontier without official authorization. One of the drugs most frequently used on political detainees is chlorpromazin. One prisoner adopted by Amnesty International, Asen Andenov, who is at present in the Stara Zagora Prison (see Amnesty International Report 1977) was treated in the Boulevard Lenin clinic for prolonged periods during the early 1970s while serving his third sentence for trying to cross the frontier without official authorization in order to join his relatives abroad (an offence punishable by up to five years' imprisonment).
Amnesty International has received allegations that prisoners of conscience are being held in at least six other psychiatric clinics in Bulgaria, including clinics in Biala, Lovetch and Suchodol (Sofia). At the time of writing, Amnesty International is examining the cases of a number of Bulgarian citizens said to be detained in psychiatric hospitals for political reasons and treated with a variety of strong sedative drugs.
According to information received by Amnesty International, hundreds of Bulgarian citizens have been banished without trial for publicly criticizing the country's political system and the official treatment of minority groups. A new police law, "The Law of the People's Militia", which came into force on 1 March 1977, did not restrict the authority of the police to banish people to remote places. Article 39 of this Law proclaims that any Bulgarian adult who has been formally convicted of "crimes against the state" and has served a prison sentence, and any citizens who "engage in anti-social activities which endanger the country's security" may be prohibited from leaving their home town for up to six months. In the case of people who have no permanent residence, the prohibition applies to a specified town.
In Amnesty International's experience, Bulgarian citizens banished under the former police law were released only after several years of compulsory residence in remote mountain villages or villages on the Danube island of Belena. For
206
example, Christo Kolev, a prisoner adopted by Amnesty International, who was banished without trial to the village of Balvan in 1971, was released in February 1978, but rearrested in July 1978 and again banished to Balvan.
At the time of writing, Amnesty International groups have adopted, or are investigating the cases of, 23 Bulgarian prisoners.
Reports of 10 people being sentenced to death during the period under review have reached Amnesty International. All were said to have been convicted of murder. Amongst them wasGeorgi Ivanov Balchev who was executed in November 1977 after being convicted of the murder of two students in May 1977.
