Brunei (the Sultanate of)
The Sultanate of Brunei is situated on the northern coast of the island of Borneo, between the two Malaysian states of Sarawak and Sabah, covering an area of approximately 5,765 square kilometres. Brunei is ruled by an hereditary Sultan, who is assisted by a Council of Ministers. The present Sultan is Sir Hassanal Bolkiah. The Constitution provides for a Legislative Council, in which elected members are in a minority, the majority being officially appointed.
Amnesty International groups have continued to work for the release of 13 adopted prisoners, all former members of the Partai Rakyat Brunei (People's Party of Brunei), who are imprisoned without trial under emergency orders.
153
Most of them have already spent more than 14 years in detention without trial. The Partai Rakyat has been banned since December 1962, when meetings of the Legislative Council were suspended. At that time, the Partai Rakyat held all the elected seats in the Legislative Council, having won 80 per cent of the votes in elections to district councils under a system of indirect elections to the Legislative Council. But they were not able to form a government because their elected representatives were outnumbered by members of the Legislative Council nominated by the Sultan. On 12 December 1962 the Sultan declared a State of Emergency—which is still in force—and invoked a treaty with the United Kingdom to call in British troops to put down a revolt by the Partai Rakyat, who had declared an independent government of Brunei. Some 2,500 Partai Rakyat members and supporters were arrested. Most of them had been released by 1974, with the exception of 49 men, whose cases were taken up by Amnesty International. Of these, according to the information available, the 13 adopted prisoners already spoken of remain in detention without charge or trial.
The exact number of political detainees in Brunei is not known. The Government has not disclosed the number even in response to questions from members of Brunei's Legislative Council. Furthermore, although the over-all trend is for the number to decrease as the result of releases, an unknown number of released prisoners have been arbitrarily re-arrested, including some who had spent many years in detention without trial in the 1960s.
Most of those still in prison have already been detained for what in many countries wouid amount to a life sentence with remission for a convicted criminal, yet they have been held for this length of time for political reasons, without charge or trial, solely at the discretion of the Brunei Government. By releasing more than 30 of the group of 49 detainees already mentioned over the last four years, the Government has demonstrated that it does not consider the detainees represent a threat to the security of Brunei—the original ground for their arrest. In view particularly of the great length of time which most of the prisoners have already spent in detention without trial, Amnesty International has urged their speedy release.
Burma (the Socialist Republic of the Union of)
During 1977-78, the administration of President Ne Win has maintained its one-party form of government; the ruling party is the Burma Socialist Program Party. The new Council of Ministers was appointed in 1977, with a new Prime Minister, U Maung Maung Kha.
Information about political prisoners in Burma is not available. The Government imposes severe restrictions on foreign journalists and the press is under Government control.
There was a recurrence in 1977 of trials for high treason. Following the case of Captain Ohn Kyaw Myint and five others reported in the Amnesty International Report 1977, two more high treason trials began, in December 1977. The first case involved a group of civilians accused of plotting the assassination of a number of Burmese political leaders with the assistance of Karen insurgents. On 24 February 1978 the Rangoon Division Court sentenced to death three of the defendants: U Mahn Ngwe Aung, a Karen national and former chairman of a local unit of the Burma Socialist Program Party, U Mahn Dar Waik, a Karen freelance
154
journalist and Maung Kyaw Htoo, a mechanic. The court in its judgment said that severe punishment had to be given to deter those who plotted against the constitutionally elected national leaders and Government.
The Rangoon Division Court concluded at the same time (February 1978) the trial of four other civilians accused of conspiring with Arakanese rebels to create a separate Arakan state. The court sentenced one of the defendants, U Htein Lin, to death. Information is not available regarding the sentences passed on the three other defendants.
On 27 February 1978, Amnesty International cabled President Ne Win, urging him to commute the four death sentences passed in the two trials.
There were reports in September 1977 of a purge of some 50 senior Government officials, but precise details are not available.
The most serious general human rights problem in Burma involves the treatment of the Muslim minority, particularly the Rohingyas, in the province of Arakan. Recently, there has been a marked increase in the number of Burmese Muslims crossing the border into Bangladesh; the Government there has estimated that in the months of April and May 1978, some 100,000 have sought refuge. The refugees have alleged that Burmese troops had driven them from their homes and that they had been subjected to brutal treatment. On 11 May 1978, Amnesty International cabled President Ne Win, expressing deep concern at continuing reports alleging that some Burmese Muslims have been brutally treated and killed, and that Burmese troops have evicted others from their homes and driven them from the country.
