Central African Empire (the)
In December 1977, a year after changing the status of his country from Republic to Empire, Marshal Jean Bedel Bokassa crowned himself Emperor of Central Africa. During the intervening year, a new Constitution was introduced, and the
40
Emperor declared that it was an offence to refer to the Constitution of the former Republic, or even to refer to the Empire by its former name, the "Central African Republic". In theory the Central African Empire is ruled by the Emperor together with his ministers through the only existing political party, Mouvement d'Evolution Sociale de l'Afrique Noire (MESAN), and Marshal Bokassa hinted that once he was crowned Emperor he would spend most of his time at his palace in his home village, and leave affairs of state to his ministers to deal with. However, in practice, this does not appear to have been the case, and all important decisions continue to be taken by Emperor Bokassa himself: even a foreigner suspected of spying was brought before him personally.
The new Constitution, adopted when Central Africa was declared an Empire, in December 1976, in theory gives assurance that the basic human rights of individual citizens will be safeguarded. Article 48, for example, states that no one shall be arbitrarily detained, and that anyone who is detained should be given a fair trial and adequate opportunity to defend him or herself. However, in practice, these basic rights have been ignored. In December 1976, the Emperor announced a general amnesty for all prisoners, and said that another would be granted at the time of his coronation. When ordering the release of some common-law prisoners in December 1977 he nevertheless decided not to release any political prisoners or anyone who had been imprisoned for "embezzling public funds" - several political prisoners in Central Africa have been charged with embezzlement.
In August 1977, Amnesty International learnt of the cases of four students and one lycée (school) teacher who had been arrested for using the country's former name: Central African "Republic". The four students had only just arrived from France, and the lycée teacher's only apparent offence was to give accommodation to them the night after they arrived. Three of the students and the teacher were all sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, after being charged with crimes against the internal security of the state and with offending Emperor Bokassa. The trial proceedings are believed to have been the same as those usually used in Central Africa in political cases: the trial was in camera, the defendants had no access to lawyers and no opportunity to appeal against their sentences. In ensuing weeks, reports circulating in Europe suggested that the four prisoners had been beaten in prison and that they might, perhaps, have died from the injuries which they had sustained. In order to discredit these reports, in October 1977, shortly before his coronation, Emperor Bokassa ordered the release of the four prisoners. (The fourth student, a pregnant woman, could not be actually imprisoned under Central African law, but was kept under house arrest until October).
One month before the four students and lycée teacher were arrested, a British journalist, Michael Goldsmith, was arrested in Bangui and personally assaulted by the Emperor. He was suspected by the authorities of being a South African spy, after he had sent a telex message about Emperor Bokassa's future coronation. Soon after he was arrested he was taken to see Emperor Bokassa, who beat and kicked him. Michael Goldsmith was subsequently kept in detention for almost a month in Bangui Prison, where conditions are reported to be extremely harsh. He was lucky to be treated better than most other prisoners, for he was given food from a nearby hotel and was eventually attended by the
41
Emperor's own doctor, who treated his wounds. Most of the other prisoners in Bangui Prison spend their days doing forced labour, and many, it is said, die from disease or lack of food and medical attention. The families of political prisoners are unable to obtain any information about them and often do not know whether they are dead or alive. Michael Goldsmith was released in August 1977 after international pressure and appeals from his family for his release.
In December 1976, Amnesty International was informed that two trade unionists, both of them adopted prisoners, Jean Richard Sandos and J.B. Malikanga, had been released under the amnesty granted by Emperor Bokassa. However, in early 1978, Amnesty International heard that both these prisoners were still in prison. It has been investigating these reports before taking up the cases for re-adoption. It is investigating also the cases of other Central Africans who are reported to have disappeared in recent years, and who, if alive, may still be in detention.
