Bahrain (the State of)
In Bahrain, the imprisonment of non-violent opponents of the régime—in most cases without trial—the use of torture and the use of the death penalty are Amnesty International's major concerns. The political situation in Bahrain has not changed during the period 1977-78. Since the dissolution of the partially elected National Assembly in August 1975, the country has been ruled by the Amir, Sheikh Isa bin Sulman al-Khalifa, and a Cabinet formed by his brother, Prime Minister Sheikh Khalifa bin Sulman al-Khalifa.
Amnesty International has 24 adopted prisoners in Bahrain, most of them detained without trial. Twelve new cases were taken up during the past year. Yousif al Ajaji, Abbas Awashi and Ahmad al-Thawadi, who were arrested in June 1974 following an industrial dispute at the Aluminium Bahrain Company, have been in prison ever since, without having been either charged or tried. Other prisoners have been detained since August 1975, when many people were arrested before the dissolution of the National Assembly, and since November 1976, when there were many arrests after the murder of a right-wing newspaper publisher. Although the men responsible for the murder were brought to trial and eventually executed, others arrested at the same time are still held without trial. One of those arrested —apparently in connection with the dissolution of the National Assembly-who is still in prison is Muhsin Marhoun, a lawyer and former member of parliament who, before his own imprisonment, acted on behalf of many other political prisoners. He was arrested in December 1975 when he returned to Bahrain from abroad.
In many cases known to Amnesty International the same people have been arrested, released and re-arrested several times over a period of years, without ever having been charged with an offence, and it appears to be the pattern that arrests are made from time to time simply in order to discourage dissent. Amnesty International has received reports that, in March 1978, 35 employees in the shipbuilding and aluminium smelting industries were arrested and imprisoned for several days, during which time they were beaten. These arrests do not seem to have been connected with any particular activities on the part of those detained. For several years, the number of political prisoners held for more than short periods has remained constant at approximately 30, releases being matched roughly by new arrests.
In May 1978 Amnesty International urged the Minister of Justice, Sheikh Abdulla bin Khaled al-Khalifa, to investigate allegations that Mukund and Jayanti Dhanak, Indian citizens living in Bahrain, who were arrested in connection with their father's murder, had been ill-treated during interrogation.
All of Amnesty International's 24 adopted prisoners in Bahrain are held in Safra Prison (to which they were moved during the past year), most of them
253
having formerly been detained in Jidda Island Prison. Amnesty International has been told that conditions at Safra are inferior to those at Jidda and that the number of permitted family visits has been greatly reduced.
A number of political prisoners were released in an amnesty to mark Bahrain's National Day on 16 December 1977: the exact number is not known-possibly ten.
