Cameroun (the United Republic of)
In February 1978, President Ahmadou Ahidjo celebrated his twentieth anniversary as Cameroun's leader: he became Prime Minister of Cameroun in February 1958, and then President at the time of independence in 1961. Throughout his 20 years in power, President Ahidjo has faced continued opposition from the banned political party, Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC), but only members of the country's ruling political party, Union Rationale Camerounaise (UNC), were permitted to stand for election to Cameroun's National Assembly at the elections in May 1978. Deputies were first elected to the National Assembly in May 1972 when Cameroun became a unitary state (which replaced the former federation of French-speaking and English-speaking Cameroun). The Parliament elected in 1972 was dissolved in 1977 at the end of its five-year term. The 120 candidates for election in May 1978 were selected by a special commission of the UNC's central committee, but on the actual polling day, 28 May, they were returned unopposed.
In 1977 Amnesty International groups took up for investigation the cases of 120 Camerounians who had been arrested in July 1976. These detainees were never formally charged or tried, although the Camerounian Constitution guarantees that detainees be brought to trial. Although no official reason for the arrests in July 1976 has ever been made public, it is believed that the detainees were suspected of association with the banned UPC and of helping to produce and distribute pamphlets criticizing President Ahidjo's Government. Most of those arrested
39
were young people, many of them students at university or school, and some were professionals, such as doctors or engineers, who had studied in France and been associated with the Camerounian Students' Union in France (Union Nationale des Etudiants du Kamerun — UNEK), which was also critical of President Ahidjo and was banned in France in 1977.
In addition to the large number of detainees arrested in July 1976, Amnesty International has taken up the cases of several others who have been detained without trial for long periods. Samuel Essoungou, for example, was arrested in January 1977, shortly before he was due to return to France, where he had lived for some years, and was accused of having contacts with subversive elements and of giving money to the families of prisoners in Cameroun. However, at the time of writing, he has not been formally charged or brought to trial.
Most political detainees appear to be held at two so-called "re-education centers" at Tchollire in northern Cameroun and at Yoko, near Yaounde. Most women detainees are believed to be held at Yoko. Tchollir6, where male detainees are held, is reported to be the harshest of Cameroun's prison camps. Detainees held there are completely isolated from the outside world. They are not permitted to write or receive letters, nor are they allowed any visits, even from close relatives. They are said to be poorly fed and many are alleged to have been ill-treated by prison guards.
Little response has been forthcoming from the Camerounian authorities to representations from Amnesty International, both about long-term detention without trial and about the generally unsatisfactory conditions of imprisonment. On various occasions, the Camerounian authorities have denied that individual detainees are held for political reasons, and even that they are imprisoned at all. Nevertheless, some releases were reported during the past year. In May 1977, the Camerounian authorities are reported to have released 42 detainees, although many of these are believed to have been subsequently re-arrested and only 10 releases were subsequently confirmed. Those who were set free are believed to have remained under police surveillance to discourage them from publicizing their experiences in detention or from reporting details of their prison conditions. In February 1978, Amnesty International appealed to President Ahidjo to grant an amnesty on the twentieth anniversary of his accession to power. Several detainees were released. However, a further Amnesty International appeal in May 1978, on the sixth anniversary of Cameroun's change from a federal to a unitary state, evoked no response.
During 1977-78, Amnesty International became increasingly concerned by the apparently frequent imposition of the death penalty in Cameroun. Common-law prisoners may be sentenced to death for a wide range of offences, including any theft in which a weapon or tool (even one for picking a lock) is used, as well as for aiding and abetting a thief. A large number of prisoners are believed to be awaiting execution at Yaounde Prison, but Amnesty International has no information on the actual rate of judicial executions.
