Albania (the People's Socialist Republic of)
Amnesty International is concerned at the likelihood that grave human rights violations occur in Albania. However, the organization has not been able to verify or document individual cases of political imprisonment or execution. This is because of the country's isolation, the lack of relevant information in the Albanian media or from Government sources and the scarcity of recent emigrants from the country who might be able to give personal testimony.
During the past year, Albania has reaffirmed its official restrictions on citizens' rights as set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In October 1977 a new Penal Code was enacted to conform with the 1976 Constitution (See Amnesty International Report 1977). The new Code still retains legislation which makes individuals liable to long terms of imprisonment for exercising their basic human rights.
Article 1 of the new Penal Code proclaims that "an important duty of the penal legislation of the People's Socialist Republic of Albania is the struggle
202
against bureaucratism and liberalism [emphasis added] which are most dangerous to the state of dictatorship of the proletariat".
Article 55 of the new Code proscribes "agitation and propaganda against the State". It proclaims that "fascist, anti-democratic, religious, war-mongering or anti-socialist agitation and propaganda, as well as the preparation, dissemination or the keeping for dissemination of literature with such a content to weaken or undermine the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat are punished by deprivation of liberty for from three to ten years".
According to fragmentary reports reaching Amnesty International, the groups most liable to imprisonment under these articles of law for exercising their human rights are active believers of the Autocephalic Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Muslim faiths and their leaders, members of the Turkish, Greek and Montenegran minorities and peasants who oppose the official policy of the forcible "collectivization" of the land and the abolition of private agricultural holdings.
Article 2 of the new Penal Code, subtitled "The Bases of Penal Legislation", in spirit supports the provisions of Article 37 of the Constitution, which states that the state does not recognize any religion but supports and develops "atheist propaganda".
During 1977, Amnesty International members appealed to the Albanian authorities on behalf of three Roman Catholic titular bishops, Nicola Troshani, Ernesto Coba and Antonin Fishta who disappeared in the mid 1970s after conducting religious ceremonies in private. All three have in the past served long sentences of imprisonment, banishment and forced labour, and all were banned more than 20 years ago from conducting any religious ceremonies. According to religious sources, many of the Roman Catholic, Orthodox and Muslim church leaders in Albania are serving terms of imprisonment or forced labour. Amnesty International is investigating reports that as many as 20 Franciscans are at present imprisoned.
The new Penal Code lists fewer offences punishable by the death penalty than the Code of 1958. It specifies 34 crimes which are punishable by the discretionary death sentence, 23 of these being political or military crimes. The 1958 Penal Code, as amended, listed 40 crimes punishable by the discretionary death sentence, of which 25 were political or military crimes. In the absence of any substantial information, Amnesty International is unable to establish whether the reduction in the number of capital crimes implies that the death sentence will be used less often in Albania.
