Thailand (the Kingdom of)
The Government of the then Prime Minister, Thanin Kraivichien, was itself overthrown in October 1977 by the group of senior military officers which had brought to an end three years of civilian elected government in the previous year. The new Prime Minister, General Kriangsak Chamanand—who is also Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces and Minister of the Interior—is responsible to that group of officers. The Government operates under an interim Constitution, and a national body has been appointed to draft a new Constitution in preparation for national elections to be held in 1979.
Four categories of prisoners in Thailand are of concern to Amnesty International. The first includes those who had been arrested before the military coup of October 1976. Most prominent in this category is the case of Supap Pasa-Ong and six other trade union activists who were arrested in March 1976. Supap had been an active student leader who later became a journalist and then an active member of the trade union movement; he was adviser to a number of trade unions. The police allege that they found a gun and subversive communist literature which belonged to Supap and his colleagues, but the prisoners deny possession of firearms. After a trial which has gone on for more than two years, evidence has not been presented in court which shows that the prisoners had either used violence or planned to use violence in the conduct of their trade union activities.
The second category includes 18 people, mainly student leaders, being tried on charges relating to the student demonstrations at Thammasat University in October 1976. Of the more than 3,000 students arrested at the University, all have been released except for these 18 defendants and one other prisoner, who is being tried on his own. Each of the 18 defendants is indicted for ten offences; in addition, six of them are charged with lese majeste. The central allegation against them is that they took part in a conspiracy "to conduct communist
193
activities directly and indirectly aimed at overthrowing the democratic government, changing the administrative system to one without His Majesty the King as Head of State". The conspiracy was alleged to have been conducted "orally and through distributing leaflets". The defendants were also charged with inciting workers to strike. The specific charges included criminal offences under the Penal Code and conspiracy to kill or attempt to kill Government officers and others, and relate to the events at Thammasat University on 6 October 1976. Other charges include possession of firearms, violently opposing and resisting government officers, and illegal entry and damage to property.
Although the 18 defendants are all civilians, they are being tried before a military tribunal and its decision is not subject to appeal to any other court. Each defendant is liable to the maximum punishment-the death penalty. The defendants were not allowed to appoint lawyers for their defence before the military tribunal, until a new Government decree, issued on 8 November 1977, allowed them to appoint lawyers for the remainder of their trial. The trial before the military tribunal was authorized by two martial law decrees, Number 8 and Number 14, promulgated on 6 and 7 October 1976 respectively. The two decrees retroactively imposed military jurisdiction over violations of the Anti-Communist Activities Act: people accused of committing such violations before martial law was imposed on 6 October 1976 were now to be tried by military tribunals. The Thailand Association of Lawyers protested strongly against this retroactive imposition of military jurisdiction on the grounds that it violated the spirit and tradition of Thai law and the explicit provisions of the former Constitution and Legal Code.
As well as the 18 defendants from Thammasat University, there is the related case of Boonchart Sathienthammani who is being tried before a civilian court, also on the charge of lese majeste. He is alleged to have insulted the Crown Prince of Thailand in the performance of a play which, he maintains, had merely re-enacted an incident which- happened in the past, when two students were killed by police. This prisoner is not officially listed with the Thammasat defendants and it seems that he is being tried in a civilian court because he was arrested before the declaration of martial law.
In the third category are prisoners held under martial law Decree Number 22 which describes nine types of people as being "dangerous to society", six of them on account of criminal acts and three because of political offences, defined in vague terms. Under Decree Number 22, the authorities have wide-ranging powers to arrest suspects and hold them indefinitely without trial. From May 1977, detainees held under this Decree were denied applications for habeas corpus to challenge allegations that they were "dangerous to society". After the declaration of martial law on 6 October 1976, several thousand people were arrested under the Decree. The Government claims that most of them have been released, except for approximately 800, who remain in detention. Of the 800, the Government claims that less than 100 are being held under the political provisions of Decree Number 22.
The fourth category includes people arrested in outlying provinces where the Government is faced with the problem of armed insurgency. There have been cases of people arrested ostensibly on suspicion of being communist insurgents or sympathizing with underground insurgency movements, when there is contrary
194
evidence to indicate that they were arrested for other reasons. An example is the case of Udom Pka-krong and ten other men, alleged to have taken part in an attack by communist insurgents on a military camp which resulted in the killing of 12 soldiers and civilians. The defendants deny any involvement in the attack and any connection with the insurgents. They claim that they had been actively critical of the local authorities and had, in the past, accused them of maladministration, including corruption. They allege that they were victimized by being arrested on false charges, and that confessions were forced from several of them under torture and by threats to their lives. The trial of this case, which began in the city of Nakorn Sri Thammarat, was subsequently transferred to the Bangkok Central Court.
This fourth category of prisoner also includes people who were rounded up by the military in areas where insurgents were active and subsequently required to undergo "re-education" for varying periods in so-called "Democracy Training Schools". One such School is at Ban Chaien in Nakorn Sri Thammarat Province. Groups of people, numbering 300 or more, were taken from several localities-usually groups of villages-and held in the School for periods of about three months, during which time they were given lectures on democracy and Thai national institutions. It is clear that those who are held in such centers are compelled to be there by the local military authorities and this, in fact, amounts to detention without trial.
In August 1977 an Amnesty International mission visited Thailand. It consisted of Ramsey Clark, former Solicitor General of the United States and member of the National Advisory Council of Amnesty International's United States Section, and the head of research on Asia in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International in London. The mission explained the nature of Amnesty International's concern to the Foreign Minister, Uppadit Pachariyangkun, and to the then Minister of the Interior, Samak Sunphorawat, and urged that all political prisoners detained without trial should be released. As for prisoners undergoing trial, the mission pointed out that the trials had moved at an extremely slow pace: it was typical for there to be only one day's hearing a week, and often less, because of postponements. At the rate at which several trials were proceeding, they were likely to last three years. The Amnesty International mission urged the release of those on trial, pending a prompt and fair conclusion to their trials. It pointed out that the 18 Thammasat defendants, who were being tried according to retroactive legislation, had been denied counsel in court and were being tried by a military tribunal, whose decision was not subject to appeal in any other court.
The mission also told the Ministers of Amnesty International's objection to the Prime Minister's power under the Constitution to order the sumir ±y execution of defendants without trial in cases where the offence was deemed to be serious. This power has been used on many occasions to order the summary execution of people accused of murder, rape and smuggling-and, in one case, of an army general who failed in his coup attempt in March 1977.
In May 1978, Amnesty International national sections, together with more than 50 groups that have taken up Thai cases, began a campaign on behalf of Thai political prisoners and to bring about the revocation of the constitutional power to order summary execution and the annulment of those martial law Decrees which provide wide powers of detention without trial.
195
