Singapore (the Republic of)
The ruling People's Action Party (PAP), led by the Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, has been in power continuously since 1959. There are no opposition members in the 65-seat Parliament. The Singapore Government is invested with wide powers of arbitrary arrest and detention under the Internal Security Act (which derives largely from former British colonial legislation). It has continued to use these powers to arrest people alleged to be a danger to the security of Singapore, including men and women who have been outspoken critics of the policies of the Government. Although a member of the United Nations, Singapore has not signed or ratified the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights.
The Government still detains in prison three men who have been held without trial under the Internal Security Act for political reasons since February 1963. They are: Said Zahari, formerly Editor of the Malay language newspaper Utusan Melayu and well known as a poet; Ho Toon Chin (also known as Ho Piao), formerly Secretary General of the now proscribed Singapore National Seamen's Union; and Dr Lim Hock Siew, a medical practitioner and a former officer in the opposition Barisan Sosialis (Socialist Front) Party. A fourth prisoner, Lee Tze Tong, a former officer in the now proscribed Singapore Busworkers' Union and elected member of Parliament representing the Barisan Sosialis Party, was arrested in October 1963. In 1968 he was served with a banishment order and is still in detention in the Moon Crescent Center, "awaiting deportation". Amnesty International has kept urging the immediate and unconditional release of these four men. In the case of Lee Tze Tong, it has urged the Singapore Government to order his immediate release from prison and to grant him permission to remain in the Republic of Singapore if it is his wish to do so.
In addition to their appeals on behalf of these four prisoners, Amnesty International groups have worked on some 40 adoption and investigation cases of men and women detained without trial under the Internal Security Act or the Banishment Act. Some of them have already been detained without trial for more than 11 years. Amnesty International has consistently urged the Singapore Government to present any evidence it possesses against political detainees in fair and open trial, since this is the only way that the grounds for their detention can be fairly tested. Regrettably, however, the Singapore Government has not chosen to bring detainees to trial and, in the absence of public evidence, it would therefore seem
186
that they are arbitrarily detained at the Government's discretion, for political reasons.
Among the prisoners adopted by Amnesty International is Shamsuddin Tung, also known as Tung Tao Chang, arrested in December 1976 on the eve of Singapore's general elections, in which he was an opposition candidate. Shamsuddin Tung, who is a Chinese Muslim, was formerly the Editor of the Nanyang Siang Pau, a leading Chinese language newspaper. From 1971 until 1973 he was detained without trial under the Internal Security Act. The Government alleged that he had encouraged "Chinese chauvinism" in his comments about Chinese language and culture in Singapore. An official statement after his rearrest in 1976 said that he had been detained for raising matters of Chinese education and language during the 1976 election, which allegedly incited "chauvinistic emotions".
The Singapore Government has stated publicly that it will release a detainee who undertakes to "foresake the use of force or violence". On 20 July 1977 Shamsuddin Tung's wife, Aliya Tung, held a press conference at their home at which she released details of a letter her husband had written to the Government. The letter, dated 1 July and addressed to the Prime Minister personally, said:
"I wish to say that I am not, and never have been, a communist, pro-communist or even a communist sympathizer. The Internal Security Department is well aware of this. Equally, I have never advocated violence or the use of force against the Government of Singapore or any other government. I have, however, chosen the constitutional method of opposing certain policies of the Government by standing for election as a member of Parliament, which I believe is the legitimate right of any citizen."
In spite of the Government's assurances explained above, Shamsuddin Tung is still in detention without trial.
In addition to Lee Tze Tong, mentioned above, Amnesty International is working for the release of five other men and women detained "awaiting deportation" under the Banishment Act. Amnesty International believes that these prisoners, originally detained under the Internal Security Act, can only be regarded as political prisoners who are detained indefinitely without trial. They have been imprisoned for periods ranging from eight to fourteen years. Particularly in view of the great length of time which they have already spent in prison without trial, Amnesty International has urged that they should be released immediately and given permission to remain in the Republic of Singapore if they so wish.
In a letter to the Prime Minister on 8 April 1978, Amnesty International expressed concern that, in effect, political prisoners in Singapore are faced with only two "alternatives" to indefinite detention without trial: either conditional release on the basis of "confession" and "recantation" of alleged statements or offences which have never been tested in a court of law, or else banishment and deportation. Amnesty International maintains that the obligation of proving the guilt of an individual must rest with the Government, according to generally recognized legal practice. It is clear from the case of Shamsuddin Tung that even for those who do make a "recantation" there is no guarantee of release.
Amnesty International welcomed the release in 1978 of two adopted prisoners, Lee Eu Seng and G. Raman. On 1 February 1978 the Singapore Government announced the release of Lee Eu Seng, formerly Managing Editor of Nanyang
187
Siang Pau, a Chinese-language newspaper, who had been detained without trial since his arrest in January 1973 in connection with Government allegations that the newspaper had "glamorized the Chinese way of life" and "sought to stir up Chinese racial emotions". These allegations were not tested in a court of law. An official statement announcing Lee Eu Seng's release said that amendments to Singapore's Newspaper and Printing Presses Act in 1977 had ensured that he could no longer "make use of the Nanyang Siang Pau against the public interest". On 25 February Mr Raman, a lawyer well known for his work in defence of political prisoners in Singapore, was conditionally released on a bond of 100,000 Singapore dollars. One of the six restrictions imposed upon him prohibits him from practising his profession for two years.
Amnesty International has reiterated its concern for Dr Poh Soo Kai, a medical practitioner and former Assistant Secretary General of the Barisan Sosialis Party, who was arbitrarily re-arrested in June 1976. Dr Poh had spent 10 years in detention without trial from 1963 until 1973. The Singapore Government has alleged that, among other things, he supplied medicines to a communist activist said to have been injured by a bomb he was carrying. This allegation was based on a "confession" made by Mr G. Raman after his own arrest in February 1977, which he later retracted. Dr Poh, however, remains in detention without trial. Amnesty International has urged that the evidence against Dr Poh Soo Kai should be fairly tested in a court of law, particularly in view of the retraction of Mr Raman's "confession". Failing this, he should be released immediately and unconditionally.
In February 1978, coinciding with the 15th anniversary of the massive arrests carried out in February 1963, Amnesty International published a second edition of its Briefing Paper on Singapore, first published in 1976. The second edition noted that, since 1976, the Singapore Government has taken actions which have led to serious violations of human rights, including the arrest and imprisonment without trial of men and women for political reasons and the use of public "confession" by political prisoners as a basis for arresting and detaining their friends and associates. The Briefing Paper also reiterated Amnesty International's opposition to caning-which leaves permanent scars-as a punishment for certain criminal offences.
On 4 May 1978 Amnesty International cabled the President of Singapore, Dr Benjamin Sheares, expressing concern at the execution of Teh Sin Tong, convicted of drugs offences that carried the death penalty, and urging him, on humanitarian grounds, to commute death sentences passed on nine other people similarly convicted.
