Swaziland (the Kingdom of)
Amnesty International was principally concerned, in 1977-78, with the situation of several Swazi nationals detained for political reasons, and with that of some 20 members of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), a South African liberation movement, who were detained and declared prohibited immigrants in April 1978. The Swazi citizens were all held under the provisions of a King's Order in Council of April 1973, which provides for detention without charge or trial for a maximum of 60 days. In almost all cases, however, those detained were held for more than 60 days since, upon expiry of their first detention order, they were immediately re-detained under new orders. This happened also to the most prominent political prisoner, Dr Ambrose Zwane, who was first detained in February 1978. He was the former leader of the main opposition party— Ngwane National Liberatory Congress (NNLC), which was banned in April 1973 when King Sobhuza II suspended the Constitution and dissolved Parliament. He was served with a new detention order in April 1978, having already spent 60 days in detention. He went on hunger strike in protest against this treatment and had to be moved from Matsapa Central Prison to hospital in Manzini at the end of April. No reasons were given by the Swaziland Government for his detention, although he was at first charged with using a false travel document to go to Mozambique during January 1978. However, this charge was dropped before the case could be brought to court and he was instead served with a detention order. A third successive 60-day detention order was imposed on him in June 1977, by which time he had ended his hunger strike.
Dr Zwane, who was adopted by Amnesty International when he was detained without trial on at least three previous occasions between 1973 and 1976, was not the only NNLC leader to be detained in the past year. The Party's former Secretary-General, Clemens Dumsia Dlamini, was also put under a 60-day detention order in mid 1977 and then continuously imprisoned under successive detention orders for more than nine months. He was still in detention at the end of May 1978. His case has been taken up by Amnesty International.
86
A new wave of arrests took place in Swaziland during April 1978, when the authorities detained some 20 members of the PAC. Although the Deputy Prime Minister, Zonke Khumalo, claimed that they had been abusing their refugee status in Swaziland by attempting to establish military training bases for South African nationalist guerillas, no charges were brought against them but they were declared to be prohibited immigrants. On 10 April, Amnesty International urged Zonke Khumalo to ensure that none of those arrested would be repatriated against their wishes to South Africa, their country of origin, where they would be liable to imprisonment for political reasons. Later, the Swaziland press reported his assertion that the PAC members would be detained until they were granted political asylum in other African countries.
Shortly after the arrest of the PAC members, other South African refugees in Swaziland, including many former Soweto students, demonstrated in support of the PAC and against the detentions. More than 50 students were arrested as a result of the disturbances, but were subsequently released after being warned as to their future conduct. The Swaziland Government then introduced a new refugee law, empowering it to repatriate forcibly any refugee who, in the opinion of the Swazi authorities, would not be liable to detention or imprisonment when returned to his or her country of origin. The introduction of this law was widely regarded as an attempt to intimidate those refugees from South Africa who have become increasingly critical of the restrictions placed on their activities by the Swaziland Government.
