Poland (the Polish People's Republic)
In 1977, the Polish People's Republic ratified the United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The official Polish news media gave much attention to questions about the implementation of the provisions of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and the follow-up conference in Belgrade during 1977 and 1978. During the year 1977 -78, Amnesty International has not heard that any Polish citizens have been charged with offences such as "dissemination of false literature" or "associating with hostile foreign organizations", as happened to many prisoners of conscience in the past (see Amnesty International Report 1977).
However, since the beginning of 1978, there has been a considerable increase in the number of citizens detained for short periods for circulating written material the content of which is not officially approved or for participating in private political discussions. In many of these cases, false charges were brought, such as "hooliganism", "obstructing the police on duty" or "illegal possession of weapons", and they were heard in magistrates' and criminal courts.
Many short-term detainees were members of unofficial groups established to protect human and civil rights. The best known of these groups are the Social Self-Defence Committee (formerly the Workers' Defence Committee), the Movement in Defence of Human and Civil Rights and the Student Solidarity Committee (see Amnesty International Report 1977).
A number of unofficial publications were issued during 1977 by members and supporters of these groups, claiming that in Poland freedom of expression and academic freedom are restricted. During 1978, members and supporters of the Social Self-Defence Committee and the Movement in Defence of Human and Civil Rights in Poland's largest cities started up unofficial education courses and gave citizens legal advice. Some people who took part in these activities were treated harshly by the Polish authorities. For example, Adam Michnik (an historian and former Amnesty International adoptee [szt Amnesty International Report 1977]), who belongs to the Social Self-Defence Committee and lectures for one of the unofficial education groups, was detained five times between 11 and 24 February 1978 for periods of up to 48 hours. During the same period he was twice beaten by police officers in public.
Since the beginning of 1978, a number of people who attended meetings organized by unofficial human and civil rights groups (or let their flats be used for such meetings) or who distributed publications issued by these groups were tried by magistrates' or criminal courts and sentenced to short terms of imprisonment or fined 5,000 zloty.
In February 1978, Bogdan Boruszewicz, an historian and Stanislaw Smigiel, a student, were forcibly taken from the former's flat and interrogated for 48 hours before being tried by a magistrate in Sopot for "hooliganism". The police, as
224
well as causing extensive damage, confiscated books, tape recordings and other materials connected with the unofficial education courses, and a number of eyewitnesses have testified that Bogdan Boruszewicz and Stanislaw Smigiel did not offer any physical resistance to the police when they entered the flat. The court sentenced the former to two weeks' imprisonment and the latter to one week. On appeal to the district court in Sopot, Bogdan Boruszewicz's sentence was subsequently prolonged to three weeks.
Further allegations of unfair trial and framed charges were made in respect of workers who, in February 1978, founded the Committee of the Free Workers' Union, a group which provides legal aid to workers who are dismissed, downgraded or persecuted for political reasons. One member of this Committee, Kazimierz Switon from Katowice, was arrested and tried in April 1978 by a magistrate in Katowice and sentenced to 5 weeks' imprisonment on charges of "illegal possession of weapons". The charge referred to an air rifle which belonged to one of his children and which police had found during a search of his flat. In April 1978, Boleslaw Cygan, a founder member of the Committee of the Free Workers' Union was allegedly picked up by four men and dragged into a car. According to unofficial sources, he was severely beaten up while the car was being driven to a nearby forest. He was later found unconscious, suffering from injuries caused by the beating. In late May 1978, Blazej Wyszkowski, an active supporter of the Committee of the Free Workers' Union in Gdansk was arrested and sentenced to two months' imprisonment on charges of "obstructing the police while on duty". Amnesty International has heard that these charges were false and that he was, in fact, arrested on account of his human and civil rights activities. Blazej Wyszkowski started a hunger strike on the day of his arrest and while it was still in progress Amnesty International urged the Polish authorities to release him. Elsbieta Lewinska and Wojciech Edward Jasman from Lodz were sentenced to one month in prison in May 1978 for taking part in meetings of the Free Workers' Union and for distributing an unofficial paper, Robotnik (The Worker), outside a factory in Lodz.
In addition, the Polish authorities have tried and fined a number of people who publicly collected signatures on petitions for improvements in the international human rights situation. On 29 November 1977, three Amnesty International members, Emil Morgiewicz, Adam Wojciechowski and Zbigniew Sekulski were fined 3,000 zloty each for having collected signatures for the organization's worldwide Prisoners of Conscience Year petition. Other people, such as M. Pilka, A. Hal and A. Slommicki, who collected signatures for a petition that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ratified by Poland in 1977) should be published in the official press, were arrested, interrogated and beaten, then driven to the country and left in the fields in the middle of the night.
During the period 1977 — 78, Amnesty International continued to investigate allegations that some Polish citizens who had lived for a number of years in foreign countries were given unfair trials on their return to Poland and wrongly sentenced to terms of imprisonment on charges of "espionage". One case investigated by Amnesty International was that of Maximilian Rosenburg, a thirty-four-year-old dental technician who left Poland in 1970 and failed to return within the period specified by the Polish authorities. He later became a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany. He returned to Poland to visit his fiancée in 1977 and was
225
arrested. A military tribunal in Gdansk sentenced him to seven years' imprisonment on charges of "espionage". His trial took place in camera and his lawyer was appointed by the military justice authorities although he had specifically asked to be defended by a different lawyer of his own choice. According to reports received by Amnesty International, Mr Rosenburg was imprisoned because he belonged to an organization in the Federal Republic of Germany which was founded after World War II by expatriate Poles of German origin rather than for engaging in intelligence work for a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) country — which was what he was charged with. Amnesty International has asked the Polish authorities for information on a number of such cases, but has received no reply.
Although, during 1977, the Polish authorities were more liberal over allowing citizens to travel abroad, during 1977 and the first half of 1978, over 200 people were tried and sent to prison for attempting to exercise their right to leave their country. Amnesty International took up the case of Anthony Pol, a professor of mathematics, whose applications for permission to attend conferences abroad were refused by the authorities, apparently because he had publicly expressed dissenting political views. He was arrested in November 1976 while attempting to cross the Romanian-Yugoslav border. He was sentenced in early 1977 to two years' imprisonment. After one year in prison he was conditionally released and his sentence suspended.
Amnesty International groups took action on behalf of 15 people imprisoned in Poland in the period 1977 - 78. During this period, Amnesty International learned of the execution of three Polish citizens convicted of murder. In another case, in December 1977, the Supreme Court of Warsaw sentenced Viktoras Galvanavkas to death. He had previously been sentenced by a lower court to twenty-five years' imprisonment, but on appeal was sentenced to death for murdering 300 inhabitants of Wilnis (now capital of Lithuania in the USSR) during the German occupation in the Second World War.
