Iran (the Empire of)
Amnesty International's major concerns in Iran are the imprisonment of nonviolent opponents of the regime and the use of the death penalty. Investigation into the possible use of torture and of trial procedures involving political prisoners continues.
256
During the period 1977-78, the Iranian régime has made some changes in the treatment of political prisoners. These appear to reflect a new policy on the part of the authorities. For the first time in many years opponents of the régime—who include prominent lawyers, writers, academics and former political leaders—have expressed their discontent publicly and have appealed for freedom of speech and of association. They have not automatically been imprisoned as would have happened in the past, but Amnesty International has received reports that they are subjected to harassment and persecution. Some of them have been physically assaulted and others have had bombs planted outside their houses. Throughout the past year demonstrations—some of them of a religious nature—have been repressed with great force, resulting in large-scale loss of life and injury.
Amnesty International finds it difficult to judge, on the basis of available information about recent developments, the extent to which the new policy may have benefited political prisoners in Iran, or whether it simply indicates a change of tactics.
Amendments to the Military Code of Procedures which came into force in November 1977 were intended by the authorities to meet some of the criticisms made by Amnesty International and other organizations regarding trial procedures in Iran as applied to political prisoners. These amendments, together with the procedure governing cases coming within the jurisdiction of the military tribunal, were the subject of a memorandum submitted to the Shah on 1 November 1977 and of testimony given on behalf of Amnesty International by British barrister, Brian Wrobel, to the United States Congressional Sub-Committee on International Organizations on 28 February 1978. In this testimony, Mr Wrobel, who observed a political trial in Iran on Amnesty International's behalf in April 1977, stressed that, despite the amendments, fair trials were still not afforded to those people charged with offences over which the military tribunal has jurisdiction. In April 1978 Amnesty International received reports from Iran that some people charged with political offences had been tried by civilian courts and had been allowed to choose their own civilian defence counsel. According to subsequent reports, trials of political prisoners by military tribunals continue.
Amnesty International does not know the number of political prisoners in Iran. An official Iranian estimate, quoted in the British newspaper, the Guardian, on 22 February 1978, put the number of political prisoners at about 2,200, but it is known that many arrests took place subsequently, during disturbances all over Iran, so the official figure may have increased. Opposition sources insist that the number of political prisoners is much higher than that given by the authorities. Five amnesties of prisoners have taken place during the past year and, according to official announcements, 561 political prisoners have been released.
Sixty-nine Iranian cases are being worked on by Amnesty International groups, but it is recognized that they almost certainly represent only a very small proportion of the prisoners of conscience in the country. These include left-wing opponents of the régime, religious leaders and activists, and Kurds. Many recent cases taken up by Amnesty International are of students who have been arrested after returning to Iran from studies abroad. It is thought that in these cases the charges are related to alleged political activities in the host countries.
On 30 March 1978 Amnesty International set on foot an Urgent Action on behalf of political prisoners on hunger strike in Qasr Prison as a protest about
257
prison conditions and to demand retrial in civilian courts. The organization was informed on 13 April that the prisoners had ended their hunger strike when the authorities had agreed to comply with some of their requests.
Some allegations of torture have been received during the past year, but Amnesty International has not been able to substantiate them; opposition sources within Iran say that torture continues but has decreased, while the authorities deny that any torture at all has taken place recently. What seems certain is that torture is no longer practised systematically and invariably, as it was in the past.
Official executions of political prisoners have greatly diminished during the past year: Amnesty International knows of only two which have taken place. Mohammed Reza Akhoundi, convicted of killing a translator employed by the US Embassy in Teheran, was executed on 17 October 1977. Major General Ahmad Mogharebi was convicted of espionage and was the subject of an Urgent Action on 21 December 1977, appealing for commutation of the death sentence. He was executed on 25 December.
On 16 January 1978 Amnesty International appealed to the Shah to commute the death sentence passed on Ali Naghi Rabbani, also convicted of espionage. His sentence was subsequently suspended by the Shah. Earlier, on 16 June and 16 December 1977 Amnesty International had appealed to the Shah to commute death sentences passed on six men sentenced to death in Isfahan in April 1977 charged with killing a religious leader. To Amnesty International's knowledge, these men had not been executed at the time of writing, but their present legal position is not known. Amnesty International does not have figures for the total number of executions which have taken place in Iran during the past year.
