Israel (the State of) and the Occupied Territories
During the period 1977-78 the Israeli military authorities continued to enforce the Defence (Emergency) Regulations of 1945 which provide for, among other things, detention without trial and trials of civilians by military courts, often in camera. These regulations are most rigorously applied in the Occupied Territories, where military governors are appointed to enforce them, and because of this and the tensions which exist between the occupying authorities and the Palestinian population, most of Amnesty International's concerns have tended to be with prisoners from Occupied Territories—in particular the West Bank.
Over the past year, Amnesty International has worked on behalf of 38 adopted cases of people detained in Israel and the Occupied Territories, of whom 19 were released and one deported to Jordan. In November 1977 Amnesty International took up the cases of six students from Bethlehem College who were arrested in March and April of 1977 in connection with the publication of two university magazines, al-Jami'a (The University) and at-Talia (The Vanguard). The students were subsequently charged under Article 94(1) of the Defence (Emergency) Regulations with publishing the magazines without the formal consent of the military governor. They were tried by a military court in January 1978 and sentenced to a suspended period of six months' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000 Israeli pounds.
Amnesty International has also taken up for investigation the cases of a further 12 people arrested in connection with alleged offences under the security regulations. They include a US citizen, Sami Esmail, who was detained on arrival at Ben Gurion Airport, Tel Aviv, on 21 December 1977, and charged with membership in an illegal organization and with contact with a foreign agent. Amnesty International's concerns in this case include the prisoner's having been held incommunicado after his arrest, the allegation that his confession was obtained under extreme duress, and that the definition of "membership" used by the Israeli authorities is potentially so broad that they may define as criminal those acts which, under Article 1(a) of Amnesty International's Statute, are clearly acts of conscience.
Sami Esmail was convicted of membership in an illegal organization but was acquitted of the more serious charge of contact with a foreign agent. In sentencing him to 15 months' imprisonment, Judge Dov Levin, one of the three-judge panel, was reported as saying that "In order to set an example for others, the court has
262
decided to make the sentence significant" (.Jerusalem Post, 8 June 1978). Sami Esmail has appealed against the conviction.
Amnesty International's main concern during 1977-78, as in previous years, has been the continuing use of Administrative Detention. This is provided for under Article 111 of the Defence (Emergency) Regulations, whereby any person may be arrested and detained without being formally charged and without public reasons being given for the arrest. Although the Article specifies detention "for a period not exceeding one year", a detention order can be extended indefinitely.
Since July 1977, Amnesty International groups have worked on behalf of 28 administrative detainees, of whom 11 have been released. One of them was Taisir al-Aruri, Professor of Mathematics at Bir Zeit University on the West Bank, whose case Amnesty International took up in February 1975. He was also "prisoner of the month" in the November 1977 Newsletter. His detention was extended on a number of occasions before he was finally released in January 1978 after three years and eight months in detention without trial.
Other cases were those of Abdel Hafez Zeidan, a pharmacist arrested in Halhul in November 1975 (who featured in Amnesty International's letter-writing campaigns) and Maher al-Khayyat who was "prisoner of the month" in the May 1978 Newsletter. Amnesty International also intervened on behalf of a Palestinian journalist, Raymonda Tawil, who was arrested by Israeli security forces just after midnight on 22 March 1978 and 18 days later was placed under administrative detention for one month. In addition, some of her books, films and tapes were reported to have been confiscated. Amnesty International was particularly concerned by allegations that she had been "beaten . . . blindfolded and forced to walk over a floor strewn with metal objects", reported in the British newspaper, the Guardian on 3 May 1978. She was released after spending 45 days in detention. Although no specific charges were laid against her, she is well known among foreign correspondents as representing the views of the Palestinians of the West Bank and for her support of the view that an independent Palestinian state should be set up alongside the state of Israel.
After President Anwar Sadat's visit to Jerusalem in November 1977 and Prime Minister Menahem Begin's visit to Egypt the following month, Amnesty International wrote on 2 February 1978 to Mr Begin, appealing for a general amnesty. In May 1978, Amnesty International groups working on behalf of prisoners in the Middle East took part in a letter-writing campaign, appealing for the release of all administrative detainees to mark the 30th anniversaries of both the State of Israel and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Amnesty International is still waiting for a reply to its request to the Israeli authorities (made in August 1977) for the names of 136 detainees reported to have been released on the occasion of the feast of Ramadan. It is not known whether any prisoners adopted by Amnesty International were among them.
The trial by secret military courts of civilians alleged to have committed offences under the Defence (Emergency) Regulations continues to be of concern to Amnesty International. In a letter in November 1977 to the Israeli Minister of Justice Shmuel Tamir, Amnesty International expressed disquiet that two citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany had been held incommunicado for 14 months, part of them in solitary confinement (see Amnesty International Report 1977). Allegations that the two prisoners had been tortured during
263
the period had also arisen. Amnesty International asked permission to send an observer to the trial. Amnesty International learnt later that three Palestinians, believed to have been arrested at the same time, were also being tried. In a letter dated 30 January 1978 the Attorney General of Israel replied that, "Due to the nature of the matter and the classified security information involved therein, the court decided to hold the trial in camera. For this reason it will not be possible to permit any outside observers to be present at the trial."
However, the court later decided to allow representatives of the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany and the International Committee of the Red Cross to attend the trial. Amnesty International welcomed this decision but expressed regret that the trial would still be held in camera and asked that the results of investigations into allegations of torture, made while the prisoners were being held incommunicado, should be published.
Amnesty International has continued to receive allegations that detainees held in connection with security offences have suffered ill treatment and torture.
On 19 June 1977 the British newspaper, the Sunday Times, published an extensive report of its five-month investigation of allegations of the use of torture in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza. One of the conclusions was that "Torture of Arab prisoners is so widespread and systematic that it cannot be dismissed as 'rogue cops' exceeding orders. It appears to be sanctioned as deliberate policy." The investigation team found that Israeli interrogators had beaten prisoners; hooded, blindfolded and hung them by the wrists; sexually assaulted prisoners; administered electric shocks; and in one detention center had confined prisoners in a very small "cupboard" with concrete spikes set in the floor.
In an official response to the Sunday Times report, the Israeli Embassy in London denied these allegations, saying: "All Israeli prisons are open to inspection and such inspections are carried out frequently by judges and representatives of the Attorney General and defence counsel. .. ."
However, when this response was made, representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross had access to prisoners only after they reached prison and not while they were still being held in interrogation centers. It is during the period of interrogation, before detainees are moved to prison, that ill-treatment and torture are alleged to occur. At the end of 1977 a new agreement was concluded between the Israeli Government and the ICRC, giving representatives of the latter the possibility of visiting people within 14 days of their arrest -within a week, in some cases-even if they are still being interrogated.
Amnesty International was sufficiently concerned by the allegations of torture committed by the Israeli security forces to renew its request, in July 1977, that the Israeli Government permit an independent inquiry into the allegations. To this request-as to Amnesty International's earlier ones-the Israeli authorities have not, at the time of writing, replied.
Amnesty International is also concerned by continuing reports of overcrowding and poor conditions in prisons in Israel and the Occupied Territories. In an interview published in the Israeli newspaper Yediot Aharonot (Recent News) in July 1977, Haim Levy, the Prisons Commissioner, again commented on the overcrowding of Israel's prisons and is reported to have said that inmates "could not be kept quiet when they are kept like cattle". In the same month, Amnesty International medical groups took part in an Urgent Action appeal on behalf of
264
Hani Nassar, a twenty-eight-year-old resident of Ramallah on the West Bank, who had been serving an eighteen-month sentence for belonging to an illegal organization. Amnesty International had received reports that his health was deteriorating because of overcrowding and poor prison conditions and that he was suffering from rheumatism, an infection in the ear and boils. In September 1977, as the result of a mitigation of sentence order, he was released.
In June 1977 an Israeli military appeal court in Lydda commuted to life imprisonment the death sentence passed on Mussa Juma El-Talalka, the only surviving member of an Arab guerilla squad which took over the Savoy Hotel in Tel Aviv in March 1975. Although the death penalty is retained in Israel—for crimes under the Nazi and Nazi Collaborations Law of 1950, the Crime of Genocide Law of 1950, and the Defence (Emergency) Regulations of 1945—the last time it was carried out was in 1961 when Adolf Eichmann was executed.
