Yemen (the People's Democratic Republic of)
On 26 June 1978 the President of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY), Salem Rubia Ali, was overthrown by the pro-Soviet faction within the Government, headed by the Chairman of the National Liberation Front, Abdul Fattah Ismail. The President and two of his Cabinet Ministers were executed by firing squad. It is as yet too early to say what effect, if any, these events will have on the human rights situation in the country.
Amnesty International is unable to give any estimate of the number of political prisoners currently held in the PDRY, but the 43 cases which Amnesty International groups have been working on this year (33 adoption and 10 investigation cases) almost certainly represent only a very small proportion of the political prisoners in the country. Ten of these cases are people who have "disappeared" and who may no longer be alive. One such case, taken up this year, is Bahadin Ahmad Muhammad who disappeared in March 1972; details of his disappearance have only recently been received by Amnesty International. Bahadin, aged about 40, was a teacher at a technical school at the time of his disappearance. He had studied in England for a number of years, and had returned to Aden in 1967. During 1968 and 1969, he had been arrested on several occasions for short periods
276
of time, and questioned about his relations with foreigners living in Aden. In 1972 he married, and a week later, while he was at his sister's house, a man came to the door and asked Bahadin to accompany him. He was last seen being driven away in a jeep. He has not been seen since, and despite persistent enquiries, his family has been unable to discover whether he is alive or not. There are, according to reports, hundreds of similar cases of people who have disappeared without trace since the PDRY became independent in 1967.
Another typical case taken up by Amnesty International is that of A1 Haj Husain A1 Aidrous. A Yemeni living and working in Dubai, he visited Aden in December 1971 on business and was arrested. Reasons for his arrest are not known but he is being held in A1 Mansura Prison, and, as far as is known, has not been charged or tried. This prisoner was included in the 1977 Greetings Card Campaign.
Two other adopted cases were included in another Amnesty International campaign. Muhammad Salih bin Abdullah Fadhli, an officer in the federal (pre-Independence) army, and his brother Muhsin Salih bin Abdullah Fadhli, a trained jet-fighter pilot, who have both been detained without charge or trial since 1967, were the subject of one of the Prisoner of Conscience appeals marking the 30th Anniversary of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
To mark the 10th Anniversary of the PDRY's achievement of independence in November 1977, all Amnesty International groups working for PDRY prisoners organized petitions to send to President Salem Rubia Ali, appealing for the release of their particular adopted prisoner and for a general amnesty for all political prisoners in the country.
As in previous years, no replies have been received by any Amnesty International groups from the PDRY authorities; neither has there been any news, from official or unofficial sources, about any of these prisoners.
One of the detention centers in Aden, Mu'askar A1 Fatah (A1 Fatah camp), was taken up in June 1978 as a "prison adoption". Mu'askar A1 Fatah is the main detention center in Aden, and probably the most notorious. Political suspects are usually taken to it in the first place for investigation purposes and are either moved later to A1 Mansura Prison in Aden or to some other prison in the country, or else remain in Mu'askar AI Fatah until they are released. None of the inmates is a convicted prisoner. Little, if anything, is known about the many other prisons and detention centers in the PDRY (Amnesty International has collected the names of over 45 of them) but it is probable that conditions in Mu'askar Al Fatah are representative of conditions in other such places throughout the country.
The data collected about Mu'askar Al Fatah from ex-detainees give information on the location and administration of the camp, the composition of the prisoner population, hygiene, food, medical treatment, and the treatment of prisoners. Amnesty International's main concern is the very poor prison conditions in which detainees are held. These fall far below the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, and differ markedly from conditions in Al Mansura Prison in Aden, which Amnesty International delegates visited in June 1975. Amnesty International is also concerned about the very poor treatment of prisoners in Mu'askar Al Fatah. A number of first- and second-hand reports, covering the period between 1970 and 1976, describe ill-treatment as ranging from frequent and arbitrary harassment of prisoners by prison guards to the most severe and brutal torture, known in some cases to have resulted in paralysis or even death.
277
Improvements for which Amnesty International is calling are:
-	an end to detention without trial; that detainees be told the reason for their arrest; that families be informed of the whereabouts of a prisoner; that prisoners be charged and tried in accordance with the Penal Code, or be released immediately;
-	an improvement in conditions in Mu'askar A1 Fatah, by the provision of adequate food, medical and recreational facilities, and reading and writing materials;
-	the right of prisoners to receive visits from their families or representatives of their families on a regular basis and as soon as possible after their arrest;
-	the introduction of measures to guarantee protection for all detainees against torture and ill-treatment.
