Seychelles (the Republic of)
The Republic of Seychelles has been ruled by presidential decree since the overthrow of President James Mancham's coalition Government on 5 June 1977, and the suspension of Parliament and the Constitution. The new President, Albert René, has promised elections to a new one-party Parliament for 1979.
New detention legislation was introduced on 3 May 1978 to deal with 20 people arrested the previous weekend. They were initially accused of treason by the Government, which stated that large caches of arms had been found, and that there had been a plot for mercenaries to invade Seychelles to overthrow the régime, in collaboration with the former President, some former members of the Government and others. Those arrested included three women, three former Members of Parliament, a senior civil servant and several businessmen. Some were former members of or supposed sympathizers with the Seychelles Democratic Party, which had led the Government from the time of independence from Britain in June 1976 until the coup and is now effectively banned. However, the treason charges brought against them in court were withdrawn when they were detained under a new emergency detention decree on 3 May, the day before a habeas corpus order by the Supreme Court judge was due to take effect. The Government did not display the weapons allegedly found, and there were no further court proceedings against the detainees.
Their lawyers later brought an action against the Government in the Supreme Court on the grounds that the detainees were being ill-treated. The complaints were concerned with poor diet and the almost total ban on family visits but not with any physical ill-treatment. Three detainees received medical treatment in hospital.
On 9 June Amnesty International cabled President René, expressing concern at the use of new indefinite detention legislation and requesting a guarantee that detainees would receive an early trial in open court with proper legal representation. The organization appealed for the provisional release of all detainees
73
(especially women and those who were ill) pending trial. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Ogilvy Berlouis, replied that the release of the detainees would be prejudicial to internal security, and said that they had been arrested to avoid bloodshed, if the invasion plot had gone ahead. He denied that detainees were being ill-treated and invited Amnesty International to investigate their conditions. Amnesty International replied on 26 June, reiterating its belief that detainees should be either tried or released and requesting the Government to consider setting them free as a humanitarian gesture to mark the second anniversary of Seychelles' independence. It urged that Ms Tall, Mr Payet, and Mr Bonte be released immediately on medical grounds. When it learnt that all the detainees had finally been set free on 5 July, Amnesty International cabled President René, welcoming this humanitarian action.
