Brazil (the Federative Republic of)
1978, the fourteenth year of military rule in Brazil, is an election year. In April 1977, President Geisel suspended Congress and decreed some "electoral reforms" which effectively ensure a majority in the Senate for the ruling party, Alianga Renovadora Nacional (National Renewal KWimct-ARENA). At the time of writing President Geisel has nominated as ARENA'S candidate for the Presidency General Joao Baptista Figueiredo, former head of the Servigo Nacional de Informagdes (National Intelligence Agency-STW), without consulting the army
103
high command. The official opposition party Movimento Democrático Brasileiro (Brazilian Democratic Movement—MDB), has also put forward its own military presidential candidate, a retired army officer, General Euler Bentes Monteiro.
Some sectors of the military have opposed the nomination of General Figueiredo. In March 1978, Colonel Tarcisio Nunes Ferreira, commander of an armoured infantry battalion in Paraná, attacked the President in a speech and a newspaper interview for "usurping" power and "disdaining" military opinion. He also claimed that the character and purpose of the military have been distorted since the 1964 revolution. As a result of his remarks Ferreira was removed from his post and put under house arrest for twenty days.
Throughout 1978, there has been a growing demand for a return to full restoration of civil and political rights. After its annual conference in April 1978, the Conferência Nacional dos Bispos Brasileiros (National Council of Brazilian Bishops—CNBB) issued a document stating that "The political systems of the continent have been progressively influenced by the doctrine of national security that, by giving absolute importance to the State, has diminished the security of individuals." And again: "The situation of injustice is maintained by mechanisms of institutionalised violence. . .the dynamic of this process has led to the multiplication of violations of the most elementary human rights."
On 14 May 1978, at a conference on the Estado do Direito in Curitiba, Paraná, the Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil (Brazilian Bar Association—OAB) issued a declaration calling on the military to restore the rule of law, including the right of a citizen to know the reason for his or her arrest or to be released. The OAB has also appealed for respect for human rights, the restoration of collective bargaining by trade unions, freedom of expression and legal guarantees for judges to administer justice without interference by other branches of the government.
One of the most important developments in Brazil over the past few years has been the growth of the campaign for a general amnesty. In 1975, the Movimento Feminino pela Anistia (Women's Movement for Amnesty) was founded and began to draw attention to the problem of cassados—that is, those who had lost their political rights by presidential decree and as a result were dismissed from their jobs. An estimated 4,877 people have been declared cassado in the period since 1964. Under the terms of Institutional Act No. 5, the President is authorized to withdraw a citizen's political rights for ten years without allowing the person concerned any opportunity to defend him or herself or to have a trial. Anyone who has been declared cassado is ineligible for public office and is not allowed to vote. Recently, a number of injustices which are due to this decree have been publicized in the Brazilian press.
Since the founding of Movimento Feminino pela Anistia, several other committees have been formed: the Comité Brasileiro pela Anistia (Brazilian Committee for Amnesty) and the Comité Unitario pela Anistia (United Committee for Amnesty).
In April 1978, the opposition paper Movimento published an estimate of how many people had suffered as a result of the repression since 1964: there were at least 36 disappearances and 157 assassinations; a further 128 people were banished and 10,000 exiled.
Amnesty International estimates that, at the time of writing, there are about 180 political prisoners detained in Brazil. Eighty cases are under adoption or investigation by Amnesty International groups.
104
In February 1978, a group of 16 political prisoners who had served prison sentences for activities relating to the organization of the illegal Brazilian Communist Party in the State of Santa Catarina were given further sentences ranging from two and a half to four years' imprisonment for organizing the Communist Party in another State, Paraná. Most of them were free by the summer of 1978, having been eligible for parole. Among those re-sentenced who remain in jail are two prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, Theodoro Ghercov and Newton Cándido. Their cases illustrate the tendency of the courts to try political prisoners more than once for the same crime, thereby ignoring the concept of crime continuado. As a result, many prisoners are involved in the lengthy process of appealing for "unification" of their sentence.
On 25 January 1978, the President of the Superior Military Tribunal, Admiral Hélio Leite, ordered the release of two prisoners adopted by Amnesty International, Fued Saad and Stanislau Alkmin Magalháes, after habeas corpus writs had been filed on their behalf. Both had been arrested in August 1972 and sentenced to two and a half and three and a half years' imprisonment respectively for attempting to reorganize the Brazilian Communist Party. Fued Saad, a doctor of medicine who suffers from a serious heart complaint, was not released at the end of his sentence in November 1977 but served an extra two months. Stanislau Magalháes, a lawyer, served an extra 13 months at the end of his sentence. The writs of habeas corpus which were filed with the Superior Military Tribunal (STM) opposed the prisoners' continued and unjustified detention. After the release order, lawyers for the prisoners stated at a press conference in Rio de Janeiro that this was the first time the tribunal had granted habeas corpus to people charged under the Law of National Security, as this is forbidden under Institutional Act No. 5. However, when the full STM reconvened, it ruled that habeas corpus should not have been granted. Nevertheless, the two men subsequently won their appeal against the lengthening of their sentences.
Amnesty International appealed to the authorities in November 1977 to allow three political prisoners, Rosalice Fernandes, Norma Sá Pereira and Jessie Jane de Souza, detained in the Talavera Bruce Prison in Rio de Janeiro, to be transferred to another prison after a seventeen-day hunger strike. The prisoners complained about their lack of safety. The appeal was refused. Rosalice Fernandes, a MDB Deputy from Volta Redonda, was arrested in July 1977 and accused of subversive activities. She was sentenced to one year and five months' imprisonment for printing "subversive material" (a special edition of the local metal workers' newspaper). She was held incommunicado for ten days in the Departamento de Ordem Política e Social (Department of Political and Social Order-DOPS) where she was allegedly maltreated.
Amnesty International also sent telegrams to the President on behalf of the prisoners in Itamaracá, Pernambuco, who went on two hunger strikes, the first in November 1977, the second, which lasted for 25 days, in April 1978. The strikes were in protest at the detention incommunicado of two prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment. Rholine Sonde Cavalcanti and Carlos Alberto Soares had been kept in solitary confinement for more than two years because the local judge chose to interpret very strictly an article in the Law of National Security which states that those sentenced to life imprisonment must be separated from other political prisoners. Finally, on 9 May 1978, the strike, which had spread to other
105
prisons throughout the country, ended when the judge agreed to allow the two men to mix with the other prisoners for some time every week.
In the year under review (July 1977-June 1978), Amnesty International intervened urgently on behalf of 5 1 people. One such intervention was on behalf of Milton Soares, a researcher and reporter for the Agencia Fólhas news agency, who, in March 1978, was beaten up in a police station in the town of Guarulhos, Sao Paulo, after he had published a report about the torture of criminal prisoners and the death of a miner while in the custody of the Guarulhos police. Senhor Soares was so badly beaten that he had to be interned in hospital. The Associagdo Brasileira de Imprensa (Brazilian Press Association-^BI) and the Sindicato dos Jornalistas Profissionais do Estado de Sao Paulo (Sao Paulo Union of Professional Journalists) protested strongly about this case.
Another case in which Amnesty International intervened was that of the writer and journalist Renato Tapajós, arrested by order of Sao Paulo's Chief of Security, Colonel Erasmo Dias. Reportedly Colonel Dias, passing a news-stand and buying Tapajós' latest book In slow motion, found it to contain "subversive material" and had Tapajós imprisoned for two weeks. He is said to have been tortured but no official charges were ever brought against him.
Lourengo Diaféria, a journalist with Fólha de Sao Paulo and the Justice and Peace Commission's weekly 'O Sao Paulo' was another case for Amnesty International's concern. Diaféria was detained for nearly two weeks in September 1977 after the then Minister of the Army, General Sylvio Frota, read one of his columns in Fólha de Sao Paulo and found it to be an offence to the army. (The story traces comparisons between fictitious modern army characters and ancient war heroes, such as the Duke of Caxias.) After the Sao Paulo military court responsible for Diaféria's case decided to drop the charges, the Superior Military Tribunal decided to go ahead with the prosecution and the first hearing is scheduled to take place towards the end of the year.
On 22 July 1977, Amnesty International expressed concern at the political detention and alleged torture of Celso Giovanetti Brambilla, an engineer arrested with three others on the outskirts of Sao Paulo on suspicion of distributing subversive leaflets. Brambilla, who was given wide publicity in the national press, was held incommunicado for more than a month, although all his colleagues were released after a week. Allegedly, during this detention incommunicado Brambilla was subjected to very severe beatings about the head, as a result of which his left eardrum burst and bled for ten days, and was not allowed medical attention. He was released after being held at the Departamento de Ordem Política e Social (Department for Political and Social Order-DOPS) and Hipódromo Prison for nearly three months. No official charges were brought against him. Since his detention, Celso Giovanetti Brambilla has been partially deaf.
On 17 March, in Curitiba in the State of Paraná, a journalist, Juracilda Veiga, was kidnapped by a group calling itself Comando de Caga aos Comunistas (Anti-Communist Commando). She was interrogated and given electric shock torture but released the next night after a public protest by the local bishop. On 18 March, eleven people were officially arrested in Curitiba by the Federal Police who were investigating allegations of Marxist indoctrination of pupils in a nursery school. The 11 people were at first refused access to their lawyers but were released after four days, after the public outcry in Curitiba by the Church,
106
the Brazilian Bar Association, the Justice and Peace Commission and the Movimento Feminino pela Anistia.
Acts of violence attributed to the death squads, which consist of members of the police said to be involved in crime, continue on an alarming scale, but it is still the case that few death squad members are ever brought to trial. In the first four months of 1978, more than 177 murders were reported in the Baixada Fluminense district of Rio de Janeiro alone, and press and other sources attributed these to death squads. On 19 May 1978, Amnesty International sent telegrams to the Brazilian authorities on behalf of four youths between 15 and 16 years of age who had been arrested by a police squadron on about 5 May after leaving a discothèque. They subsequently disappeared, and their parents feared that they had been killed by the police. Amnesty International has no information on their subsequent fate. A fifth boy had previously been arrested by police officers and was found a week later in a rubbish bin, handcuffed, with two bullet wounds in his head.
Delgado Sergio Fleury, the Chief of Sâo Paulo's Departamento de Investigaçôes Crimináis (Criminal Investigations Department) and allegedly one of the founder members of the death squads, was briefly detained in February 1978 when a judge in the town of Guarulhos ordered that he be remanded in custody while the case against him and four other men, charged with the murder in December 1968 of three marginals (petty criminals) was being heard. The three marginals had allegedly been taken to the Departamento de Investigaçôes Crimináis by Delgado Fleury. They were told that they would be set free but that they should wash and put on clean clothes. On the night of 17 December 1968, the three were taken out and shot dead. Less than 48 hours after the arrest warrant was issued by the judge in Guarulhos, another judge was appointed to take his place and he decided to grant Fleury habeas corpus. Fluery and the four others remanded with him were later acquitted at their trial.
In October 1977, attempts were made by Sào Paulo lawyers to reopen an official inquiry into the death of Vladimir Herzog, a journalist who died on the premises of the Second Army within minutes of being arrested in October 1975. The lawyers filed a suit against a Dr Harry Shibata, accusing him of forgery, after he admitted publicly in August 1977 that he had signed the official autopsy report, giving suicide as the cause of Vladimir Herzog's death, without having seen the body. Dr Shibata signed in the place of Professor Armando Canger Rodrigues, whose name had been clumsily erased from the document. Despite Dr Shibata's confession and the call by the leader of the opposition party, the Deputy Freitas Nobre, for a "new and more thorough investigation into the death of the journalist", the Sao Paulo police decided to drop the case against Dr Shibata, who had previously been awarded a peace prize by the Government.
On 11 May 1978, Amnesty International wrote to the President of the Superior Military Tribunal, explaining the organization's opposition to the death penalty and drawing his attention to the Declaration of Stockholm made in December 1977, which calls upon all states to abolish the death penalty. This letter was prompted by reports that three prisoners then on trial, or about to be tried, faced a possible death sentence. Hélio da Silva and Carlos Alberto Salles were accused of murdering an English sailor in Rio de Janeiro in 1972. The case against them rests on their confessions which were extracted under torture while they were
107
held incommunicado for two months by the military police. The third case is that of Jesus Paredes Soto, accused of involvement in the kidnapping of the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany in June 1970. At the time of writing, his trial has not taken place.
Seventeen post-graduate engineering students at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro are, at the time of writing, awaiting the outcome of their trial on charges of belonging to the Movimento pela Emancipaçâo do Proletariado (Movement for the Emancipation of the Proletariat). They were arrested on 2 July 1977, and ten days later relatives of some of them claimed in the newspaper Fôlha de Sâo Paulo that they had been severely tortured. The torture apparently included electric shocks, beatings and suspension by the hands for as long as three hours. In addition, some victims were said to have been subjected to deafening noises for more than 24 hours and kept in freezing conditions. The evidence against the students, who have been freed pending the result of their trial, is based on confessions extracted under torture.
The second half of 1977 marked the reappearance of student demonstrations throughout Brazil. Students, who had not been seen demonstrating in the streets since 1968, when the law of National Security put a ban on demonstrations and strikes, organized peaceful assemblies, usually within the boundaries of their university campuses, calling for an amnesty for political prisoners, a return to constitutional rule and the reorganization of unions, especially their own—Uniâo Nacional dos Estudantes (National Union of Students-UNE), also banned by the military régime in 1968.
Most of the demonstrations in Rio de Janeiro and Brasilia took place peacefully, without any major clashes between students and the police. However, in Belo Horizonte some 800 students were arrested at one time and held for questioning. They were all subsequently released, but during the short period of detention some are reported to have been subjected to torture. On 22 September 1977, riot police broke into the campus of the Pontifïca Universidade Catôlica (Catholic University) of Sâo Paulo, where an estimated 20,000 students were holding a meeting. Police beat up the students, threw bombs and used tear gas sprays causing severe injuries to at least twenty students, five of whom at the time of writing have still not completely recovered from their third degree burns. Some 2,000 students were detained that day. All of them were held for about one week and then released.
A researcher from the International Secretariat of Amnesty International went to Brazil on behalf of the organization in March 1978. The object of the visit was to meet Brazilian clergy, members of the Brazilian Bar Association, and members of Congress, the Justice and Peace Commission and the main representatives of the general amnesty committees. The Amnesty International delegate was able also to have an informal meeting with the head of the Superior Military Tribunal, Admiral Hélio Leite.
In June 1978, President Geisel announced proposed amendments to the Constitution, including restoration of habeas corpus for political prisoners, abolition of the death penalty and repeal of Institutional Act No. 5, which gives exceptional powers to the President. According to these amendments, the President will not be able to banish citizens or administratively suspend their political rights or parliamentary mandates. But there is no provision for the return of those
108
Brazilians who have been banished. Brazilian jurists have expressed concern about a clause in the new habeas corpus ruling which permits suspects to be held incommunicado without a judge's warrant during 10 days' interrogation. "Safeguards of the State" are also to be introduced, which will allow for, among other things, a State of Siege.
British Virgin Islands
On 5 May 1978, Amnesty International initiated an urgent action on behalf of Sylvester Gaston, sentenced to death for murder on 11 October 1977, after hearing that the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London had refused him leave to appeal. Appeals for commutation of the sentence were made to the Governor, Mr W.W. Wallace, and to Dr David Owen, the British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs—the British Virgin Islands still retain colonial status.*
*The death sentence was commuted by the Governor on 5 July 1978. Chile (the Republic of)
Amnesty International's principal concerns in Chile during the past year (1977— 78) have been the continuing disappearances of people for political reasons, the failure of the Government to account adequately for the whereabouts of more than 1,500 prisoners who have disappeared since 1973, and the hundreds of arbitrary short-term detentions, frequently accompanied by physical maltreatment and torture.
During the year under review, Chile continued to be ruled by a four-man military Junta, headed by the President, General Augusto Pinochet. In December 1977, faced with the fourth consecutive resolution of condemnation by the United Nations General Assembly, which stated that ". . .Chilean people continue to be subjected to constant and open violations of human rights and fundamental liberties. . .", President Pinochet called a referendum; all Chileans over the age of 18 were to vote "yes" or "no" on whether they supported the Government. Seventy-five per cent of the votes cast were "yes", 20 per cent "no" and a further five per cent were spoilt or blank.
There were many irregularities in the conduct of the poll: it was not independently supervised—officials at polling stations were government appointees; since there were no electoral registers (these were destroyed in 1974), voters had to produce their identity cards which were then marked with a tricoloured label, which made it easy to identify those who abstained from voting. Shortly after the referendum, 12 leaders of the banned Christian Democrat party were banished to remote regions of Chile; others who had campaigned actively against the Government over the referendum were detained for a few days.
The State of Siege, in force since the September 1973 coup which brought President Pinochet to power, was lifted on 10 March 1978. This, in theory, gave civilian courts greater power to scrutinize police and military activities, and ended the Government's right to banish critics (in addition to the cases mentioned above, in November 1977 seven trade union leaders had been banished to remote settlements in northern Chile on account of their trade union activities). However, a "State of Emergency" remains in force, with very similar provisions to those of
109
the "State of Siege". All political parties are still outlawed and the present Government sees them as playing no part in the political future of Chile.
On 11 August 1977, the Government announced the dissolution of the Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional (the Directorate of National Intelligence), better known by its abbreviation DINA, which played a central part in the arrest, torture and disappearance of thousands of Chileans. Hopes that this would be a step towards a decrease in repression rapidly faded when it was seen that Decree Law 1878 of 12 August 1977 had created a new body known as the Central Nacional de Informaciones (National Information Center—C/V/) with the same terms of reference as had been laid down for the DINA in Decree Law 521, three years before. Manuel Trucco, Chile's observer at the UN Commission on Human Rights, stated at a meeting of the Commission on 22 August 1977 that "the National Information Center, is a new entity, different from the Directorate of National Intelligence; it lacks the powers of detention possessed by DINA". However, since the CNI is the legal continuation of the DINA, with the same personnel, the same premises and the same records, it was logical to suppose that its actions would not differ. Arrests, torture and disappearances recorded between September 1977 and May 1978 support this logic. Investigations into the assassination of Orlando Letelier in Washington in September 1976 have once again provided evidence of DINA participation in the physical elimination of political opponents.
According to information received by the International Secretariat of Amnesty International, 14 people have disappeared following their arrest in the period from April 1977 to May 1978. They are Jenny Barra Rosales, Raúl Iván Cárcamo Aravena, Isidoro Castro Villanueva, Pedro Daniel Castro Sepulveda, Israel Vicente García Ramirez, Sergio Hidalgo Orrego, Sergio Hernán Leal Diaz, Pedro Mella Vergara, Luis Gerardo Otarola Valdes, Sergio Oviedo Sarria, Juan José Paillalef Paillalef, Hernán Santos Perez Alvarez, Hernán Soto Galvez and Jorge Andrés Troncoso Aguirre. Among other cases reported to Amnesty International in the first few months of 1978 was that of Haydée Palma Donoso. She was arrested with her mother, Sofia Donoso Quevedo and sister, Sara Eliana Palma Donoso, on 16 January 1978 (see Newsletter article, May 1978). She subsequently "disappeared" and was brutally tortured for ten days in a place she believed to be the Villa Grimaldi torture center. She was then driven, handcuffed, to Tacna, Peru, where she was released on 20 February. She gave herself up to the Peruvian police as she was in the country illegally. After three weeks in detention in Peru, she was granted refugee status by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees and is now living in another country. It is possible that the international publicity given to her case (including an Urgent Action by Amnesty International^ saved her life.
During the period under review, the Chilean Government has provided no information about the fate of the more than 1,500 prisoners who have disappeared since 1973 following their arrest. Because of the Government's failure, 26 people (relatives of disappeared prisoners) staged a hunger strike in the offices of Comisión Económica para America Latina (Economic Commission for Latin America—CEP AL) in June 1977. After personal intervention by the Secretary General of the United Nations, the Chilean Government promised to explain, within three months, exactly what had happened to those who had disappeared. However, the explanation, when it came, was inadequate, giving information
110
that the relatives already knew. Amnesty International issued a press release on 25 October 1977, expressing concern at the Chilean Government's denial that the disappeared were being detained. Since the hunger strike, families of disappeared prisoners have been harassed. Three of them (women) were expelled from Chile in November 1977, because they had toured various European countries and the United States in order to publicize the situation. Amnesty International sent a telegram about this matter to President Pinochet on 25 November 1977. On 22 May 1978, 70 relatives of the missing prisoners declared in Santiago that they would go on indefinite hunger strike. They asked the Chilean authorities to keep their promise and tell them the fate and whereabouts of their relatives. The hunger strikers also denounced the fact that the amnesty of 19 April 1978 benefited government security agents. Missing Chileans' relatives in other parts of the world also began hunger strikes in solidarity with the Santiago strike. On 23 May 1978, Amnesty International initiated an Urgent Action supporting the relatives' demands.
Amnesty International made two oral statements in support of a trust fund for Chile, at the 30th session of the Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August 1977 and at the 34th session of the Commission on Human Rights in February 1978. In May 1978, the Economic and Social Council recommended to the UN General Assembly the creation of a "UN Trust Fund for Chile". If set up, the Fund will be used to distribute, through established channels of assistance, legal and financial aid to people whose human rights have been violated by detention or imprisonment in Chile, to those forced to leave the country and to the relatives of people in any of these categories.
Amnesty International is investigating the apparent judicial irregularities in the case of a group of political prisoners who have been imprisoned in Chile since June 1971. This group, known as V OP (Vanguardia Organizada del Pueblo-Organized Vanguard of the People), was sentenced in their first trial, Number 51/71 under the Ley de Seguridad Interior del Estado (Law of Internal State Security) to terms of imprisonment ranging from 800 days' to five years'. However, new trials were subsequently begun against them for the same crimes for which they had already been sentenced, which would appear to be an irregularity.
Amnesty International is also concerned at the lack of adequate legal assistance for presumed political prisoners who are tried for common crimes, (i.e. crimes that do not come under the Law of Internal State Security and Arms Control) although it seems clear that they were politically motivated. It is estimated that there are approximately 50 prisoners in this category. Amnesty International has taken up 30 cases as investigation cases.
Short-term detention is still common in Chile. During the period covered by this Report over a thousand people accused of political activities were arrested. On 1 May 1978, more than 500 people were arrested after taking part in a peaceful procession to celebrate Labour Day. Among them was Clotario Blest, a prominent and venerable trade unionist of over 70, who was brutally beaten by the police. All those arrested were released the same day.
During 1977-78, Amnesty International has received numerous torture testimonies. One particularly dramatic testimony is connected with the disappearance of Jorge Andrés Troncoso Aguirre. Eyewitnesses had seen him being electrically tortured, which apparently killed him. He had disappeared after being arrested
Ill
by DIN A agents in May 1977. In September 1977 in Chilian, about 45 people, members of the banned Socialist Party, were arrested, electrically tortured, and hung from their prison bars. They were accused of distributing political pamphlets. Most of them were subsequently released on bail.
Various testimonies have been received of torture involving the use of drugs and electric shocks in an attempt to induce partial amnesia, so that the victims forget their torture and their torturers. Two such cases were reported in October 1977 and one in January 1978.	v_„
On 18 April 1978 the Chilean Government issued Decree Law 2191 which, in Article 1, provides an "amnesty for people who as authors, accomplices or accessories have been involved in crimes during the State of Siege, that is, from 11 September 1973 until 10 March 1978, as long as they are not undergoing trialj or have not been sentenced". There are a few exceptions to this Article—for example, those who committed offences in relation to property (embezzlement, robbery, etc.), patricide or infanticide. Article 2 of the Decree amnesties all those sentenced by military tribunals after 11 September 1973. About 200 prisoners falling into this category were released.
Under Article 1, people who have committed crimes against human life and safety which have not been investigated are automatically included in this amnesty, which therefore applies to kidnappers, murderers and torturers—including agents of the security services. This is particularly serious since some judges have now closed official investigations into the disappearance of prisoners, on the grounds that the crimes being investigated were covered by the amnesty.
When the amnesty was announced (on 20 April 1978) the Minister of Justice said that people in exile would be allowed to return to Chile if they asked to do so. However, in ensuing weeks it became evident that the "amnesty" did not apply to most of the Chileans in exile. On 4 May 1978, the Minister of the Interior himself declared that "following an irreversible, well-thought-out decision, no one involved in the international campaign against Chile and no activist in international Marxism" would be allowed to return to the country. Since the military Junta has always classified as Marxists all those who supported or sympathized with the Popular Unity Government of President Salvador Allende, this may meatf that practically all Chilean exiles are excluded from the amnesty.
During the past year, there have been 15 Amnesty International Urgent Actions on behalf of approximately 75 people. In June 1978 there were 32 adoption and 62 investigation cases.
