Ireland (the Republic of)
During the year covered by this report (July 1977 -June 1978), Amnesty International has been concerned over anti-terrorist legislation and the rights of suspects detained by the police in the Republic of Ireland. In June 1977, the organization sent a mission to Dublin to investigate these matters and an Amnesty International submission to the Irish Government followed, in August 1977.
Amnesty International's submission, the contents of which are described in the Amnesty International Report 1977, gave details of allegations that people detained by the Garda Siochana (Irish police) on suspicion of involvement in
220
terrorist or other politically motivated offences, had been maltreated. Amnesty International called for a full, impartial and public inquiry into these allegations. The cases of alleged maltreatment which the submission described involved people who had been arrested, most of them during 1975 and 1976, under the Offences Against the State Act (1939 and 1972) or under the Emergency Power Act (1976). On 4 October 1977, the Irish Government announced that it would not renew the section of the Emergency Powers Act under which suspects could be detained by the police for up to seven days without being charged. The Offences Against the State Act continues to operate: it covers a wide range of offences related to terrorism, provides for police detention of suspects for 48 hours without charge, and for the establishment of special non-jury courts to try people charged under the Act.
Amnesty International has no prisoners in the Republic of Ireland under adoption as prisoners of conscience.
In October 1977, the Minister for Justice, Gerard Collins, made a public statement that, after considering Amnesty International's request for an impartial inquiry into allegations of police brutality, the Irish Government had appointed a three-member Committee of Inquiry to consider "... what additional safeguards are necessary for the protection against ill-treatment of persons in Garda custody and for the protection of members of the Garda Siochana against unfounded allegations of such ill-treatment". The Minister stated that the Committee would not have a mandate to inquire into specific allegations of maltreatment: these should be investigated through the normal procedure of bringing criminal prosecutions against identifiable police officers in the courts.
Amnesty International wrote to the Minister for Justice on 17 October 1977, welcoming the establishment of a Committee of Inquiry into safeguards for people in police custody but criticizing the Committee's terms of reference as being too narrow. It urged that the Committee's mandate be extended to include investigation of specific past complaints of maltreatment, to reach conclusions as to whether the complaints were justified, and to make their findings public. In this and in subsequent correspondence with the Irish Government, Amnesty International expressed the view that the normal procedure for bringing police officers accused of maltreatment before the criminal courts would not reveal the extent of maltreatment, because of the difficulty of fulfilling the courts' requirement for proof beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of individual officers.
On 8 December 1977, Alfred Heijder, a member of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee, and Douwe Korff, a Dutch lawyer who had taken part in the Amnesty International mission to Dublin, testified on behalf of the organization to the Committee of Inquiry appointed by the Irish Government, on the general issue of safeguards for suspects in police custody. Among the recommendations made by Amnesty International to the Committee were that people who were detained should have prompt access to solicitors of their own choice before interrogation; that no statement or confession made by a suspect in police custody should be used in evidence unless made in the presence of a solicitor; that detained people should have medical examinations at regular intervals while in police custody. In May 1978, the Committee of Inquiry sent the Irish Government a confidential report of its findings and recommendations. The contents of this report have not been made public. During the past year there has
221
been a decrease in the allegations of police maltreatment of suspects received by Amnesty International. However, Amnesty International is still concerned by the fact that there has as yet been no public inquiry into specific past complaints.
