Ecuador (the Republic of)
During the past year (July 1977-June 1978), Ecuador continued to be ruled by a three-member junta of the Consejo Supremo de Gobierno (Supreme Council of Government) made up of the heads of the armed forces. The military have been in power since 1972. However, steps towards a return to civilian rule were taken during the past year: two civilian commissions with mixed political representation were established to draw up alternative constitutions, voted on in a national referendum in January 1978; a third commission was put in charge of drawing up an electoral law and a law governing the recognition of political parties, in preparation for national elections on 16 July 1978. The effect of these steps was negated somewhat when several important potential presidential candidates were banned from taking part in the elections by the Tribunal Supremo Electoral (Supreme Electoral Tribunal).
On 18 May 1977 the three major national trade union federations, theEcuador-ean Confederation of Working Class Organizations, the Ecuadorean Workers' Confederation and the Ecuadorean Confederation of Free Trade Unions declared a 24-hour general strike. At the same time, the National Union of Teachers began a strike for higher salaries, which lasted a month. The Government's reaction was to introduce two new decrees: Numbers 1475 and 1476 of 18 and 30 May 1978 respectively. Decree 1475 made possible the implementation of Decree 105 (passed by the Constituent Assembly of 1967) under which organizers of strikes "prejudicial to public peace and the national economy" were liable to between two and five years' imprisonment and fines of up to 10,000 sucres (about £200). This Decree also gave the status of "Special Judges" to the Intendentes Generales de Policía (civilians answerable directly to the Minister of the Interior and in charge
120
of public order and internal security at provincial level), and under Decree 105 empowered them to try strikers summarily and sentence them to up to two years' imprisonment with fines of up to 10,000 sucres without the right to appeal. Decree 1476 declared the National Union of Teachers illegal.
Amnesty International sent a telegram to Vice-Admiral Alfredo Poveda Burbano, President of the Consejo Supremo de Gobierno in late December 1977, requesting the release of trade unionists in prison in Ecuador.
The organization also took up the cases of 13 imprisoned trade unionists, three of whom were released at the beginning of 1978. Five of those still under adoption are teachers who were tried under Decree 1475 as a result of the teachers' strike of May 1977. Most of them were sentenced to two years' imprisonment and fined. The other five are trade unionists who were involved in a strike at the "Aztra" sugar mill (see below), including the workers' lawyer, Dr Brummel Reyes Buestan. An Appeal (to mark the occasion of the Thirtieth Anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights) was made on behalf of the Ecuadorean trade unionists in prison in February 1978; Urgent Actions were undertaken on behalf of two trade unionists—Telmo Tello Castro and Julio Chacon—who were very ill in prison and reportedly not receiving adequate medical attention.
In October 1977, the workers of the "Aztra" sugar mill in Canar Province went on strike in protest at the company's refusal to abide by the collective bargaining agreement, granting them a share in the recent internal sugar price increase. Apparently, about 700 workers and their families were occupying the mill on 18 October 1977 when some 150 policemen arrived, surrounded the building and gave the workers and their families two minutes to leave. Suddenly, before the two minutes were up, the police attacked with tear gas and guns. The Government acknowledged that 25 people, including women and children, were killed, but other sources gave higher figures. The autopsies were reportedly carried out in secret and the bodies buried without being returned to their families. Subsequently, 35 people were detained for a short time when they arrived in the town of Ibarra for a peaceful demonstration against the incident. It has also been reported that since May 1977, approximately 335 students, peasants and workers have been detained for their trade union activities.
In April 1978, students and workers in the capital city of Quito demonstrated against a proposed rise in bus fares. Some reports said that 527 of them were detained at the time. Amnesty International undertook an Urgent Action on behalf of students and workers who were detained and reportedly injured during the incidents.
