Kenya (the Republic of)
Amnesty International concern in Kenya has continued during 1977-78 to center on the indefinite detention without trial of a few prominent Kenyans who have made outspoken criticisms of Government policy and on the frequent use of the death penalty in criminal cases. Amnesty International twice during the year came under attack by Kenya's Attorney General, Charles Njonjo, after it had appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and expressed concern about the use of administrative detention orders. Under the 1966 Preservation of Public Security Act, people served with a detention order may be detained indefinitely without charge or trial on the grounds of public security. No court may challenge a detention order, and it is thought that detainees are not given specific details of the grounds for their detention. A secret Government-appointed tribunal reviews detention cases every six months, but its confidential recommendations are not binding on the Government. Detainees have the right to appear before this tribunal, with legal representation. They rarely receive family visits, they are forbidden correspondence, and their place of detention is secret. Medical treatment appears to be inadequate, judging from the frequent reliable reports of the chronic ill-health of one detainee, Martin Shikuku.
Prisoners of conscience in Kenya include four elected Members of Parliament, whose cases have been investigated by the Inter-Parliamentary Union also. They are Wasonga Sijeyo, detained since 1969, the only former Kenya People's Union leader still held, John Marie Seroney, former Deputy Speaker, and Martin Shikuku (both arrested in 1975), and George Anyona (arrested 4 May 1977). George Anyona, one of Kenya's most active Members of Parliament, was presumably arrested because of his comments about corruption among senior Government officials, his appeals for the release of political detainees, and other vigorous criticism on controversial political issues. He was Amnesty International's Prisoner of the Month in September 1977.
On 31 December 1977, the internationally-known novelist and playwright, Ngugi wa Thiong'o, was arrested; his detention was announced on 6 January
57
1978. Police arresting him confiscated books but there is no evidence that he was in possession of literature officially banned. He was probably arrested not so much because of radical ideas expressed in his latest novel Petals of Blood, but because of his activities in association with a village Community Center in Limuru, where he was co-author of a recent (unpublished) Kikuyu-language play containing many outspoken comments on national and local socio-political issues. The play's performance licence was withdrawn by the Government.
Ngugi wa Thiong'o, who was Professor of Literature at the University of Nairobi, was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Appeals for his release have also been made by several other organizations in Africa and elsewhere, and on 16 March Amnesty International launched a UN 30th Anniversary Appeal for his release. The following week Charles Njonjo, the Attorney General, reaffirmed the right to freedom of expression in Kenya but warned Kenyan authors "not to write about things which might embarrass the Government in the eyes of the public" (Kenya Nation, 22 March 1978).
Amnesty International continues to investigate two other cases of detention without trial: that of an air force officer, Larry Mwanzia, held since 1971 but not tried in the sedition case with which he was allegedly associated, and Michael Koigi Wamwere, a Nakuru journalist and prospective parliamentary candidate, held since 1975; and the case of Ms Chelagat Mutai, a Member of Parliament imprisoned for a criminal offence in 1975. The number of people held in detention during the year was variously said by the Attorney General to be 14 (October 1977) or 11 (November 1977), and some Kenyan Somalis were detained later when there were renewed fears of conflict with Somalia. The former Vice-President, Odinga Oginga, was arrested in January 1978 but released conditionally three days later.
Amnesty International received information considered to be reliable concerning the severe ill-health of the detained Member of Parliament Martin Shikuku in early 1978; it also heard unverifiable rumours about ill-treatment of Ngugi wa Thiong'o shortly after his arrest. Amnesty International is convinced that there is no Government policy of torturing political prisoners, although on at least eight occasions between August 1977 and March 1978, the Kenya press reported complaints in criminal cases of torture or ill-treatment in police stations, resulting in one instance in the victim's death. The Government has prosecuted some police officers alleged to have caused ill-treatment.
Amnesty International remained concerned at the frequent use of the death penalty for robbery with violence — although information on the actual number of those executed after they have exhausted all appeal procedures and their right to petition the President for clemency is not published by the Government and is not known to Amnesty International.
Amnesty International group appeals for the trial or release of detainees were criticized by the Kenyan Attorney General, Charles Njonjo. On 6 October 1977 the Kenya Standard reported that he "... warned the London-based Amnesty International to stop criticizing Kenya's detention law, which he described as legal and constitutional' ". This followed his criticism of a Kenyan Member of Parliament who had urged the Government to repeal the Preservation of Public Security Act and instead to bring to trial those who were alleged to have committed a political offence. The Attorney General later said: "Those people in
58
detention have been locked up because their conduct was intended to undermine peace and stability in this country" (,Sunday Nation, 18 September 1977). On November 13, in reply to an Amnesty International group's appeal on behalf of George Anyona,Mr Njonjo warned Amnesty International to "keep off Kenya's internal affairs". The organization replied that "Kenya has a human rights record that is much better than that of many countries in Africa, and indeed the rest of the world", but repeated its concern over these human rights issues in Kenya.
The Kenya Government has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
