India (the Republic of)
Throughout the period 1977-78, the Indian Government took important steps to restore the rule of law in the country. Amnesty International has welcomed the release of nearly all the thousands of prisoners of conscience arrested during the 1975-77 Emergency under the provisions of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act; and the Government has introduced constitutional amendments for the protection of fundamental rights, which had been seriously eroded during the Emergency. At present, Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners of conscience in India, but Amnesty International groups are investigating the cases of approximately 50 political prisoners held in Kerala, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh, who have been imprisoned for more than two years and are still awaiting trial.
In the autumn of 1977, the International Executive Committee of Amnesty International asked a delegation to go to India on a mission to study the measures announced by the Government for the restoration of the rule of law and to discuss specific areas of concern within Amnesty International's mandate; these included the new preventive detention legislation proposed by the Government and the Government's announcements concerning the release of political prisoners who had been held for many years without trial. From 31 December 1977 to 18 January 1978, Professor James Fawcett, President of the European Commission on Human Rights, and a member of the Research Department of Amnesty International travelled in India and met the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Home Affairs, Law and Industry. The delegation also went to Kerala, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh, where it met Government officials, including the Chief Ministers of Kerala and West Bengal. The delegates were received by the judges of the Supreme Court of India, and of the High Court of New Delhi and Calcutta, and met many lawyers, members of civil liberties organizations, and released political prisoners.
The Amnesty International delegates called upon the Indian Government to take immediate steps for the release of the approximately 400 political detainees then held under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA) (385 of them "foreigners"), considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience, and urged the Government to repeal the Act. They discussed the new Bill providing for preventive detention, and urged the Government to consider removing preventive detention provisions from the Indian Constitution.
The delegates also urged the Home Minister to review, as a matter of priority, the cases of several hundred left-wing political prisoners, most of them arrested before the Emergency, who were alleged to be members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) or of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist); the latter are commonly known as "Naxalites". The conditions of their imprisonment have been of concern to Amnesty International since the publication in 1974 of its Short Report on Detention Conditions in West Bengal Jails, in which it noted that
159
many of these political prisoners had been arrested on mere suspicion and were often held for many years without being tried. At present, Amnesty International knows of cases of prisoners held for periods of up to six years without trial. The Home Minister explained that the release of these prisoners was the responsibility of the states concerned and said that he had advised them to release all such prisoners who had been charged with or convicted of committing criminal offences, who had spent five years or more in jail and gave signs of a desire to "abjure violence".
The three states visited by the delegates-Kerala, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh-all had political prisoners. (The delegates had to abandon their plans to visit Bihar, for reasons of time.) In Kerala they were told that the state Government reviewed the cases of political prisoners on an individual basis, having decided not to declare a general amnesty. Eighty political prisoners were held in the state, 49 of them without trial and having spent periods of over two years in prison. The delegation discussed the possibility of a code of ethics for the conduct of police with the Inspector General of Police for Kerala, and the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners with the Inspector General of Prisons, but did not obtain the latter's permission to visit Trivandrum Central Jail.
In West Bengal, at the time of the mission, there were still 297 political prisoners. The rest—the vast majority-had been released under a general amnesty for political prisoners declared immediately after the new state Government took office on 21 June 1977. The Chief Minister explained that the amnesty covered all political prisoners in the state, including prisoners held without trial and prisoners convicted on criminal charges. The state Government gave assurances that it hoped that all political prisoners in the state would be released by April 1978 and political prisoners continued to be released during the visit of the delegates. (In late March 1978, official statistics showed that 199 "Naxalite" prisoners were still held.) The delegates also visited Presidency Jail, Calcutta, where they met political prisoners.
According to official figures supplied by the Andhra Pradesh Government to Amnesty International, there were 97 political prisoners in the state at the time of the mission, 50 of them held without trial. But Amnesty International has details of 113 political prisoners held in the state. The state Government said that it shared Amnesty International's concern that the delays in proceedings in political trials in the state were extraordinarily long (the Secunderabad Conspiracy Case has gone on for more than four years), but that it had no intention of declaring a general amnesty for political prisoners. One of the Amnesty International delegates visited Hyderabad Central Jail but was not given an opportunity to speak to any of the political prisoners there.
In the report on the mission, which it hopes to present to the Indian Government in autumn 1978, Amnesty International estimates that at least 500 political prisoners are held in the three Indian states it visited, apart from several hundred more in other Indian states. The report notes that, in the absence of directives from the central Government, great discrepancies exist between the various Indian states as regards policy for the release of the "Naxalite" prisoners, and in those cases where political prisoners have been tried, the delays in trial procedures have been unacceptably long. In a memorandum to be submitted to the Indian Government with the report, Amnesty International recommends that all political
160
prisoners throughout India who have not been tried and sentenced within two years from the date of their arrest be released; that trial procedures for political prisoners should be speeded up by certain specific steps, and that the release of any political prisoners should not be made conditional upon any statement from them concerning their future political activity.
In Kerala and West Bengal, the Amnesty International delegates interviewed seven victims of torture, administered between 1970 and 1977; two of them had been disabled as a result of what they had undergone. The delegates also interviewed the family of Vijayan Nair of Varkala in Kerala, whom Amnesty International believes to have died in police custody in March 1976, as a result of continuous torture, under similar circumstances to the student P. Rajan (see Amnesty International Report 1977). In the report of the mission to India, Amnesty International speaks of its long-standing concern about the incidence of torture of political prisoners suspected of extreme left-wing views before the Emergency and notes that it occurred on a much wider scale during the Emergency. Since then, Amnesty International has not received any complaints alleging torture of political prisoners; but the mission report draws attention to reports in the Indian press of the deaths of two non-political prisoners in police custody, as a result of serious police brutality. In its memorandum, Amnesty International makes detailed recommendations to the Indian Government for the protection of citizens from torture: these include the establishment of independent machinery to investigate complaints of ill-treatment and torture; the adoption of a code of conduct for police officials, and a set of legal measures allowing people, on arrest, to have immediate access to lawyers and relatives.
On 13 April 1978 the President of India gave assent to the 43rd Amendment to the Constitution, restoring powers to the Supreme Court and the High Court to determine the constitutional validity of laws, and withdrawing powers given to Parliament under an amendment to the Constitution passed during the Emergency to enact laws "for the prevention or prohibition of anti-national activities or associations". On 15 May 1978 the Constitution 45th (Amendment) Bill was introduced in the Lok Sab ha (Lower House), providing that the right to life and liberty, guaranteed in the Constitution, cannot be suspended during an emergency (this protection does not extend to other fundamental rights guaranteed in the Indian Constitution). The Defence of India Rules, under which, according to recent Government statistics supplied to Amnesty International, 77,297 political prisoners had been held during the Emergency, lapsed in September 1977, six months after the State of Emergency had been revoked in March 1977.
However, in spite of an election pledge to repeal the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, on 23 December 1977 the Janata Government introduced the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill in the Lok Sabha which would have retained powers of preventive detention whilst repealing the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA). The Bill, which would have incorporated preventive detention permanently into statutory law, proposed that prisoners could be held for up to one year without trial in order to prevent action prejudicial to "the security of India" or "the maintenance of public order". However, it met with vocal opposition in India from the press and from civil liberties organizations. On 23 March 1978 the Government announced that it would withdraw the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill and introduce legislation for the repeal of
161
the MIS A. The Secretary General of Amnesty International cabled the Prime Minister, Moraiji Desai, on 29 March 1978, welcoming the Government's announcement and stating that Amnesty International was opposed to long-term preventive detention on humanitarian and legal grounds. However, at the time of writing, 13 Indian nationals and 249 "foreigners" are still held under the provisions of the MIS A. Amnesty International has called upon the Government to release all these prisoners forthwith, since it considers them to be prisoners of conscience. As yet it has not taken up their cases on an individual basis with the Government, since it was informed by the Home Ministry, in a letter sent in April 1978, that all 13 Indians would be released immediately the MIS A was repealed. No such assurance has been received regarding the position of the 249 "foreigners" held under the same Act and, on 30 March 1978, the Home Ministry announced that a law permitting preventive detention of foreign nationals will be introduced in the Lok Sabha before the repeal of the MIS A.
The withdrawal of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill and the proposal to repeal the MISA shortly mean that the central Government will be without powers to use preventive detention. But five Indian states-Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh-will retain preventive detention laws; the widest powers are contained in the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Bill, introduced after the ending of the Emergency, on 30 March 1978, replacing a similar Bill introduced in October 1977. On 9 November 1977 the Secretary General of Amnesty International had cabled the state's Chief Minister, Sheikh Abdullah, expressing the organization's disturbance at reports that the state Government had introduced powers to allow preventive detention of political prisoners for up to two years, and urging the immediate repeal of these provisions. And in its memorandum, to be submitted with the 1978 mission report to the central Government, Amnesty International recommends that the Government consider amending the Constitution in order to remove provisions for preventive detention, releasing forthwith all remaining prisoners of conscience held under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, and consider ensuring that preventive detention laws still in force in five Indian states be withdrawn.
Since the end of the Emergency, there have been serious allegations-particu-larly with reference to Andhra Pradesh-that prisoners said to be "Naxalites" have died in encounters staged by the police (see Amnesty International Report 1977). In June 1977 the Andhra Pradesh Government set up a judicial commission headed by Justice V. Bhargava, which has among its terms of reference "the facts and circumstances in regard to the encounters between police and the so called Naxalites" and the "allegations of murder, torture and brutal treatment of Naxalite prisoners". According to official statistics, 214 people died between 1968 and 1977, the period covered by the commission's terms of reference. Various civil liberties groups in Andhra Pradesh to whom the Amnesty International delegates spoke during their mission, claim that between 300 and 500 political prisoners died in encounters staged by the police during those years. On 7 June 1978, the Andhra Pradesh state Government requested the commission to hold its proceedings in camera "in the public interest"; on 23 June 1978 Amnesty International cabled the Chief Minister, Chenna Reddy, expressing its concern about the Government's request on such vague grounds in these words:
162
"AI [sz'c] considers it most important that the facts regarding allegations of such serious human rights violations as the torture and the killing of political prisoners be established openly and publicly. If the facts regarding these serious allegations are to be established beyond any doubt any official inquiry committee should function openly and subject to public scrutiny. It should have full access to all relevant evidence and its findings should be made public in their entirety." Amnesty International sent a copy of the cable to the Home Minister, urging the central Government to take steps to ensure that the inquiry into these serious allegations be effective, open and impartial. Amnesty International released its appeal to the press. In the memorandum to the Indian Government, already mentioned on p. 161, Amnesty International makes recommendations on similar lines, adding that such an investigation should be instituted by the Government wherever and whenever substantial allegations of this nature are made. It also recommends that full investigations be instituted into the conduct and record of individual police officers, concerning whom prima facie evidence of responsibility for the alleged killings emerges during an official inquiry.
On the basis of observations made by the Amnesty International delegates about their visits during the mission to Tihar Jail, New Delhi, Presidency Jail, Calcutta, and Hyderabad Central Jail, the memorandum to the Indian Government makes a number of recommendations in line with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, including the establishment of independent visitors' boards to visit prisons at any time and the abolition of the use of iron fetters on political prisoners.
On 20 July 1977, Amnesty International appealed to the Acting President of India, B.D. Jatti, appealing on humanitarian grounds for clemency for six political prisoners under sentence of death in West Bengal. So far, none of them has been executed, and during their visit to the state the Amnesty International delegates were informed that the six would not be executed (one of them has since escaped from prison). The West Bengal state Government opposes the death penalty. The Law Minister in the central Government told Amnesty International during its mission that the abolition of the death penalty was currently under discussion, but that the central Government did not have any concrete plans for its abolition in India.
