Malawi (the Republic of)
Several long-term detainees were freed from Malawi's main Mikuyu Detention Center in July 1977, thus continuing a process begun at the end of 1976 and in the first months of 1977, when an estimated 2,000 political detainees were released. Among those freed in mid 1977 were Arthur Chipembere, brother of the late Henry Chipembere, once President Banda's main political rival. Also released were a number of journalists who had been detained without trial since early 1973, when they were arrested for reporting a clash between the Malawi military forces and FRELIMO (Front for the Liberation of Mozambique) guerillas, operating in the Tete province of neighbouring Mozambique, then under Portuguese colonial rule. Many former members of the academic staff at the University of Malawi and former civil servants, most of whom had been detained in 1975 or 1976, were also released. Several former detainees left Malawi almost immediately to seek political asylum in Zambia and other countries, because of the widely-held belief that the improvements in the human rights situation in Malawi that took place during 1976 and early 1977 would be shortlived.
The release of political detainees in Malawi began almost immediately after the arrest, in October 1976, of the Cabinet Minister Albert Muwalo Nqumayo and the head of the security police, Focus Martin Gwede. Both men were convicted of treason and sentenced to death by a traditional court in February 1977. Despite Amnesty International appeals for clemency, Muwalo Nqumayo was executed in early September 1977. However, Gwede's death sentence is believed to have been commuted to life imprisonment by President Banda.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to collect information about prison conditions and to research the cases of those detainees - estimated
59
to number some 50 or 60 - who are still held. They are believed to include at least two former Government ministers and relatives of certain political prisoners and refugees. The organization also attempted to monitor the situation of former detainees, many of whom appear to have been unable to find employment again in Malawi; it has given assistance to a number of political refugees who left Malawi soon after their release in 1977.
