Kampuchea (Democratic Kampuchea) [Cambodia]
The human rights situation in Democratic Kampuchea, as described by newly-arrived Cambodian refugees in 1977-78, has continued to be characterized by gross violations of human rights.
Three years after the change of government in Cambodia in April 1975, citizens in Democratic Kampuchea are still liable, without any legal process, to be summarily executed or sent to carry out hard labour in work camps for any act considered "hostile" to the authorities. Apart from the Constitution adopted in January 1976, the country does not appear to have adopted any laws or set up any judicial institutions. The 1976 Constitution states that the judiciary is formed of the people's courts of justice which ". . . defend the people's democratic liberties" and "punish any act directed against the people's State." There is no evidence, however, from either official or unofficial sources, that "people's courts" have been established. The Constitution also defines as follows the acts ". . . transgressing the people's State:
-	any systematic hostile or destructive activity that endangers the people's State receives the most severe punishment;
—	any case besides the above mentioned activities is treated by means of re-education within the State's organs or people's organizations."
Apart from the implications of such loosely-worded provisions, since 1975 Cambodian refugees have consistently reported that justice is summarily and arbitrarily executed entirely at the discretion of political authorities.
In a speech at the end of September 1977, the Prime Minister of Democratic Kampuchea, Pol Pot, defined the potential objects of repression in the country as "reactionary elements" who continued to carry out activities "against the Cambodian revolution". He said that they constituted "one or two per cent of the population" and that those among them who can be "won over and corrected to the people's side" must be "educated", that "reluctant elements" must be "neutralized" and that those "who are cruel and determinedly oppose the revolution" must be "eradicated".
168
During 1977-78 Amnesty International has not been able to take up, on an individual basis, cases of people reported as arrested or missing in Democratic Kampuchea, partly for fear of possible reprisals. Amnesty International is gravely concerned by the allegations made by Cambodian refugees who left the country in 1977 and early 1978 that summary executions were continuing.
Because it is difficult to enter the country, refugees' accounts cannot be checked against information from independent sources, and the Government of Democratic Kampuchea has not so far answered any specific allegations of human rights violations. In consequence, refugees' reports, together with official statements, constitute almost the only sources of information on the human rights situation in the country. Such reports are often imprecise or conflicting. In one case known to Amnesty International, a Vietnamese refugee stated in January 1978 that he had heard no stories of massacres while he was in Kampuchea between February and April 1976. The refugee is reported to have walked from Vietnam to Thailand, working in various places in Kampuchea during that period. He stated: "Walking across the country for two months I saw no sign of killing or mass extermination and nobody I spoke to told me of it" (The Times, London, 30 January 1978). It should be noted, however, that many refugees have, since 1975, consistently reported that the most fundamental human rights are being violated in Kampuchea.
Among recent refugees' reports is one from a man named Ear Soth, who said in Oslo in April 1978 that he had witnessed several executions in Kampuchea in 1976 and early 1977. He alleged that, from the end of 1975, he worked as a "political commissar" teaching "communist doctrine" to workers in sugar-cane fields near Kompong Kol, west of Battambang. Among the most recent killings he reported was that of a worker named Chhat, who, with another worker, was reportedly accused of stealing sugar-cane and killed by a Khmer Rouge called Nal in January 1977. According to Ear Soth, at the end of February 1977, four people working in the sugar-factory of Kompong Kol were killed by a Khmer Rouge called Nop, president of the cooperative of the factory; those reported killed were the manager of the factory, Pak Lim, an engineer, Duang Chhan, a mechanic, Nop Non, another mechanic, and Sou Sun, an electrician. These executions seem to be confirmed by the report of another refugee, Chieu Kien, who worked as a carpenter in the Kompong Kol factory until he fled to Thailand in mid March 1977. Chieu Kien alleged that altogether 11 "members" of the Kompong Kol factory were killed by the authorities in early 1977, including the manager of the factory and the two mechanics named above, who were identified by Chieu Kien as Phok Lim, Duong and Nan. According to Chieu Kien, they were accused of having connections with "traitors" (including "comrade" Em Huon) who had tried to organize opposition to the Government among local Khmer Rouge troops in January 1977. The others killed in the factory reportedly included Phok Lieng(Phok Lim's brother), L'AcharPhol, a member of the Kompong Kol military management, Thol and Kuon, also of the military management, "old" Houl, chief of the "mobile work teams", Sarun, a worker, and Chhat, who was in charge of the workers' food.
Chieu Kien and Ear Soth reported that an internal purge was carried out during that period among local leaders. According to Ear Soth, in Battambang city, the "Khmer Rouge" Horn was "taken away" on the order of the "Khmer Rouge" Ta Khleng, and Horn's mother, sister and two brothers were later shot by Nop,
169
as were army cadres called Kuon, Yi, Pak, Saroeun, Moeung, Chhen and Moul.
Both official and refugee sources indicate that a series of purges of civil and military leaders was carried out in 1977, following attempts to organize opposition to the Government in various provinces of the country. According to refugee reports, those who were identified as the leaders of this abortive revolt have been summarily executed. Some Khmer Rouge defectors in particular have reported that regional leaders from Oddar Meanchey, Siem Reap, Kompong Cham and Kompong Thom provinces were arrested in the spring of 1977 and taken either to Phnom Penh or to the city of Kompong Thom for execution. They reportedly included Soth, the secretary of the Oddar Meanchey/Siem Reap region, his deputy, named Hien, the chief of Kompong Cham region, named Has, the secretary of Kompong Thom, named Seng, and other junior officials. Conflicting reports allege that some of them were burnt alive at a crematorium in Kompong Thom: in one case, those alleged to have been burnt alive were Soth, Has, Seng and others unnamed; however, another report alleged that Hien and two leaders called Pol and Kaeut were burnt alive in Kompong Thom, whereas Soth was taken to Phnom Penh and later reported to have been executed.
A refugee named Kong Samrach—a native of Kompong Cham province who worked at Staung (Kompong Thom province) from December 1975 until June 1977—also alleged that two mass arrests of civil and military leaders, from national down to village level, took place in January and April 1977 and that in Kompong Thom province alone more than two thousand people—including the family dependants of officers—were arrested and executed during the month of January. According to other refugees, the purges continued until September 1977.
In March 1978, Amnesty International renewed its appeal to the Government of Democratic Kampuchea to respond to allegations of continuing summary killings carried out by the authorities in the country, and called upon it to allow independent international observers into the country to carry out investigations.
Amnesty International referred to accounts from refugees that the situation in Democratic Kampuchea since the change of government in April 1975 had been characterized by large-scale killings. These included the summary executions in 1975 and early 1976 of groups of officers of the defeated Republican Army and numerous instances in which individual citizens are alleged to have been brutally killed by local chiefs, usually merely for showing the slightest sign of disobedience or dissatisfaction.
One observer, the French priest François Ponchaud, who by early 1978 had interviewed more than 1,000 Cambodian refugees, summarized his findings in this way: "The estimate that more than 100,000 Khmers have been executed must now be taken as an absolute minimum. It is possible that two or three times as many people have been executed" (New York Review of Books, 6 April 1978, p.20). Some observers have said that the phenomenon of large-scale executions has now been replaced by sporadic killings. However, the information given by refugees on the 1977 purges, although scanty, indicates that many executions were carried out in the course of it.
In its statement in March 1978, Amnesty International welcomed the decision taken on 8 March by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights meeting in Geneva to request the Government of Democratic Kampuchea to comment on the allegations of human rights violations in that country. It pointed out that,
170
over the past three years, the Kampuchean Government had ignored communications from concerned bodies, including Amnesty International, regarding reports of human rights violations in the country. The only attempt made by the Government to deny the allegations was a statement in May 1977 by the Foreign Minister, Ieng Sary, who denied that "hundreds of thousands" had been executed and was reported to have stated that "We only condemn the worst criminals." He is reported to have made a similar denial more recently in Tokyo (The Times, London, 14 June 1978).
In June 1978 Amnesty International prepared a statement for submission to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, drawing its attention to allegations of violations of human rights in Democratic Kampuchea.
