Mozambique (the People's Republic of)
Amnesty International continued throughout the past year (July 1977—June 1978) to compile information about the use of detention without trial in Mozambique and the conditions under which political detainees are held. Among those detained are several former prominent nationalists who founded rival political organizations to FRELIMO (Front for the Liberation of Mozambique) during the struggle for independence from Portugal. They include Paulo Gumane, the leader of the Mozambique Revolutionary Commission and several other members of the party's executive who were either arrested in Mozambique itself, or forcibly returned to Mozambique from Zambia and Tanzania, during the period between the Portuguese transfer of power to FRELIMO in late 1974 and independence in June 1975. They have not been charged or brought to trial, and remain detained either in prisons such as Machava or the Cadeia Civil in Maputo or in so-called reeducation camps in Cabo Delgado province.
Re-education camps situated in several other provinces, particularly Niassa, Nampula and Zambezia, are also used as detention centers for the several thousand people - mainly alleged prostitutes and vagrants - deported from the cities soon after FRELIMO took power. Certain religious groups have also been targets for Government disapproval, particularly the Jehovah's Witnesses, most of whom are now believed to be detained at re-education camps in Zambezia province. Those held at re-education camps are reportedly made to do heavy manual labour but are poorly fed and subject to random brutality by camp guards.
In May 1978, the Mozambique authorities released Miron Markus, an Israeli national who had been detained since the light aircraft in which he was travelling crashed or was shot down in Mozambique in September 1976. After his release, Markus reported that he had spent most of the time in detention at Machava Prison, where many political prisoners had been held during the period of Portuguese rule. He alleged that, while he was there, a number of prisoners had been removed from Machava and secretly killed by members of the security police.
The conflict in Rhodesia continued to have a significant effect on the situation in Mozambique during the period 1977-78. There were persistent raids into Mozambique by Rhodesian security forces, the most notable of which was an attack on a Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) camp at Chimoio, 50 miles inside Mozambique, which resulted in the killing of an estimated 1,200 men, women and children. Rhodesian claims that all those killed were nationalist
62
guerillas were refuted by eyewitnesses and other observers who visited Chimoio shortly after the Rhodesian forces withdrew.
In March 1978, a dispute within the leadership of ZANU led to the dismissal and arrest of several prominent members of the party. They included Henry Hamadziripi and ZANU's information secretary, Rugare Gumbo. According to unconfirmed reports, Hamadziripi, Gumbo and at least eight others were tried before a so-called People's Tribunal at Chimoio camp during April 1978. They were alleged to have been planning to overthrow the existing leadership of ZANU, including the organization's President, Robert Mugabe. Those arrested are all said to have been found guilty, expelled from ZANU and put "under party discipline" for an indefinite period at a ZANU training camp. In April, Amnesty International expressed its concern to the Mozambique Government about the ZANU detentions and asked that the personal safety of those arrested should be guaranteed by the Mozambique authorities.
The ZANU "dissidents" detained in March 1978 were not the only Zimbabweans held in Mozambique during the past year. Some 80 other members of the Zimbabwe People's Army (ZIPA), arrested in early 1977, are also believed to be detained, this time by the Mozambique Government, in the north of the country. They include Dr Sam Geza, a prominent ZANU theorist and Robert Mugabe's brother-in-law, and Dzinashe Machingura, one of the most prominent ZIPA leaders. In May 1978, Amnesty International received information also about the detention without trial of several supporters of the section of ZANU led by the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole (one of the participants in the internal settlement agreement in Rhodesia), and followers of Bishop Abel Muzorewa's United African National Council. They, too, are held in re-education camps.
