Italy (the Italian Republic)
In the past year in Italy there has been a marked increase in violence. Not only have there been more kidnappings for ransom but also more frequent street violence, assassination's, woundings, bombings, abductions and murder for declared political ends by extremist groups of both right and left.
In 1978, the Government under the Christian Democrat Prime Minister, Signor Giulio Andreotti, introduced new measures to combat acts of terrorism. A thirteen-article Bill which became law in March 1978 contains measures to protect property and provides for heavier sentences for different degrees of kidnapping. The law allows imprisonment for life (ergastolo) in the event of a kidnapped person dying.
There are also provisions to eliminate some features of the secret preliminary proceedings which had previously constrained investigating magistrates, and to allow a considerable expansion in police power. People arrested in the act of committing an offence no longer have the right to legal representation during interrogation. However, information obtained in such interrogations cannot be used as evidence. In addition, the law stipulates that anyone may be detained and held for up to 24 hours or until they can prove their identity. The Minister of the Interior now has increased power to request authorization for wire-tapping, and the period of time for which an authorization lasts has been lengthened. Finally, it is now obligatory to report the sale or renting of property and to tell the police who the parties involved are.
These special powers came into force by Decree Law on 23 March 1978 and the police immediately used them to arrest and hold - pending investigation of their identities - hundreds of leftists suspected of being implicated in, or having knowledge of, terrorist activities.
The most recent and most serious in a long series of violent confrontations between the Government and extremist groups took place on 16 March 1978, when the former Prime Minister and leader of the Christian Democratic Party, Aldo Moro, was kidnapped by an armed group in Rome. All the guards in his escort were murdered. The kidnappers identified themselves in a statement on 18 March as belonging to the Red Brigades - a group committed to the use of violence and of a "strategy of tension" as a first step towards the overthrow of the state. The Red Brigades claimed that Signor Moro was being held in a "people's prison" and would go on trial before a "people's tribunal". On 15 April the Red Brigades announced that his interrogation was finished, that he had been found "guilty" and had been condemned to death.
Amnesty International issued a press release on 17 April, appealing for the life of Aldo Moro. This, like appeals from many other sources, was of no avail and his murdered body was discovered in Rome on 9 May.
Amnesty International continues to be concerned at reports and allegations of maltreatment and bad conditions in Italian institutions of confinement, including the nine recently created special-security prisons. Amnesty International therefore wrote in May 1978 to Franco Evangelisti, the Under Secretary of State of the Presidency of the Council, saying that it was willing to set up a proper investigation
222
of conditions in the special-security prisons. When this letter was sent, the Italian Government had publicly expressed its own willingness to co-operate fully in such an investigation.
The delays at all stages in cases before the Italian courts is another matter of concern to Amnesty International. The problem is more acute in common criminal cases since many of the defendants in politically motivated cases are tried under special rapid penal procedures. However, this is not always so. Giovanni Ventura, for example, was in detention awaiting trial for over four years, charged with taking part in 1969 in the bombing in the Piazza Fontana in Milan which killed 16 people. He subsequently made an application to the European Commission on Human Rights in Strasbourg, claiming that he had been denied his right to a fair trial within a reasonable time, as guaranteed by Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The Commission at its April 1978 session accepted the admissibility of his application. Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice in 1976, expressing concern at the delay in bringing Giovanni Ventura to trial.
Amnesty International groups worked for a total of seven adopted conscientious objectors during the year 1977 — 78, five of whom have now been released after serving an average of 12 months' imprisonment. Those still in prison, include one Amnesty International adoptee, Franco Pasello, who was sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment for refusing to carry out military service (the usual charge) and, at a separate trial, to a further 12 months' for refusal to register for military service. In November 1977, when the first term of imprisonment in a military prison expired, he was transferred to a civilian prison to serve the second sentence. All seven conscientious objectors adopted by Amnesty International were "total resisters" to military service in that they objected on political grounds to both military and alternative service. Most conscientious objectors in prison in Italy are Jehovah's Witnesses.
