Hungary (the People's Republic of)
During the year 1977 —78, the Hungarian authorities introduced certain legislative changes which make for better implementation of international human rights standards. In 1977, the Hungarian state gave legal recognition to the Nazarene sect which had until then been treated as illegal. In the past its members were persecuted if they engaged in religious activities publicly. In March 1978, a new code of law on civil rights was introduced to replace that of 1959. The new code guarantees privacy of correspondence and states that discrimination on grounds of sex, race or religion is illegal.
There has been no amendment of the Penal Code provisions which make public criticism of official policies an offence punishable by imprisonment. According to Article 127 of the Hungarian Penal Code, "incitement to hatred" of a variety of targets, including the state, the nation and religions, can be punished by up to eight years' imprisonment. Official statistics show that, during 1977, almost 200 people were tried and sentenced to imprisonment for "incitement" but that many of them had their sentences suspended. During the past year, Amnesty International has adopted three Hungarians who were convicted of "incitement". Gyorgy Hajas, his former wife, Eva Szijj, and his half-brother Bela Hajas were tried in July 1977 by the district court of Budapest on charges of "incitement". The charge against Gyorgy Hajas was that he had: written a short statement alleging official violations of the rights to freedom of expression and movement, which he had attempted to distribute to the Hungarian authorities and to domestic
219
and foreign newspapers; tried to form a "Helsinki" monitoring group in Hungary; questioned the effects of the Soviet army's liberation of Hungary in 1945; stored in his flat eight issues of "counter-revolutionary" papers printed at the time of the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956; kept in his flat a miniature statue of Stalin hanging from a rope. He was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. His half-brother Bela was sentenced to 7 months' imprisonment for helping him in his activities, and his divorced wife to 5 months' for typing the statement on human rights violations in Hungary. All three were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. Bela Hajas and Eva Szijj were released after serving their sentences.
Another prisoner adopted by Amnesty International is Dr Maria Dombovari-Lorincz (see the Amnesty International Report 1977). She has been confined to the Robert Korhaz military psychiatric hospital in Budapest since her trial for "incitement" in 1976. The specific charge against her was that she had drafted, and attempted to distribute, pamphlets urging that Soviet troops be withdrawn from Hungary and that Roman Catholic nuns be allowed to work in various hospitals. At her trial the court ordered that, in accordance with Article 61 of the Hungarian Penal Code, she should be confined to a psychiatric hospital. Her ninth appeal hearing is due to take place in July 1978. Amnesty International has received no information alleging that she is being ill-treated in any way in the Robert Korhaz hospital, nor has the organization received any other reports of psychiatry being abused in Hungary.
Article 203 of the Hungarian Penal Code makes unauthorized crossing of the border punishable by terms of imprisonment ranging from one to five years. Amnesty International has adopted Zsolt Takacs, a twenty-five-year-old electrician from Budapest, who was charged with this offence in February 1978 and is now being held in pre-trial detention in the capital. In 1975, he had married a Swiss citizen in Budapest with the approval of the Presidential Council. However, his application to join his wife in Switzerland after their marriage was turned down by the Hungarian authorities. On 20 February 1978, he was arrested while trying to cross the Yugoslav/Italian border without official permission and was extradited to Hungary. His trial is due to take place in the summer of 1978.
Amnesty International's adoptee Sandor Rudovics (see Amnesty International Report 1977) was released in January 1978 after serving a second two-year prison sentence for trying to cross the frontier illegally. He was re-arrested on 7 March 1978. The circumstances are being investigated by Amnesty International.
During the period under review, several people are known to have been sentenced to death in Hungary for committing premeditated murder.
