Cuba (the Republic of)
During the year covered by this report (July 1977—June 1978), there have been further amendments to Cuba's legal and judicial system. In July 1977, the National Assembly approved a new Law of Penal Procedure and a new Law of the Organization of the Judicial System. In accordance with the new Constitution adopted in 1975, this legislation must now be ratified by the National Assembly of People's Power—the only body in the Republic invested with constituent and legislative authority. During 1978, the Assembly was expected to approve also a new Criminal Code to replace the 1938 Code of Social Defence which had previously served as the fundamental legal code for the indictment of both political and criminal offenders.
The 1977 Law of the Judicial System confirmed the provisions of the 1973 Law; this disbanded the Revolutionary Tribunals which had, until then, been empowered to deal specifically with "counter-revolutionary offences". Such offences now fall within the competence of the State Security chambers of the higher-ranking People's Courts, the Tribunal Supremo Popular (Supreme Popular Tribunal) and the Tribunales Provinciales Populares (Provincial Popular Tribunals). The two lower-ranking courts, the regional popular tribunals and the basic popular tribunals, were amalgamated to form the Tribunales Municipales Populares (Municipal Popular Tribunals) by the 1977 Law of the Judicial System, following the reorganization of Cuba's provincial system. These lower courts have no jurisdiction over political offences.
During the course of 1977, President Castro stated on no less than three occasions that there were between 2,000 and 3,000 counter-revolutionary offenders in prison in Cuba. Amnesty International representatives who visited Cuba at the end of 1977 (see below) were given the figure of approximately
113
3,200. This suggests that there has been no significant reduction in the total number of political prisoners during the past year.
Amnesty International has been able to record some releases. Of the 25 women prisoners named in the Amnesty International Report 1977, 13 were set free in December 1977, before the end of their sentences. They are: Caridad Cabrera, Georgina Cid Campos, Nilda Diaz Batista, María Teresa Bastanzuri, Bertha Alemán, Alejandrina Sánchez Piloto, Ana Bustamante, Clara Alonso, Dolores Correoso, María Magdalena Alvarez, América Quesada, Felicia Guillermina García and Nereyda Polo. Three prisoners adopted by Amnesty International, Roberto Fluxa Reyes, the journalist Pablo Castellanos Caballero and the former trade union leader Reynol González González, were also released in the course of 1977. Only the last of these three has been able to leave Cuba.
Between 28 November and 6 December 1977 the Chairman of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee paid a nine-day visit to Cuba. He was accompanied by a member of the organization's International Secretariat. The two were able to hold extensive discussions with high-ranking members of the Cuban Government and judiciary. They twice met the Vice-President, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez. In addition they met the Attorney General, Dr Santiago Cuba Fernández, three Judges from the Tribunal Supremo Popular, officials from the Ministry of the Interior's Department of Prisons, other officials from the Ministries of the Interior and Foreign Relations and members of various national organizations.
The Cuban Government, when agreeing to the visit, had made it clear in advance that it could not be considered an investigation. It was emphasized to the Amnesty International representatives throughout their visit that, while their specific questions would be answered by the appropriate officials, they would not be permitted to meet one particular group of prisoners. This is the group called by the prisoners themselves the plantados: they have persistently rejected the Cuban Government's "re-education" plan, have refused to wear prison uniform and, since the early 1970s, have rejected the "Progressive Plan" which permits certain privileges, including home visits and the chance of early release for prisoners who agree to work. Several of the internationally known long-term prisoners, including those mentioned in the Amnesty International Report 1977 (Huber Matos, Eloy Gutiérrez Menoyo, Antonio Lamas, Lauro Blanco, Jorge Vails and Armando Valladares Pérez) still belong to the plantado group. A seventh prisoner mentioned in the 1977 Report, the former rebel officer César Páez, died in detention in 1977.
The Amnesty International representatives were not only unable to see members of this plantado group: they were also refused permission to talk to any political prisoners in private. They were conducted round the maximum security prison of Combinado del Este in Havana Province, and were shown certain of its facilities, including unoccupied prison cells, the prison hospital and the work area adjoining the prison. They talked to some political prisoners in Combinado del Este but were not allowed any conversation in private.
However, Cuban officials were willing to provide certain statistical and other information not previously available to international organizations, including official information on the approximate number of "counter-revolutionary offenders", both inside and outside the "Progressive Plan"; the prison régime for
114
all categories of prisoners; the minimum legal rights to family visits, correspondence and exercise; the work régime, including facts and figures about production and productivity in certain prisons; the new legislation and how the judicial system works.
The two Amnesty International representatives were told that the approximate number of "counter-revolutionary offenders" in detention was 3,200, a decrease from approximately 3,500 a few months previously. At certain times in the past, they were told, this number had been significantly larger, and up to 23,000 had been detained at one time or another since 1959. Until September 1977, a total of 20,691 people had been released (15,649 into conditional freedom and 5,052 into unconditional freedom at the end of their sentences). In a few exceptional cases of contravention of prison regulations and the committing of offences in prison, additional terms had been imposed by the courts at the end of the original sentences. There had been 50 or 60 such cases, and, as of December 1977, 26 people were still in prison in these circumstances. The Amnesty International representatives were told their names, the length of their additional sentences, the dates when these additional sentences would end and where they were detained. They were not told-although they asked-precisely why these additional sentences had been imposed. The 26 involved are: Erasmo Pedraza Rodriguez, Heriberto Trujillo Montes, José M. Sánchez Calderin, Juan Roque Maya, Orlando Rodríguez Panega, Mario Pacheco Valdés, Pedro Pablo O'Farrill Díaz, Carlos Mosquera Prado, Elio Benito Manes Santana, César J. Ja Morales, Rigoberto Acosta Díaz, Rolando Carvallo Collado, Armando R. Fandiño Ramírez, Rolando Mejias Pérez, Pablo Guerra Santos, Francisco Grau Sierra, Girardo Grobeiro Ruiz, Gastón Guí Sierra, Eduardo Roque Escolles, José Cruz Chávez, Cervando Infante Jiménez, Luis Felipe Sabatela Pardo, Luis Alarcón Martínez, Fermín Alvarez Santos, Pascual Espinosa Alvarez, and José Tejeiro González.
Cuban officials stated that approximately 400 political prisoners had joined the "Progressive Plan" (see above) during the past year. There were now less than a hundred outside it. Of these, between 60 and 70 were held in Combinado del Este. Fewer were in other maximum security prisons, such as Boniato prison in Oriente Province and the prisons of Pinar del Rio, Kilo 7 Camagliey and Aguica. Three of the long-term prisoners outside the "Progressive Plan" (Pablo Castellanos Caballero, Julio Rodriguez Lamela and José Arenal Pinón) had been released shortly before the Amnesty International visit.
The Amnesty International representatives inquired about the prison régime, prison regulations and the minimum rights for all categories of prisoners. They expressed particular concern about reports that the plantado prisoners, kept apart from the rest, had been denied family visits, correspondence, adequate exercise and satisfactory medical attention. Cuban officials admitted that certain restrictions were imposed on this group (in that their rights to visits and correspondence were more limited than those of other prisoners), but said that the absolute minimum rights for all categories of prisoners, even after being punished, were one visit and one letter every three months. Prisoners not participating in the "Progressive Plan" also had these minimum rights, plus the right to exercise in the prison yard for at least two hours a day. The Amnesty International representatives were told that prisoners could receive as much medical attention as non-prisoners. The representatives voiced particular concern for the former rebel army
115
commander, José Antonio Lamas de la Torre, who had been reported by Cuban exiles to be seriously ill, and on whose behalf Amnesty International had been urged to intervene. Cuban officials said that Lamas was in the prison hospital but in no danger, and that he would shortly be having an operation. The Amnesty International representatives were not permitted to visit him.
Cuban prison officials explained the working of the "Progressive Plan" which, in 1971, had replaced earlier forms of "re-education". Unlike the latter, which had included compulsory political education and recantations of past opposition to the Revolution, the "Progressive Plan" makes only work compulsory.
Prisoners get salaries equivalent to those received by non-prisoners, the only deduction being 30 pesos a month to cover cost of food, clothing, etc. Work is done either in specially equipped centers adjoining the maximum security prisons, or in the open prison camps {frentes abiertos) in which the vast majority of offenders (both ordinary and "counter-revolutionary") may be held under any one of three régimes comprising the "Progressive Plan": the Régimen Severo (strict régime), the Régimen de Menor Severidad (less strict régime) and the Régimen Común (open régime). Prisoners under the Régimen de Menor Severidad may live and work in either a security prison or an open prison. Those under the Régimen Común are always in open prisons.
Under the Régimen Común there are no restrictions on correspondence. Family visits to the prisons take place every 15 days, and prisoners may go home once a month. Prisoners under the Régimen de Menor Severidad may receive visits once every 15 days or once a month, depending on their behaviour; home visits for this group are exceptional. Those under the Régimen Severo may receive family visits every month or every two or three months—again, depending on their behaviour.
The Amnesty International representatives were taken to one of the open régime prisons, the Frente Abierto Trinidad in Havana Province. At that time there were 181 inmates (103 of them ordinary prisoners and 78 "counterrevolutionaries"). It transpired that certain prisoners who were formally classified as being under the Régimen Severo could, in fact, be under the open prison régime, with the same rights as other open régime prisoners (of this group, 10 were classified as strict régime, 108 as less strict and 63 as open régime prisoners). At this prison, and at an exhibition held in the Havana Department of Prisons, the Amnesty International representatives were shown production charts indicating the level of work and productivity expected of the prisoners.
Discussions with legal officials centered on pre-trial proceedings and legal defence guarantees; changes in the judicial system in recent years, especially in the 1977 laws relating to the organization of the judicial system and penal procedure; the forthcoming criminal code; the imposition of additional terms of imprisonment as "security measures" and the legal possibilities of changing sentences, or granting a general amnesty.
During the second meeting with Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, at the end of the visit, it was agreed that there should be further discussion between the Cuban Government and Amnesty International.
Following the visit, a memorandum was sent to the Cuban Government, outlining Amnesty International's concerns. In it, the organization said that, while
116
it recognized that some long-term political prisoners had belonged to clandestine organizations which had resorted to violence, nevertheless, it was concerned because, "from the information currently available to us, it does seem that certain individuals may have been arrested and sentenced to long terms of imprisonment more because of their opposition to the Revolutionary Government than on account of any specific offence". It urged the Cuban Government to say precisely what these people had been charged with and what evidence there was to back the charges. It pointed out that, in the early years of the Revolution, trials by Revolutionary Tribunals had been criticized for being summary, because rights to legal consultation and defence were restricted. There had been criticisms also because the sentences passed by these Tribunals were, in many cases, extremely severe, and were arguably out of proportion to the alleged offence.
In urging a general amnesty, Amnesty International observed that a substantial number of Cuban prisoners were now among the longest-term political prisoners to be found anywhere in the world. It pointed out that, according to Law 993 of 1961 and the principles underlying the "Progressive Plan", those prisoners who obeyed prison rules and whose conduct was considered satisfactory could be granted conditional freedom after serving at least one quarter of their sentences. While noting that several hundred political prisoners (including both participants and non-participants in the "Progressive Plan") had been released during the past year, it expressed concern that there were still some 3,000 in prison, many of them long-term prisoners who had served much more than one quarter of their sentences. It requested more precise information from the Cuban Government about exact procedures whereby conditional release was granted or denied to people in this category.
In its memorandum, Amnesty International expressed continuing concern over reports that certain prisoners had been denied family visits for a long time. While welcoming the improvements for the majority of prisoners since the introduction of the "Progressive Plan", Amnesty International felt that the minority who had remained outside the "Plan" on account of their political beliefs should not be made to suffer for this reason. It conveyed the deep disappointment of its representatives that they had been unable to meet members of the plantado group.
Concern was expressed also at the number of offences for which the death penalty could, in principle, be imposed under existing laws, for both criminal and "counter-revolutionary" offences. The Amnesty International representatives had been told that there had been two or three executions a year recently.
In the memorandum Amnesty International said that it was disturbed, too, by the legal provisions which permitted the application of medidas de seguridad (security measures) to prisoners who had completed the sentences originally imposed by the courts, but were considered to be in a "state of dangerousness". The Cuban authorities were asked whether the 26 prisoners at present being dealt with by "post-delictive security measures" had committed further offences while in prison which were punishable by the law, or whether they had only broken prison regulations or behaved badly. It was pointed out that, whereas Article 586.1 of the Código de Defensa Social stipulated that people dealt with by such measures should be held, not in prisons but in separate establishments set up for this purpose, according to the information given by the Cuban Government to the Amnesty International representatives, the 26 were currently being held in maximum security prisons.
117
Finally, it was urged in the memorandum that serious consideration be given to a possible review of all cases where extremely severe sentences (such as thirty years' imprisonment) had been passed by the Revolutionary Tribunals in the early years of the Revolution.
During the year covered by this report, Amnesty International has received no information concerning recent politically motivated arrests. However, it has learned with concern that Dra. Marta Frayde Barraque, Cuban Ambassador to UNESCO between 1962 and 1965, who was arrested in Cuba in 1976, has now been sentenced to a long term of imprisonment. The two Amnesty International representatives took up her case with officials of the Cuban Government, and were informed that she had been sentenced for offences against state security. The Cuban Government assured the representatives that it would send full details concerning the charges and the sentence passed. At the time of writing, no further information on this case has reached Amnesty International.
