El Salvador
General Carlos Humberto Romero was inaugurated as President for a five-year term on 1 July 1977 after the publication of much disputed election returns and widespread post-electoral violence. All seats in the Salvadorean single-chamber Parliament, the Asamblea Legislativa, are still held by the party headed by General Romero, the Partido de Conciliacion Nacional (PNC) and so are all mayoral posts in the country. Principal opposition leaders are in exile.
On 24 November 1977 a rigorous public order law, the Ley de Defensa y Garantia del Orden Publico was promulgated. Its preamble stated that it was
121
supplying the necessary legal machinery for enforcing the Constitutional provision (Article 158) ". . . prohibiting the propagation of anarchist doctrines or those contrary to democracy", and for dealing with "terrorist behaviour and the provocation of international subversion". However, the law also seems specifically designed to restrict the actions of trade unions, the political opposition, and human rights monitors, including members of the clergy who report human rights problems or advise members of the peasant trade unions.
Trade unionists can be held for up to five years if they "plan or project, incite or carry out sabotage, destruction, stoppages or any other act or omission that has as its intent the alteration of the normal development of the productive activities of the nation ... or of disrupting a public service or services essential to the community."
Up to 150 employees of the Izalco Centra Azucarera (sugar mill) were detained on 1 February 1978, following a two-day strike. On 30 February, court proceedings under the public order law were opened against 17 trade union leaders while other prisoners were released. Amnesty International has adopted the 17 as prisoners of conscience.
The clergy may be accused of abusing their position under the new law if they encourage general awareness of human rights and the doctrine of social justice. Up to five years' imprisonment is prescribed for those who "by taking advantage of their status or personal condition propagate or foment . . . doctrines that tend toward the destruction of the social order, or of the political and judicial organization established in the Constitution".
The intimidation of those Salvadoreans who monitor the human rights situation and give information about it to national and international bodies and to the foreign news media is also a significant aspect of the public order law. Five years is the penalty for those
". . . who propagate orally, in writing or by any other means within the country, or who send abroad news or information which is tendentious or false, destined to disturb the constitutional and legal order, the tranquillity or security of the country, the economic or monetary regime or the stability of stocks and public bonds; those who give access to such news and information in the mass information media and those Salvadorean citizens who while outside the country divulge news and information of this nature."
Although Amnesty International has been concerned about prosecutions under the new public order law in the past year, its primary concern has been the increasing number of detentions followed by "disappearances", as well as outright killings in the countryside. Peasant members and leaders of the Federación Cristiana de Campesinos Salvadoreños (Federation of Christian Peasants) and the Union de Trabajadores del Campo (UTC) (both illegal, since agricultural workers' unions are prohibited) have been the principal victims of these measures, and the object of Amnesty International actions.
There have been no further murders of priests involved in the defence of peasant organizations since the killing of the Jesuits, Father Rutilio Grande and Father Alfonso Navarro, in January and February 1977, but a considerable number of lay Roman Catholic leaders have been murdered or else detained and have "disappeared". A number of priests have been held and interrogated under torture
122
about alleged connections with peasant federations and with the three guerilla groups now increasingly active in El Salvador.
Amnesty International cabled President Romero on 26 September 1977 to express dismay over killings by security forces in the countryside, specifically condemning the murder of two lay deacons on 26 August in the village of El Salitre after their arrest by between 50 and 60 uniformed members of the Guardia Nacional and the Policía de Hacienda. Felipe de Jesús Chacón Vásquez's corpse was found the next day two miles from the village. Eye-witnesses from the Archbishop of El Salvador's office said the body was nearly unrecognizable as "they cut the scalp from his head and stripped the flesh from his face". Sr Chacón Vásquez, and Sr Serafín Vasquez, who was found stabbed to death, were both well-known leaders of the conservative lay movement Cursillistas de Cristiandad, and had held literacy and religious classes in their own homes. Authorities subsequently announced that the men had in fact been killed by Government troops, but said they were cattle thieves and had first attacked the troops. No official comment was made on the mutilation of the two bodies.
Father Miguel Angel Ventura was detained on 3 October 1977 when National Guard troops interrupted a church service in Osicala: he was beaten and suspended by his arms while being interrogated, but was subsequently released. Three lay catechists detained in Osicala parish the same day subsequently "disappeared".
Amnesty International has made inquiries about more than 50 cases of detention followed by "disappearance" and 30 cases of death following detention during the past year. Forty-one cases have been adopted by Amnesty International groups, 19 of them peasant farmers in unacknowledged detention.
A submission was made by Amnesty International on 6 February 1978 to the Government of El Salvador, concerning 62 documented cases of unacknowledged detention, and 30 cases of apparent execution, all of them involving members of the official security forces, or of, the Government para-military organization ORDEN (the Spanish word for "order").
Forty-two of the 92 deaths and detentions occurred since President Romero took office in July 1977; 77 of them after the February 1977 presidential elections. Most of the bodies of the 30 dead showed signs of torture. Some had been decapitated, had had limbs amputated or were severely disfigured.
The submission stressed the details of the detentions, and noted that:
"While the formal denial that detentions were carried out by official bodies implies that the detentions were common criminal kidnappings, there is no concomitant response by the Government of El Salvador in seeking to investigate or clarify the circumstances of the abductions or to punish the perpetrators. On the contrary, these detentions are not reported by the responsible authorities . . . and appear to be of no concern to investigative police bodies."
No response was received from the Government of El Salvador about these 92 cases. A submission which included information about the same cases was made by Amnesty International to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (OAS) in January 1978.
