Asia
During the past year, several Asian governments have released numbers of people held in political detention; even so, there are still very many political prisoners who have been held for long periods without trial. For example, the Government of Indonesia announced in December 1977 that it had released 10,000 political prisoners, many of whom had been held for more than 12 years without trial. The Government said that it would release the remaining untried political prisoners -estimated to number tens of thousands-by the end of 1979. This means that the remaining large numbers of political prisoners (whose background is similar to those whose releases have been announced) will have had to spend up to 13 or 14 years in prison despite the implicit admission by the Government that they could and should be released.
Elsewhere in Asia, there has been a pattern of releases accompanied by new arrests or re-arrests. In the Republic of Korea (South Korea), the wave of arrests since 1976 of people who openly called for the restoration of basic liberties was followed by their eventual release. However, others, including students and workers, remain imprisoned; the Government has also refused to release the famous poet, Kim Chi Ha, and other prisoners arrested in previous years for expressing opposition to the Government. Recent student demonstrations, demanding the repeal of the present Constitution and the release of political prisoners, were broken up by police, and an unknown number of students was arrested.
Amnesties of detainees have been announced from time to time in the Philippines and Bangladesh. In the Philippines the pattern has been one of releases at the same time as new arrests, and there have been increasing allegations that prisoners have been summarily killed. In Bangladesh, after two abortive military uprisings in September and October 1977, the Government executed more than 130 prisoners for alleged involvement in the attempted coups, and the total number put to death could be as many as several hundred.
Refugees from Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) continued to speak of killings and arrests. The Kampuchean Government has not allowed independent international observers into that country, and has not provided information about alleged atrocities requested in March 1978 by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR).
The severe restriction on information relating to human rights which is imposed by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) denies the outside world news of violations. Burma is another country which restricts information regarding human rights; the scale of possible human rights violations there is indicated by the large numbers of Muslim refugees who recently crossed the border into Bangladesh.
147
In the People's Republic of China there have been during the past year arrests of party cadres on political and other grounds. At the same time, there has been a process of political rehabilitation of cadres and others who had previously been detained on similar grounds because they had been identified as belonging to one side or another in national political disputes. Of continuing concern is the Chinese Government's use of the death penalty, apparently as a means of maintaining public order and of punishing political offenders; there have been reports from various parts of China of people sentenced to death with immediate execution for political offences as well as for common crimes.
In Vietnam, the Government continues to keep tens of thousands of people in detention in camps where they are described as undergoing "political re-education". The Vietnam authorities had previously indicated that the process of "re-education" would take three years from the fall of the Thieu Government in May 1975, but that period has now been exceeded, and the continued detention of very large numbers of people causes increasing concern.
The new martial law Government in Pakistan has introduced measures designed to curb political dissent. The number of political prisoners has increased and now totals several thousand. At least 160 political prisoners, arrested for taking part in peaceful political activities, have been flogged. About 150 journalists and newspaper workers have also been arrested for taking part in a hunger strike to protest against the closure of a political party newspaper. The martial law Government has introduced as one form of punishment for theft the amputation of a hand.
There has been erosion of human rights in Malaysia in the past two years. Large numbers of prisoners have been held in detention without trial for long periods; those arrested more recently included prominent political figures. These violations of human rights have occurred under the Internal Security Act.
The Singapore Government continues to use its wide powers to arrest people alleged to be a danger to national security, and a number of political prisoners have been held for very long periods without trial. In the Sultanate of Brunei, 13 political prisoners have now been detained for extremely long periods, most of them for more than 14 years without trial.
A military .coup in Afghanistan in April 1978 resulted in the killing of the former President and many members of his family, and large-scale political arrests were reported.
Over the past year, Amnesty International representatives have visited India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Thailand, for discussions with members of governments and to study the human rights situation in those countries. Because of the large numbers of political detainees held in Asia, it is Amnesty International's practice to adopt a representative selection of individual cases, and to support this work with general initiatives for categories of prisoners in particular countries.
During 1977-78 Amnesty International conducted international campaigns on behalf of prisoners in Bangladesh, the Philippines, Indonesia, Taiwan and Thailand, and has also undertaken focused actions on behalf of prisoners in South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei. In the same period, the organization has issued reports on Indonesia, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Afghanistan (the Republic of later the Democratic Republic of)
After the military coup in 1973 which brought President Mohammed Daoud to
148
power, a number of people were sentenced to death for alleged complicity in attempts to overthrow his administration, including former air force and army officers. They were tried by military tribunal and the alleged ringleaders were subsequently executed. For example, on 7 August 1977 the official daily newspaper Gham'hurie jat reported that three alleged anti-government agitators had been executed by firing squad.
In accordance with its opposition to the imposition and infliction of death sentences, Amnesty International expressed its concern to President Daoud at the use of the death penalty in Afghanistan, pointing out that although the Government claimed that sentences of death were not in fact carried out, this claim was contradicted by official announcements of the execution of alleged anti-Govern-ment plotters.
On 27 April 1978 President Daoud was himself overthrown in a violent military coup, and he and many members of his family were killed. On 4 May Amnesty International cabled President Nur Mohammed Tarakki of the newly proclaimed Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, urging him to intervene to prevent further political killings of people associated with the former administration. It appealed to the new Government to protect the lives of all those in danger of being killed for political reasons, including remaining members of the family of the former President and former ministers in his administration. Because of reports of large-scale political arrests in Kabul and the provinces, Amnesty International urged the new Government to order the immediate release of all people arrested for political reasons. The number of people imprisoned on political grounds in Afghanistan is not known.
On 19 June 1978 Amnesty International wrote to President Tarakki welcoming his public announcements that, among other policy aims, his Government affirmed that it would observe the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Charter of the United Nations. Amnesty International urged that full provision for the protection of human rights should be included in the new Constitution being drawn up by a special commission of the Revolutionary Council of the Democratic Republic.
Referring to official reports that members of the family of the late President and members of the Afghan royal family were to be brought before a military court and tried for allegedly engaging in "provocative acts", Amnesty International urged President Tarakki to ensure that only people charged with specific crimes would be brought to trial and that their right to a fair and open trial, including the right to legal counsel and the right of appeal, would be safeguarded, according to generally recognized standards of legal procedure.
On 25 June Kabul Radio reported that approximately 1,000 political prisoners detained by the Daoud administration had been released from Kabul prison as the result of an amnesty ordered by the new Government. Amnesty International is making investigations to try to determine to what extent political prisoners have been included in general amnesties of prisoners announced by the new Government.
Bangladesh (the People's Republic of)
During April 1978, the military Government headed by Major General Ziaur Rahman, President of Bangladesh and Chief Martial Law Administrator, announced
149
that presidential elections would be held on 3 June 1978, to be followed by parliamentary elections in December 1978. The President said that he would participate in the elections as presidential candidate and as Chairman of the newly constituted Jatiyabadi Front (Nationalist Front), a coalition of six leftist and rightist parties which advocates the continuation of a presidential form of government. The President stated that, in preparation for the elections, open political activity would be allowed to increase gradually from 24 April 1978 onwards, that martial law would be withdrawn step by step and that the Fourth Constitutional Amendment, which had been passed under a previous regime, introducing a one-party system and seriously curbing the independence of Bangladesh's judiciary, would also, at some future stage, be repealed.
The President said that the Government had released thousands of political prisoners and that, of the rest, all would be released except those against whom serious criminal charges existed. However, at the time of writing (June 1978), martial law remains in force, together with the Emergency Power Rules and the Special Powers Act, legal instruments which have been used to detain political opponents on a large scale. Processions are still banned and there are recent reports of people taking part in them being arrested. Although the Government lifted the ban on the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal (JSD-National Socialist Party) on 24 April 1978, the ban on the Communist Party and the Democratic League remains in force. Some of their leaders, including Mohammad Farhad, General Secretary of the Communist Party (who has been adopted by an Amnesty International group as a prisoner of conscience) are still held without trial, like the majority of other political prisoners-between 10,000 and 15,000 of them, according to the estimate made in the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Bangladesh, containing the observationsof an Amnesty International delegation which visited the country from 4 to 12 April 1977.
The findings and recommendations made in the mission report were sent to the President, Major General Ziaur Rahman, on 23 June 1977; they were described in the Amnesty International Report 1977. The mission report reflects the deep concern of the organization about the absence of legal and constitutional safeguards in the procedures followed in martial law courts, which frequently try political prisoners under summary procedures. The report also recommends an early return to a situation where political prisoners are protected by all customary legal and constitutional safeguards and effective steps towards the abolition of martial law; it urges the Government to take immediate steps for the early release of political prisoners held in detention without trial for more than six months, and the improvement of the inhuman conditions in which political prisoners are being held.
The Ministry of Home Affairs replied on 5 October 1977 to the observations made in the report, in which its letter appears as an Appendix. While contesting Amnesty International's estimate of the number of political prisoners as being too high, the Government acknowledged that "persons having different political persuasions are detained under EPR/75 with a view to preventing them from indulging in prejudicial activities". The reply failed to give the number of political prisoners actually detained, nor did it acknowledge that in Bangladesh the majority of political prisoners is held on charges punishable under the Penal Code or the Special Powers Act or Arms Act without, however, being brought to trial. The letter did not contest the other facts presented in the report.
150
Explaining the arrests of a political nature which had taken place after the Amnesty International mission visited Bangladesh, and to which Amnesty International had referred, the Government stated: "Persons having different political persuasions are detained only when their detention is considered necessary with a view to preventing them from doing any prejudicial act. . . and not in consideration of their party affiliation as alleged. For any efficient Government of any country, it is its responsibility to take effective preventive measures when security of the state is threatened or endangered."
On 25 March 1978, there was a more detailed comment from the Bangladesh Government, stating that "at no time the number of political prisoners during the present régime did exceed 2,000." According to this letter, the then current figure was 862, including detainees charged with offences punishable under the Penal Code, or Arms Act, in addition to charges of involvement in prejudicial activities. (As stated at the beginning of the report, Amnesty International believes that many thousands of political prisoners are still being held.)
After the mission report had been presented to the Government of Bangladesh, there were disturbing developments in the country. Two abortive military uprisings took place-in Bogra on 30 September 1977 and in Dacca on 2 October 1977-during which it is estimated that at least 230 people died. The Government took stern measures to deal with those allegedly involved in the uprisings and, on 19 October 1977, announced that 37 army and air force personnel had been executed for their alleged part in the second unsuccessful coup-, on 26 October it was announced that 55 others had been sentenced to death in connection with the earlier coup in Bogra. All were sentenced after trials by martial law tribunals, held in camera. There was no possibility of appeal. It was reported that executions took place in Dacca Central Jail by hanging and in the Dacca Cantonment by firing squad; some executions were said to be carried out also in Comilla Jail.
The Secretary General of Amnesty International cabled the President on 19 October and 28 October 1977, calling for an immediate stop to the executions, and expressing profound concern about them, particularly in view of the absence of legal safeguards from the tribunal's procedures. These appeals to the Government were released to the press, emphasizing that, in Amnesty International's experience, trials before military tribunals in Bangladesh fell far short of internationally accepted standards. Many Amnesty International members sent cables to the Bangladesh Government, calling for an immediate halt to the executions. However, there were continuing reports that executions following summary military trials continued, and the International Executive Committee of Amnesty International asked the Secretary General to travel to Dacca to discuss these developments, as well as the recommendations made in the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Bangladesh.
The Secretary General's visit lasted from 29 to 31 December 1977. He met the President, the Presidential Advisers for Foreign Affairs and Home Affairs, and other Government officials, and was assured by the President that executions had stopped but he was not given any figure for the total number that had already been carried out. He was also told by the Government that martial law would be lifted before the general elections, scheduled for 1978.
Amnesty International wrote to the Bangladesh Government on 8 February 1978, informing the Government of its intention to release the mission report by
151
the end of the month, together with any comments on it which might possibly be made by the country's Ministry of Home Affairs, as agreed during the Secretary General's visit to Dacca. And, on 27 February 1978, Amnesty International duly released its Report of a Mission to Bangladesh.
In the foreword, Amnesty International states that it believes the actual number of executions to be at least 130 and perhaps several hundred. In December 1977 it received a list, whose authenticity it has no reason to doubt, of names of 129 military personnel executed for their alleged involvement in the two attempted coups (in Bogra and Dacca). According to this same report, the 129 were among several hundred prisoners executed after the coup attempts. In some cases, the executions allegedly took place without any form of trial. In a cable of 19 January 1978, the Secretary General of Amnesty International expressed profound concern at reports which stated that executions were still going on in December 1977, and requested an immediate assurance that executions had been stopped. The Bangladesh Government replied on 27 February, saying: "Profoundly regret that Amnesty International failed to distinguish between an ordinary crime and its trial by legally constituted courts and happenings of 2 October and trial of offenders by Special Tribunals. Amnesty International seems to be confusing ordinary convicts and under trial prisoners as political detenus or so-called 'prisoners of conscience'. The number of executions relating to 2 October is baseless. The allegation of continuing executions is false."
The mission report listed six amnesties which have been announced by the Government since the mission visited Bangladesh, involving the release of 3,662 political prisoners, and which Amnesty International has publicly welcomed. However, reports in the Bangladesh press give instances in which political prisoners whose release is announced in the press actually remain in prison because of administrative inefficiency or because it is claimed that there are other charges against them. The releases occurring now confirm the allegation in the mission report that political prisoners are kept for years without being brought to trial; Prem Ranjan Dev, for example, was reportedly released on bail on 14 April 1978 from Dacca Central Jail after having been held in detention since 11 October 1973, when he was arrested during a political procession. Other political prisoners are occasionally released by orders of the Supreme Court after presentation of habeas corpus petitions. Amnesty International groups have taken up the cases of over 40 workers of the JSD, members of the Awami League and various left-wing political organizations, for investigation, urging the Government that they be released or tried without delay, in view of the fact that most of them have been held for several years without trial. The cases which Amnesty International has taken up include those of 29 political prisoners from a list of 383 whose names the organization obtained from the Shaikh Mujibur Rahman administration, all of whom had been imprisoned for more than three years without trial.
Over the year new political charges continued to be made against political prisoners. In its mission report Amnesty International seriously questioned the validity of new charges against leaders of the JSD, reported in the Bangladesh press of August 1977. The report stated that these prisoners, some of whom were already serving long prison sentences, were again to be tried before a special martial law court for making inflammatory speeches on 17 March 1974 during a public demonstration under a previous régime, about which the Government
152
then in power took no action. The Secretary General of Amnesty International telephoned the Vice-President in Dacca on 7 September 1977 to express concern at reports that political prisoners were still tried in camera before military courts in Dacca, and urged the Government that the trial of any such prisoners should be held before ordinary courts in accordance with full legal safeguards.
In the foreword to the mission report, it was stated that Amnesty International's anxiety for the safety of political prisoners in jails had greatly increased since the mission took place: on 1 July 1977, a cable was sent to President Ziaur Rahman expressing concern about an incident which took place in Dacca Central Jail on 22 June 1977, in which between 25 and 30 political prisoners were reportedly seriously injured, and urging the Government to publish the findings of the commission of inquiry which had been set up. The President assured the Secretary General that the one-man commission (a Supreme Court judge) investigating this incident was expected to present a report after January 1978, but said that the Government would only publish its basic findings. In spite of these assurances, the findings of the report have not, to Amnesty International's knowledge, been publicly released to date, and the Ministry of Home Affairs, in its letter of 25 March 1978 referred to above, merely said that "suitable measures to strengthen security in jails have also been taken by the Government after the incident. The incident in Dacca Central Jail was inquired into by the second highest Judge of the Supreme Court. His recommendations are in the process of implementation." Amnesty International is unconvinced that any effective steps have been taken by the Bangladesh Government to safeguard the safety of political prisoners and to improve the conditions in which they are held.
During September 1977, Amnesty International members made inquiries about the health of Serajul Alam Khan, a leader of the JSD, whose health was reported to be deteriorating, and urged the Government to allow medical tests to be carried out and to permit family members to visit him regularly in accordance with prison regulations.
Recently, some new arrests have been reported to Amnesty International: these are of people charged with "bringing out [sic] processions illegally". On 30 May 1978, Amnesty International wrote to the Presidential Adviser in charge of Information and Broadcasting to inquire about the arrest of 23 journalists, some of whom were reportedly injured by the police while taking part in a peaceful procession demanding restoration of the freedom of the press. Amnesty International asked for an assurance from the Government that no new arrests of this nature would take place in the future.
