Romania (the Socialist Republic of)
During the period 1977 — 78, Romanian political leaders on several occasions reiterated Romania's adherence to international human rights covenants. On
227
9 May 1978, President Ceausescu made the following joint declaration with President Carter of the United States to the United Nations Security Council: "Observance of and promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is the basic principle for international peace and security." However, during the past year, there were no legislative or political changes in Romania affecting matters of concern to Amnesty International. As in previous years, the organization learned of a number of new cases of people being imprisoned simply for exercising their human rights. Most of these people did not get lengthy prison sentences, but there are widespread and consistent reports of many dissenters being systematically beaten by police officers while in detention.
Although the Romanian Constitution guarantees "freedom of expression", Article 166 of the Penal Code prescribes from five to fifteen years' imprisonment for "public propaganda against the socialist system, spread by whatever means". Representative of Amnesty International-adopted prisoners of conscience gaoled for "anti-state propaganda" is Doctor Nicolae Ighisan. He was tried in the summer of 1972 by the military tribunal in Bucharest on charges of "anti-state propaganda" and preparing to leave Romania without official authorization. The tribunal found him guilty of making derogatory statements about leading Romanian officials and the current political situation in the country. Dr Ighisan was charged also with illegal possession of foreign currency. This charge was made after his flat had been searched by members of the Securitate (state security police) who found three gold coins and 25 US dollars there. He was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment.
The organization is investigating the case of Georghe Popa, a mechanical engineer from Craiova who was sentenced in 1975 to 9 years' imprisonment on charges of "anti-state propaganda". Before his arrest, Georghe Popa had publicly accused the heads of the firm where he worked of mismanaging large sums of money by investing in schemes which were unlikely to be viable. The existence of a law such as the one against "anti-state propaganda" entails serious restrictions on the right of freedom of expression, and, as the past year has shown, the Romanian authorities may manage to imprison citizens who criticize the social and political system by applying laws which ostensibly have nothing to do with freedom of expression. In the summer of 1977, seven people who had sent an open letter to representatives of foreign governments, criticizing human rights violations in Romania, were tried for "systematic refusal to work" under Decree 25/1965. Their trial took place only hours after they had been dismissed from their jobs. Nonetheless, all were found guilty and sentenced to one year's forced labour on the Black Sea canal at Medgidia. On 25 August 1977, Amnesty International appealed to President Ceausescu to release the seven. Some weeks later they were all set free and given passports enabling them to leave the country.
One case which attracted international attention was that of Karoly Kiraly, banished without even the formality of criminal proceedings being taken against him for making a critical statement about the treatment of members of the Hungarian minority in Romania. He was the Vice President of the Hungarian Workers' Council in Romania and a former member of the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist party, and belongs to the country's two-and-a-half-million-strong Hungarian minority. In the summer of 1977, he drafted a letter, which was signed by prominent members of the Hungarian community, including
228
some high-ranking Party members, accusing the Romanian Government of "forcible assimilation" and persecution of ethnic minorities. He was questioned by the police, threatened with criminal prosecution, dismissed from his post and banished to the town of Caransebes.
A number of miners who made a protest were also arbitrarily deported in 1977. They had taken part in a strike involving over 35,000 miners in the Jui Valley in early August 1977. The leaders of the strike presented the authorities with a petition for wage increases, reduction of working hours and improvements in working conditions in the mines. More than 1,000 miners and their families were, according to report, later forcibly removed from their homes and moved to unknown places throughout the country. A number of the strikers are said to have been severely beaten by members of the police and armed forces.
About 50 of the persons who were brought to trial in the past year for exercising their right to freedom of conscience were not given a fair hearing. Most of the trials were held in camera. Invariably defence lawyers were appointed by the authorities and could meet their clients only in court. In most cases, the hearing did not last more than 30 minutes. All defendants were found guilty and sentenced to up to one year of forced labour.
A number of people who signed a major human rights appeal in March 1977 were detained and systematically beaten and maltreated by members of the Securitate. The appeal was launched by Paul Goma (a dissident writer who emigrated later in 1977), and was signed by at least 200 people (see Amnesty International Report 1977). Most of the signatories were later held by the police, usually for as long as several days. In early 1978, Amnesty International issued descriptions of the treatment of dissidents at the Calea Rahovei and Beldiman Street interrogation centers in Bucharest. Georghe Mihail, one of the people who signed the appeal, who has since emigrated, told Amnesty International that he was summoned for questioning to the state security headquarters in Beldiman Street several times during 1977 and beaten until he became unconscious. On one occasion, he said that he was tied to a chair and had half a litre of alcohol poured down his throat.
During 1977-78, Amnesty International has heard of a number of people being put in psychiatric hospitals for political rather than medical reasons. The legislation applied in these cases was either Article 114 of the Penal Code or Decree 12/1965. Article 114 allows the courts to order the compulsory confinement in a psychiatric hospital of "mentally ill perpetrators of crimes who are a danger to society". These laws make it possible to intern non-violent political offenders. Decree 12/1965 is called "On Medical Treatment of Dangerous Mentally 111 Persons" and states that those who commit offences which disrupt "normal working conditions" are liable to psychiatric treatment. Article 2 of this Decree defines the term "dangerous mentally ill persons" as those who "endanger their own or other people's lives or physical well-being or who may be about to commit grave acts which, as laid down by penal law, disturb the normal working conditions". Article 4 mentions the possibility of provisional confinement by order of the public prosecutor.
Amnesty International has adopted Erhard Mayerbuchler, a young dentist and member of the 400,000-strong German ethnic minority in Romania. Since the early 1970s, Erhard Mayerbuchler has been applying for official permission to
229
emigrate to the Federal Republic of Germany, where he has relatives. He was imprisoned twice during that time for trying to cross the frontier without official permission — an offence punishable by up to three years' imprisonment. In October 1976, he was arrested for the third time while trying to cross the frontier illegally. While in pre-trial detention, he was allegedly severely beaten by members of the Securitate — his jaw was fractured and he lost some teeth. His trial took place in the winter of 1976 in Turnu-Severin. Instead of sentencing him to imprisonment, the court applied Article 114 of the Penal Code and ordered him to be confined indefinitely in the Dr Petru Groza psychiatric hospital, in the district of Bihor.
Janos Torok, a member of the country's Hungarian minority, was also kept in a psychiatric hospital and has been adopted by Amnesty International. He was arrested in March 1975 on the eve of elections to the Grand National Assembly. In a speech to his fellow workers at a meeting in the factory where he worked in Cluj-Napoca/Koloszvar, he called on them not to vote for "pre-selected candidates". He suggested that such candidates would not defend the workers' interests nor those of national minorities. He was arrested on the spot, severely beaten in public by factory security officers, and taken to the Dr Petru Groza hospital. On 3 March 1978, Janos Torok was released and is now under house arrest, with orders to report regularly for psychiatric check-ups.
In the cases which Amnesty International knows about, the most frequent diagnoses have been "paranoiac schizophrenia", "senile dementia", "psychopathic disorders" and "oligophrenia". Reports received by Amnesty International during 1977 and the first half of 1978 show that prisoners of conscience (likewise non-political inmates) in psychiatric hospitals in Romania have, as a matter of routine, been treated with large doses of powerful medicines which are likely to cause considerable psycho-somatic disorder. The drugs used include plegomazin, mezoptil, phenobarbital and haloperidol — all depressants. Accounts of their experiences given by victims of these abuses indicate that breaking hospital rules or making complaints is liable to be punished by an increase in the amount of drugs administered, beating, and injections of a mixture of milk and iodine -which, according to former inmates of the Sighetu Marmatiei, Poiana Mare and Dr Petru Groza hospitals, cause intense pain, low blood pressure and high fever.
Amnesty International has learned that, since the late 1960s, prisoners of conscience have been confined and treated in a number of psychiatric hospitals in Romania, including Sighetu Marmatiei, Poiana Mare, Raducaneni, Oradea, Jebel, Poruschia, Jilava and Dr Petru Groza, and at least two hospitals in Bucharest. During the past year, Amnesty International has issued detailed information about political abuses of psychiatry in Romania. The organization believes that the number of political inmates of Romanian psychiatric hospitals runs into hundreds.
In March 1978, a man was executed after being sentenced to death by the Supreme Court in Bucharest. Reports have reached Amnesty International during the period under review that a number of people were sentenced to death in Romania after being convicted of stealing large amounts of state property, of economic espionage or sabotage.
Amnesty International groups are at present working on behalf of 20 Romanian prisoners.
230
