Portugal (the Portuguese Republic)
The process of legal and constitutional reform begun in April 1974 continued, with the Government seeking the permission of the National Assembly to revise the codes of civil law and procedure, penal law and procedure and commercial law. The new civil code came into effect on 1 April 1978. In October 1977, Portugal became the 87th country to ratify the international convention giving workers the right to join trade unions, and the new law permitting strikes officially recognized by trade unions was passed in July 1977.
Throughout the period under review there have been rumours that an amnesty was being considered for people involved in or suspected of being involved in the 11 March and 25 November 1975 attempted coups d'etat. In a press interview in March 1978, the Prime Minister, Dr Soares, is reported to have said that in the interests of "wiping the slate clean" he was in favour of amnesties not only for those involved in these attempts but also for former members of the Policía Internacional e de Defesa do Estado/Direccao Geral de Securanqa (PIDE/DGS), the International Police for Defence of the State/Directorate General of Security, (the former secret police force), still in detention. The Constitutional Commission has already ruled as unconstitutional the Decree Law "purging" General Spinola
226
and 18 other officers involved in the attempted coup on 11 March. Since then, some 700 other officers, "purged" after the April 1974 revolution under Decree Law 309/74, have appealed to the Portuguese League of Human Rights against this law and have sent a statement to the President.
A working party set up by the Presidency of the Republic has made a proposal to create a unified intelligence service which would have competence in both civil and military affairs. It would be called Servigos de Informacao da Republica (SIR) - Information Department of the Republic - and would assume some of the functions formerly carried out by the PIDE/DGS which was disbanded after the overthrow of the Caetano dictatorship. This project is viewed with alarm by many parties in Portugal, including the two government ones, in view of the problems of accountability that may be presented by a unified intelligence service.
Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners in Portugal. However, the organization is concerned at the retention of Article 411 of the penal code. This permits sentences of up to eight years' imprisonment for those found guilty of "insulting" civil or military bodies, the President of the Republic or members of the Council of the Revolution and National Assembly. In December 1977, Silva Tavares, director of the newspaper Comercio do Porto, was charged under this Article for publishing an article speculating that General Eanes might be adopting policies which could lead to a less democratic system of government. He was found not guilty. However, in June 1978, Manuel Murias of A Rua (The Street) was sentenced to two years' imprisonment or a fine for insulting Dr Soares in an article. There are further cases pending at the time of writing.
Amnesty International continued to follow the case of Rui Gomes, arrested in September 1975 and charged with theft and illegal use of arms. Rui Gomes claimed political status and Amnesty International was concerned by the length of time he was in detention awaiting trial. His trial was finally held in July 1977. He was found guilty as charged and sentenced to a period of imprisonment equivalent to his pre-trial detention. He was released on 29 July 1977. Amnesty International also inquired into other cases of prolonged detention without trial, including those of people detained in connection with the assassination of General Delgado in 1965. Seven former members of the PIDE/DGS, including three then in detention, were charged with this murder in October 1977. Despite repeated statements that the trial is imminent, it has not taken place and by now these three suspects have been in detention for as long as four years.
During the past year, two more members of the PIDE/DGS were tried on charges of torture and maltreatment of prisoners. Senhora Oliveira was sentenced to four years and four months' imprisonment less the period of pre-trial detention. The outcome of ex-Inspector Adelino da Silva Tinoco's trial is not yet known to Amnesty International.
Portugal has abolished the death penalty and, at the time of writing, Amnesty International has received no solid reports of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
