Ghana (the Republic of)
During the twelve months covered by this report (July 1977-June 1978), Ghana continued to be ruled by the military Government which came to power in 1972, when the civilian régime was overthrown by a coup. However, the military authorities, and particularly the head of state, General Ignatius K. Acheampong, faced increasing unrest in student and professional circles, aggravated by the deepening economic crisis. Following student riots in May 1977, demands by professional groups, such as lawyers, doctors and accountants, for a return to civilian rule increased during the next two months. They culminated in a strike by the professional bodies, which secured a promise from the military Government that it would stand down in July 1979. In the interim, a referendum on the form of government to succeed the military régime would be held in March 1978.
The choice to be put to the Ghanaian voters at that time was between "Union Government" (which prohibited the formation of political parties, and provided
51
for the continuance of some form of participation in government by the military) and a return to multi-party democracy. There were clashes during the period preceding the referendum between supporters and opponents of Union Government. A number of people died, and there were accusations by Union Government opponents that the military were conducting a campaign of thuggery and intimidation in order to ensure victory for the Union Government concept at the referendum. The voting was eventually held in an atmosphere of confusion on 30 March 1978. The electoral Commissioner, Justice Isaac Abban, disappeared temporarily. The result of the referendum showed a narrow majority in favour of Union Government, but this was immediately challenged by the opponents of the plan, who alleged that the whole referendum had been invalidated by grossly biased actions on the part of the Government — a view shared by many objective observers. Following the referendum, the Government forcibly dissolved the organizations opposing Union Government and arrested their leaders.
During the past year, Amnesty International continued to work for three adopted prisoners of conscience first assigned to groups in 1975. Of prime importance, however, was the expansion of the organization's investigation case program to cover a considerable number of prisoners, some held without trial and some sentenced by military tribunals during 1976.
Amnesty International groups continued to work on behalf of J.H. Mensah, Minister of Finance in Ghana's last civilian government, and two of his colleagues, who received prison sentences of up to eight years' hard labour on sedition charges in November 1975. The three were charged in connection with the production and circulation in September 1975 of a pamphlet critical of the military Government's economic policies. All three were released on appeal in June 1978.
The year saw a significant expansion in Amnesty International's investigation case program on Ghana: at the end of June 1978, 80 cases were being handled by Amnesty International groups. The bulk of these cases were from two major categories of prisoners.
The first category consists of individuals detained without trial under the provisions of the Preventive Custody Decree (1972), which was introduced by the military Government shortly after it came to power. The Decree provides for the indefinite detention "of any person in respect of whom the government is satisfied that it is in the interest of national security or in the interest of the safety of the person so to do." The use of this decree by the Ghanaian authorities to detain large numbers of people without charge or trial for long periods of time was challenged in November 1977, when the Human Rights Committee of the Ghana Bar Association applied for habeas corpus on behalf of 451 such detainees held at Nsawam Medium Security Prison — more than 40 of whom had been held without charge or trial since 1972. On 13 December 1977 the Accra High Court ordered the release of 175 detainees whose detentions were not covered by an executive instrument, but only 19 were released, and these were subsequently re-arrested and detained. By February 1978 unconfirmed reports stated that approximately half the 175 had been released.
Meanwhile, after this action by the courts, in December 1977 the ruling Supreme Military Council issued a decree which justified, post facto, the detention of 224 people, many of whom appeared on the original list of 451 detainees on whose behalf the habeas corpus application was made. In January 1978,
52
General Acheampong denounced the Ghana Bar Association's campaign for the freeing of the detainees, alleging that the prisoners involved were criminals. However, considering that none of them had been charged with any crime, and in view of the specifically political purpose of the Preventive Custody Decree, and the use to which it had previously been put, Amnesty International began a group-work program in late 1977 which led to the assignment of 60 cases from this category (see paragraph 5) to Amnesty International groups as investigation cases by the end of January 1978. The organization subsequently learned of the release of several of these detainees in March 1978, but in the same month the Accra High Court dismissed the application for habeas corpus made on behalf of the original list of 45 1 detainees, on the grounds that the various executive instruments covering their detention had not been challenged in any critical way. Amnesty International group work continues on the cases of the remaining detainees who have not yet been released or charged.
The second major category of Amnesty International investigation cases stemmed from the wave of arrests which immediately followed the referendum of 30 March 1978.
On 13 April, in a news release, Amnesty International expressed concern at reports of up to 50 arrests since the referendum. Among those said to have been detained in early April 1978 were members and leaders of three movements opposed to Union Government, all of which were banned on 4 April: the People's Movement for Freedom and Justice, the Front for the Prevention of Dictatorship, and the Third Force. Those arrested included William Ofori Atta, Minister of Education in Ghana's last civilian Government; Victor Owusu, Minister of Foreign Affairs in the same Government; Komla Gbedemah, Minister of Finance in the Government of Dr Kwame Nkrumah; and Dr John Bilson, leader of the Third Force. The following day, the Ghanaian authorities acknowledged the arrest of 17 leading politicians involved in the anti-Union Government campaign; later it was stated by official sources that 35 people who had "plotted to throw Ghana into chaos" had been arrested. On 5 July General Ignatius K. Acheampong resigned as head of state, and power was assumed by Lieutenant-General Frederick W.K. Akuffo, Chief of Defence Staff, who the following day ordered the release of the group of politicians imprisoned in April.
A number of other cases were taken up by Amnesty International groups for investigation. Some were people tried and convicted of subversion and related crimes by military tribunals during 1976 (sze Amnesty International Report 1977); a second group, including Colonel George Minyila, former Commissioner for Industries, were arrested on suspicion of plotting a coup in May 1977 but have yet to be brought to trial.
It was alleged that some of the prisoners tried for subversion in 1976 had been tortured, and there were unconfirmed reports of torture concerning the group arrested in May 1977, too. Amnesty International groups were asked to stress this in their approaches to the authorities. In mid 1977 Amnesty International asked the Ghanaian High Commission in London for details of the cases of two political prisoners who are reported to have died in custody: David Afful Bimpong, said to have died in prison at Yondi in October or November 1976, and Ebenezer Allotey, who reportedly died in March that year. The High Commission was not able to give any more information on these cases.
53
In January 1978, Amnesty International asked General Acheampong to consider an amnesty for political prisoners and a commutation of death sentences to mark the anniversary of the accession to power of the military Government. Subsequently, it appealed for "a general amnesty which would embrace not only the detainees held without trial but also individuals convicted under the Subversion Decree". Following the news of further arrests in April 1978, the organization once more called for the release of untried detainees and prisoners of conscience in Ghana. None of these appeals has met with a direct response from the Ghanaian authorities.
