Tunisia (the Republic of)
During the period 1977-78 Tunisia continued to be ruled by the Socialist Destour Party of President Habib Bourguiba. However, a number of significant changes have taken place within the Cabinet. In January 1977, a five-year social pact had been signed by representatives of the Government, the Union Generate des Travailleurs Tunisiens (UGTT) and other unions. According to one of the provisions of the pact, it was agreed to "maintain social peace, increase production and improve purchasing power and living conditions for wage earners". During 1977, however, as the economic situation worsened and inflation rose, strikes and demonstrations began again. On 23 December 1977, Tahar Belkhodja, Minister of
273
the Interior since 1973, was dismissed from his post, together with Abdul Mejid Bouslana, the Director of Internal Security. Within three days of their dismissal, five other Ministers in the Tunisian Government had resigned in sympathy. The new Cabinet which took office in December 1977 was appointed to deal more strictly with instances of civil unrest. On 26 January 1978 the first general strike since Independence was declared by the Union Générale des Travailleurs Tunisiens. In clashes with police and military forces over 100 people were killed and many more wounded; several hundred were arrested and a State of Emergency was declared.
On 14 June 1978, the Mouvement des Démocrates Socialistes declared that they were seeking permission from the Tunisian authorities to establish a political party to be led by Ahmed Mestiri. If permission were granted, the Mouvement would be the first political party to be formed in Tunisia since the country achieved its independence in 1956, the sole existing party being still the Socialist Destour Party.
Amnesty International adoption groups continued during 1977-78 to work on behalf of 35 imprisoned left-wing students and intellectuals. (The group includes five leading socialist dissidents who were originally arrested in 1968, granted a conditional amnesty in 1970 and then re-arrested and retried in 1972.) Most of the 35 prisoners were sentenced in 1974 and 1975 after being convicted of plotting against the internal security of the state, of membership of illegal organizations and of spreading false information. They are now serving sentences, of between 4 and 16 years' imprisonment and are detained at the Prison du Nador, Bizerte. During the past year, Amnesty International has continued to be concerned over the poor health of many of them: a special appeal was launched for the release of Gilbert Naccache on account of serious illness: he had to receive hospital treatment in December 1977.
During 1978 Amnesty International has also taken up the cases of 33 trade unionists arrested in connection with the events of 26 January 1978 and is making efforts to obtain further information about other detainees with a view to adoption. Those detained include Habib Achour, Secretary General of the UGTT and ten members of its executive bureau, all of whom have been detained in isolation at the Civil Prison in Tunis since their arrest. Other trade union officials and members are held in Tunis Civil Prison as well as in prisons in Sfax, SoUsse and other towns. The exact number detained is not known. In February 1978, Amnesty International expressed concern at the large number of arrests and asked the Tunisian authorities to ensure that detainees received their full rights.
Over 30 members of the Mouvement d'Unité Populaire (MUP) were brought to trial before the State Security Court in Tunis between June and August 1977. The defendants, who included former government officials and leading trade unionists, had been arrested in March 1977 and were charged with, among other things, distributing leaflets containing false information, membership of a clandestine organization and offences against the dignity of the President. Professor Winfried Hassemer of the University of Frankfurt, who observed the opening of the trial on Amnesty International's behalf, reported that limitations were placed on the defence lawyers and on the defendants themselves in making statements and in pleading their cases. The court acquitted nine of the defendants but passed sentences ranging from six months' to eight years' imprisonment on the rest,
274
whose cases were taken up for adoption by Amnesty International. Ahmed Ben Salah, who founded the MUP in 1973 and now lives in exile, was sentenced in absentia to eight years' imprisonment and five other exiled MUP members received sentences of between five and eight years' imprisonment.
In July 1978, Amnesty International delegated a member of the Research Department in its International Secretariat to attend trials of trade unionists in Sfax and Sousse. Two trials took place at the Sfax Criminal Court, one of which involved 27 people, arrested as a result of a strike in Gafsa in November 1977. Of the 27 accused, 6 were acquitted, 20 were given sentences ranging from four months' to two years and six months' imprisonment and one received a suspended sentence of eight months' imprisonment.
The second trial in Sfax was concerned with 12 trade unionists arrested in the town as a result of the one-day general strike in January 1978. (One of the reasons for the strike in Sfax was that Abderrazak Ghorbal, the Secretary General of the Sfax regional union office, was arrested and taken into preventive detention during January.) The 12 were charged under Articles 131 and 132 of the Penal Code. All the defendants denied the accusations against them, some of them stating that earlier "confessions" made while they were in police custody had been extracted under duress.
Five of the group were sentenced to two years' imprisonment, four were acquitted and three received suspended sentences of two years' imprisonment. Amnesty International is at present taking up the cases of the five who were convicted.
The trial at Sousse Criminal Court involved 101 trade unionists, including eight women, also arrested as a result of the events of 26 January 1978. Charges against the 101 include incitement to armed attack and membership of a group whose aim is incitement to armed attack. Charges against 39 of the defendants carry the death penalty. Many of the defendants claimed that they had made confessions under torture or duress—one person's fingernails had been torn away—and asked that a medical examination be made of their condition. At the time of writing, the trial is still continuing.
No date has yet been decided on for the trial of those detained in Tunis Civil Prison. However, it is known that three of the charges against Habib Achour and the ten members of the executive bureau carry the death penalty. Amnesty International intends to send an observer to attend their trial.
Amnesty International remains concerned at the numerous reports of torture and maltreatment of trade unionists arrested in January and February 1978. Many were held incommunicado in police custody for periods of two months and longer before appearing before a juge d'instruction (examining magistrate) and it is during this period that torture is alleged to have occurred. Methods of torture include burns inflicted by cigarettes and the so-called "swing": the prisoner hangs upside down over a bar fixed rigidly behind the knees, with wrists and ankles bound to one another; sensitive parts of the body are beaten with wooden sticks and iron bars. One trade unionist, Houcine El Kouki, who was detained in Sousse, died on 15 February 1978, apparently as a result of torture and bad prison conditions. In August 1978, Amnesty International wrote to the Tunisian Government, expressing deep concern at the above reports and requesting that an independent commission of inquiry be set up to investigate all allegations of torture.
275
In October 1977, the Tunisian Human Rights League, founded in May 1977, was authorized by the Minister of the Interior to visit the Civil Prison of Tunis and the Prison du Nador, Bizerte—both prisons in which Amnesty International adopted prisoners are held. The League reported that political prisoners had been accorded some privileges not given to common-law prisoners, and that there had been some improvements in prison conditions during the past two years. However, the League stated in its report that prison buildings were overcrowded, that the food was of poor quality and that family visits lasted no more than 15 minutes and took place in the presence of prison guards.
In April 1978, Ahmed Mestiri, a former Government Minister, was charged with defamation of the régime and with spreading false information; he was alleged to have committed the offences during a press conference. In May 1978, Amnesty International learned that Hassib Ben Ammar, a former Minister, President of the Tunisian Human Rights League and Director of Er-Rai (Opinion), a newspaper representing the Mouvement des Démocrates Socialistes, had been accused of defamation of the Army. According to reports, this consisted in his having printed a letter in Er-Rai which criticized military intervention in a factory strike in October 1977. His case was referred to a military tribunal on 11 May and on 25 May 1978 he was convicted and fined 300 dinars.
On 1 June 1978, Tunisia's Victory Day, Amnesty International adoption groups took part in a campaign in which petitions were sent to President Bourguiba expressing concern at the prolonged detention incommunicado and alleged maltreatment of many of those arrested on 26 January (see p.273). The petitions asked that all detainees be accorded a fair trial and urged that all prisoners of conscience in Tunisia, some of whom have been held since 1968, be granted an amnesty.
Amnesty International learned that President Habib Bourguiba granted an amnesty to 422 prisoners to commemorate Victory Day, but those who benefited were all prisonniers de droit commun.
