Pakistan (the Islamic Republic of)
Since coming to power on 5 July 1977, the military Government of Pakistan, headed by the Chief Martial Law Administrator, General Mohammad Zia-ul Haq, has applied increasingly stern martial law provisions to curb political opposition. At the time of writing, elections have again been postponed, all political activity has been banned under martial law and Amnesty International estimates that several thousand political prisoners are held in Pakistan. (At least 160 of those held have been flogged for engaging in peaceful political activities.) When it first took power, the military Government released many political prisoners arrested during the previous administration and took significant steps to put into effect recommendations which Amnesty International had earlier made to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, then Prime Minister of Pakistan (see p. 180). In 1978, an Amnesty International delegation went to Pakistan to discuss developments regarding human rights, and the visit led to the issuing of a mission report in May 1978.
On 13 July 1977, the Secretary General of Amnesty International wrote to General Zia-ul Haq, bringing to his attention the organization's mandate and the conclusions drawn by Amnesty International in its Report on the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, including the findings of a mission to Pakistan, 23 April-12 May 1976, which had been presented to the former Prime Minister, Mr Bhutto. This report, issued on 16 May 1977, had made a number of specific recommendations (see Amnesty International Report 1977). The letter of 13 July welcomed the release
179
of 33 political leaders from prolonged detention in a camp in Azad Kashmir (mentioned in the 1977 mission report), whose arrest the previous Government had denied. It also welcomed the new Government's announcement of the release of political leaders taken into "protective custody" immediately after the military takeover, and urged it to consider putting into effect soon all the recommendations made in the 1977 mission report. The letter expressed the hope that the Government would consider appeals from Amnesty International members taking part in a campaign for the implementation of these recommendations as expressions of the organization's long-standing concern for human rights in Pakistan. It also asked for details of the martial law regulations restricting political activities and expressed concern at the introduction, with reference to Islamic Shariat (religious law), of harsh punishments under martial law. These include the amputation of a hand for theft, and flogging for a range of martial law offences, including political ones.
Shortly after coming to power, the Pakistan Government took a number of important steps in line with Amnesty International's recommendations: on
14	July 1977, it abolished special tribunals which operated under the Defence of Pakistan Rules, and which Amnesty International has severely criticized in the Report on Pakistan already mentioned. Nearly all the prominent prisoners of conscience, many of them adopted by Amnesty International, were released. On
15	September 1977, the President of Pakistan revoked the State of Emergency which had been in force since 23 November 1971, and the Defence of Pakistan Rules were repealed. This legislation had, in the past, been widely used to detain without trial political opponents of the government then in office. However, before repealing the Rules, the martial law authorities had introduced similar provisions for preventive detention on very broadly defined grounds under Martial Law Order Number 12. The new Government also restored to the higher judiciary full powers to issue writs, including the writ of habeas corpus (with the proviso, however, that martial law provisions were excluded from supervision by the courts). The Government also annulled the Fourth and Fifth Constitutional Amendments, which Amnesty International had criticized because they introduced serious restraints upon the independence of Pakistan's judiciary.
In a letter dated 6 September 1977 to the Chief Martial Law Administrator, the Secretary General of Amnesty International expressed the organization's appreciation of the important steps which the Government had taken and urged it to abolish also the Special Court in Hyderabad, where the leaders of the outlawed National Awami Party had been on trial since April 1976, under procedures which had been severely criticized in Amnesty International's Report on the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, as falling far short of international standards.
On 1 January 1978, the Government announced the dissolution of the Hyderabad Special Court trying Wali Khan and 54 other leaders of the outlawed National Awami Party. All the prisoners except one - Gul Khan Naseer, against whom, the Government said, a murder charge was pending-were released shortly afterwards. At the same time, the Chief Martial Law Administrator announced that, since the military Government had assumed office, 11,109 political prisoners had been released. Most of these had been arrested under the previous administration for taking part in anti-government demonstrations alleging large-scale rigging of the elections in March 1977, and belonged to the Pakistan National Alliance (PNA),
180
a coalition of political parties opposing the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) (see Amnesty International Report 1977). According to the Government, 68 political prisoners were still in prison and there were criminal charges against them. In a letter of 6 January 1978 to the Pakistan Ambassador in London, Amnesty International welcomed the releases and asked for details of the 68 political prisoners still in jail.
However, during 1977, concern had already mounted over the increasing number of political prisoners who were being arrested under martial law provisions restricting fundamental freedoms. Amnesty International started an adoption program calling for the release of prisoners of conscience who were arrested for participating in political meetings or processions (prohibited under Martial Law Regulation Number 11), for participation in political activities (prohibited under Martial Law Regulation Numbers 24 and 33) and for criticizing the armed forces (punishable under Martial Law Regulation Number 13). Over the past year, Amnesty International groups have worked on behalf of 50 adopted prisoners of conscience and have investigated the cases of another 32 prisoners. Most political prisoners belong to the Pakistan People's Party, the former ruling party, once headed by Mr Bhutto, but members of other parties—such as the Tehrik Istiqlal-and students are known to have been arrested too, for taking part in processions, shouting slogans and waving the flags of political parties. Strikes and lockouts are prohibited under martial law, and Amnesty International took up for adoption as prisoners of conscience the cases of eight trade unionists arrested for joining in industrial action. Political arrests increased substantially after the arrest of Mr Bhutto.
He was first arrested on 3 September 1977, on charges of complicity in the murder of Nawab Ahmed Khan in 1974, a murder committed while Mr Bhutto was Prime Minister. On 13 September 1977, a Lahore High Court judge granted Mr Bhutto bail but he was re-arrested four days later by the martial law authorities and taken into preventive custody under Martial Law Order Number 12, together with ten other leading members of the Pakistan People's Party. At first the Government ordered that Mr Bhutto should be tried by a military court, but later it announced that the former Prime Minister would be tried in open court before judges of the Lahore High Court. The trial, before five High Court judges, began on 9 October 1977. Meanwhile, Mr Bhutto's wife had challenged her husband's detention in the Pakistan Supreme Court on the ground that detention under martial law was without legal authority. However, on 10 November 1977, the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal, upholding the imposition of martial law on 5 July (when the military Government came to power) as valid. However, it ruled that, in spite of the imposition of martial law, the superior courts in Pakistan continued to have the power of judicial review of any action taken by the martial law authorities.
Mr Bhutto's trial before the Lahore High Court resulted in his conviction on 18 March 1978, and he and four members of the Federal Security Force accused with him were sentenced to the death penalty. On the day the conviction was announced, Amnesty International cabled the Chief Martial Law Administrator, asking him to commute the death sentences passed on Mr Bhutto and those convicted with him to life imprisonment, on humanitarian grounds. The appeal from Amnesty International was released to the press on 20 March 1978 and it
181
emphasized the danger involved in carrying out executions, pointing out the risk of miscarriage of justice inherent in every trial, but most especially a trial such as that of Mr Bhutto, conducted in a tense political atmosphere, in circumstances in which all normal political activity had been banned under martial law. Hundreds of appeals for commutation of the five death sentences were sent by Amnesty International members in the following several days.
In December 1977, in order to obtain a first-hand account of recent developments in Pakistan which come within the mandate of Amnesty International, its International Executive Committee asked its Vice-Chairman to go to the country. The Government was informed of Amnesty International's proposed visit in a letter dated 6 December 1977 and on 16 January 1978, Amnesty International was told that its two delegates, Professor Miimtaz Soysal, the Vice-Chairman of the International Executive Committee, who is Professor of Constitutional Law at Ankara University, and a researcher on Asia in the Research Department in the International Secretariat, would be able to meet the Chief Martial Law Administrator and other officials in Islamabad on 21 January. (The same Amnesty international delegation had already been to Pakistan in April 1976; their findings were the basis for the Report on Pakistan issued in May 1977.)
In Islamabad, the two delegates were received by the Chief Martial Law Administrator and had detailed discussions with him, as well as with his Adviser on Law and Parliamentary Affairs, Religious and Minority Affairs, the Adviser on Foreign Affairs, and with the Secretary of the Ministry of Interior. They also met the Attorney General and, at their request, were readily given permission to attend trials before summary military courts in Lahore. The delegates also met lawyers concerned with civil liberties and the relatives of political prisoners. Although they received cooperation from the authorities throughout their visit, the delegates were, however, refused permission to visit Mr Bhutto in jail.
The Report of thè delegates' visit, lasting from 20 to 25 January 1978, was presented to the Chief Martial Law Administrator on 22 March 1978, with a request for the Government's comments and the assurance that Amnesty International was willing to release these with the report. The Government was informed, too, that the International Executive Committee of Amnesty International had decided, in principle, to release the text of the report on 17 April 1978. However, the release was twice postponed in order to enable the Government to send its comments. When none was received by 3 May, Amnesty International decided to release the report twelve days later.
Amnesty International's Short Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (20-25 January 1978) expresses concern at the introduction of stern martial law provisions, curtailing fundamental freedoms and allowing for preventive detention. It also voices its disquiet at the practice of trying civilians for political offences before summary military courts, and particularly at the courts' frequent imposition of the sentence of flogging for acts "which often appear to be no more than the exercise of the right of freedom of speech and expression, guaranteed in the Constitution". The report states that, at the time when it was being written (March 1978), at least 160 prisoners had been sentenced to flogging for engaging in political activities, and describes the punishment as "cruel, inhuman and degrading". The report estimates that there are at least several thousand political prisoners in Pakistan, the majority of them
182
members of the Pakistan People's Party arrested at about the time of the announcement of the Lahore High Court's verdict on Mr Bhutto. On the basis of the observations made by the delegates when they attended summary martial law courts, Amnesty International expressed, in the Short Report, great concern about the summary military court procedures, under which political prisoners are being tried without access to a lawyer and without the customary right of appeals. The Short Report makes a number of recommendations to the Pakistan Government, including the abolition of the practice of trying civilians before military courts for political offences, and recommends the immediate abolition of flogging of political prisoners, the repeal of martial law provisions allowing for preventive detention, and the abolition of special courts, particularly those trying political prisoners.
The 1978 Short Report was written before the outcome of Mr Bhutto's trial was known, but it contains observations about his trial, made on the basis of the official trial transcript, given to the Amnesty International delegates during their visit. These observations emphasize that a number of allegations have been made by Mr Bhutto's defence counsel on the subject of the impartiality of the judges trying him, the fairness of the conduct of the trial and the correctness of the record of proceedings. Moreover, the Short Report notes that the most direct evidence against Mr Bhutto should be regarded with great suspicion, since it is that of an informer, who had been granted pardon. It also expresses regret that the last stage of Mr Bhutto's trial was held in camera.
In view of these reservations, and considering the Government's refusal to allow the Amnesty International delegates to inspect personally the prison conditions in which Mr Bhutto was being held, Amnesty International urged the Government in the Short Report to allow international observers at all stages of Mr Bhutto's trial (including the appeal stage), to withdraw preventive detention orders against him and to allow representatives of international organizations to meet him in jail.
On 22 March 1978, the first public executions took place since the present Government assumed power: three men were hanged in Lahore after being convicted by a military court on charges of kidnapping and murder. Amnesty International had sent a cable to the Chief Martial Law Administrator, urging clemency and calling the public execution of civilians tried by military courts a "dangerous precedent in Pakistan". Earlier, on 7 March 1978, it had sent a cable to the Chief Martial Law Administrator, urging clemency for Nazir Ahmed, who had been sentenced to death on 4 March 1978 by a military court under retroactive legislation, for attempting a hijack on 20 January 1978. (In a foreword to the Short Report, the Chairman of the International Executive Committee of Amnesty International had expressed deep concern about the application of the death penalty in Pakistan.)
At the time of writing, Amnesty International has not received any reaction from the Government to the recommendations made in the Short Report.
Since it was published, Amnesty International has been concerned at the arrest under martial law provisions of at least 145 journalists and newspaper employees for demanding the right of freedom of expression. Nearly all were arrested for taking part in a hunger strike in protest against the forced closure of Musawat (Equality), the official organ of the Pakistan People's Party, whose Editor and printer have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience,
183
after their conviction by martial law courts for publishing "objectionable material". In May 1978, Amnesty International groups took part in a special action, calling for the journalists' release and drawing attention to four among them who had been sentenced, on 13 May 1978, to be imprisoned and flogged for their part in the hunger strike. The four included Masudullah Khan, a senior Sub-editor on the Pakistan Times, who was sentenced to five lashes and six months' imprisonment, although it was known that he was lame. Many Amnesty International members participated in the May 1978 appeal for Masudullah Khan's release, marking the occasion of the 30th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The flogging of three of the journalists was confirmed, but the Government announced a week later that Masudullah Khan was not flogged because of his physical disability. On 29 May 1978, an agreement was reached between the Government and journalists' representatives, the Lahore edition of Musawat was allowed to reappear and all 145 journalists were released.
On 30 May, Amnesty International sent a cable to the Chief Martial Law Administrator, expressing deep concern at reports of confirmation of the first sentences of amputation of a hand passed on three young men convicted on criminal charges. The Secretary General urged the Chief Martial Law Administrator to revoke immediately the confirmation of this punishment, which Amnesty International considers "cruel and inhuman"—as it is so defined in international law. As far as Amnesty International is aware, execution of the sentence has not been carried out as of the time of writing.
