Jordan (the Hashemite Kingdom of)
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is a monarchy with King Hussein at its head. The legislature consists of a Senate of 30 members nominated by the King, and a newly constituted National Consultative Council of 60 members to replace the suspended Lower House of Parliament. Amnesty International's principal concerns in Jordan during 1977-78 have been long-term detention without trial and reports of prolonged solitary confinement.
Amnesty International estimates that there are between 200 and 250 political detainees in Jordan. Only about half this number are believed to have been tried. The majority (about 170) are reported to be members of Palestinian groups within the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), mainly from Fatah and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Also detained are some members of extremist right-wing religious parties, the Iraqi faction of the Baath Party and the Jordanian Communist Party. No political parties have been allowed to be formed in Jordan. Political prisoners are tried under martial law by military courts.
Amnesty International groups have taken up the cases of three prisoners of conscience, sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment by military court for alleged membership of the Communist Party (a special law prohibiting communist activities was passed in 1953 and still remains in force). Feisal al Za'mi, a student from Irbid, was arrested early in 1977. His sentence was later commuted by the Prime Minister to two years. Imad Mulhim, a medical student at the University of Jordan in Amman, was arrested in about May 1977 for taking part in demonstrations of solidarity with Palestinians living in Israeli-occupied territory. Nabil Ja'nabni, from Madaba, was arrested in 1977, following his election to membership of the Madaba Youth Organization. It was reportedly feared that he would introduce political ideas into this organization. Amnesty International has since learned of the release of Feisal al Za'mi. At the time of writing, the other two men are imprisoned in Mahatta Central Prison in Amman.
Another case, that of Fathi Sultan, forty-three-year-old editor of a weekly magazine for teenagers called Faris, detained without trial since 2 January 1975 in Mahatta Central Prison, was taken up with the Minister of the Interior, Suleiman Arar, during an Amnesty International mission in March 1978. Amnesty International has since been told that he was released on 13 June 1978.
265
Amnesty International medical groups requested an immediate inquiry into the arrest early in 1978 of a twenty-year-old student, Omar Musa Khalil Ajoury, believed to have been a prisoner of conscience, and into his death on 5 June 1978, in the Abdeli security prison in Amman, after an eight-day hunger and thirst strike.
Amnesty International has received reports that over one hundred political detainees have not been tried, although many have been in detention for long periods. This issue was raised with the Minister of the Interior during an Amnesty International mission in March 1978. The Minister affirmed that all political prisoners were fairly tried and that Jordanian law stipulated a time limit within which trial proceedings must take place. Amnesty International asked the Minister to investigate the cases of 47 political detainees in Mahatta Central Prison, believed by Amnesty International to have been held without trial for periods of one to five years. It has since been reported that twenty untried political prisoners were released on 13 June 1978.
Prison conditions are said to be very poor. Amnesty International has had numerous reports, some of them first-hand, of solitary confinement for several months in unlit cells measuring about lm x 2m, in the Abdeli Security Prison in Amman. Reports of ill treatment and torture in this prison have also been received by Amnesty International, two at first-hand. Serious overcrowding and bad hygiene are widely reported, particularly in Mahatta Central Prison, where, it is alleged, a hunger strike took place in the summer of 1977. During Amnesty International's mission in March 1978, these issues were brought to the attention of the Minister of Interior, who admitted that conditions were poor and told Amnesty International that a new prison was under construction. He affirmed, however, that all prisoners were well treated.
Twelve death sentences for the sale of property in territory now occupied by Israel have been reported to Amnesty International in the past year. On 21 September 1977 it appealed to King Hussein to commute six of the sentences, and was told by the King's Secretary that "no executions for the offence of the sale of land to the enemy have yet been—or will be—carried out since the 1967 war." The accused had been tried in absentia. Further information about the trial procedure was given to Amnesty International by the Jordanian Ambassador in London.
A written appeal to King Hussein made in May 1978 on behalf of four more cases similarly sentenced received a prompt response, giving Amnesty International detailed information. Amnesty International made another appeal in June 1978 on behalf of two further cases.
The Amnesty International mission sent to Jordan from 17-20 March was for government and legal talks. The delegates were the Deputy Secretary General of Amnesty International and a member of the Research Department in its International Secretariat. They introduced Amnesty International to the Minister of the Interior, Suleiman Arar, and raised with him the issues of concern to Amnesty International mentioned above. The delegates also discussed Amnesty International's activities in various parts of the world with Faleh al Tawil, Director of International Organizations at the Foreign Ministry. They were told that Jordan shared Amnesty International's views on the death penalty, but that it was still applied in exceptional circumstances. Talks on legal matters took place with the President of the Jordanian Bar Association and other leading lawyers.
266
Detailed information was obtained about legislation in force under martial-law regulations relating to the full range of Amnesty International's concerns.
