France (the French Republic)
All Amnesty International adopted prisoners in France are conscientious objectors. The law stipulates that conscientious objectors who do not apply for exemption from military service within one month of call up, or who have had their applications rejected and still refuse to do military service, may be charged with draft resisting and, in some circumstances, with "refusal to obey". People so charged may be tried by the special military courts, the Tribunaux permanents des forces armées (TPFA), and may be sentenced to up to two years' imprisonment.
The sentences passed by the TPFA have varied from fifteen months' suspended to between six months and one year in prison. In some cases, notably those of Jehovah's Witnesses, the length of time the prisoner is actually required to serve has decreased in some military regions.
Those granted conscientious objector status are assigned an officially prescribed alternative service assignment. Although such individuals are under military discipline, they are subject to the jurisdiction of the civil courts. In cases of partial or total refusal to carry out their orders, these conscientious objectors are brought before a civil court, the Tribunal de Grande Instance (TGI), which has been passing heavier sentences. Whereas previously in such cases those convicted were usually either fined or given short suspended sentences, since September 1977 longer suspended sentences have been passed and there have been several prison sentences of up to six months.
People who have already been called up but who subsequently return their military papers continue to be fined and, in some cases, deprived of their civic rights for up to five years but, to the best of Amnesty International's knowledge, no one has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment on this charge during the period under review.
In October 1977, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe recommended that the right to conscientious objection be included in the European Convention on Human Rights. Although this right is recognized in France, it is subject to important restrictions: French legislation in some aspects contravenes the European Council recommendations.
Amnesty International groups worked on 34 cases during the year, of which 16 were still in hand at the end of June 1978.
Amnesty International continues to be concerned at the apparent lack of impartiality of the TPFA : three of the five judges are military personnel (see Article 7 of the Code of Military Justice). It is also concerned at the fact that, in these courts, the judges are not obliged either to give reasons for their decisions
211
or to make public their deliberations and that there is a lack of adequate appeals machinery in cases tried by them. Appeal is allowed only on procedural grounds and Amnesty International knows of no case in which such an appeal has been upheld.
The operation of judicial procedures for some crimes, usually minor, which can best be termed flagrants délits (offences committed by someone who is caught in the act) also gives cause for concern. There is a legal procedure which permits summary hearings—as, for example, in the case brought against 12 alleged participants (out of an estimated 60,000) in a demonstration in July 1977 against the construction of a nuclear reactor at Creys Malville. The defendants were charged under Article 314 of the French code pénal known as the loi anti-casseurs (a law against wilful damage). This covers offences against people or property resulting in destruction or breakages. It was the opinion of the Amnesty International observer that the court procedure was open to criticism and that the application of the law and the assumption of collective guilt among those accused appeared to contravene the principle that one is accountable under criminal law only for one's own actions (personnalité des peines).
Amnesty International has taken action over the use of the death penalty in France, where it may still be imposed for the same wide variety of both civil and military crimes as previously. However, in the period 1977 — 78, as in other recent years, it has been imposed only for civil crimes, always involving murder, usually in conjunction with other offences such as theft, grievous bodily harm or torture. Under Article 17 of the French Constitution, the President of the Republic has the right to commute any death sentence by way of pardon, and President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing has publicly stated his opposition in principle to the death penalty. Amnesty International has consistently appealed to the President to exercise his right to commute death sentences. During the period under review, five people have been sentenced to death and one sentence has been carried out.
Hamida Djandoubi was sentenced to death for murder, rape and torture in February 1977. This verdict was upheld by the Cour de cassation in June of the same year and his appeal to the President was rejected. He was executed on 11 September 1977. He was the third person to be guillotined during President Giscard d'Estaing's term of office.
At present there are three people who have been sentenced to death and have had their sentences quashed by the Cour de cassation on procedural grounds. They will stand trial again on charges of murder and grievous bodily harm, for which they could again be given death sentences.
