Morocco (the Kingdom of)
In 1977-78, Morocco continued to be ruled as a monarchy by King Hassan II, but several changes in the personnel of the Cabinet took place during this period. In October 1977, King Hassan dismissed the Government and requested the Prime Minister, Ahmed Osman, to form a new Cabinet. This new Cabinet, a coalition, consisted of a majority of independents, strong supporters of the monarchy, and also included eight representatives of the Istiqlal Party, the largest opposition party, and four members of thz Mouvement Populaire. One member of the opposition Union Nationale des Forces Populaires (UNFP), Maati Bouabid, the Minister of Justice, was expelled from his party as a result of his acceptance of the post. Neither the Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires (USFP), nor the Parti du Progrès et du Socialisme (PPS) was represented in the Cabinet.
In October 1977, Amnesty International published a Morocco Briefing Paper. In this were listed the following issues which are of particular concern to the organization:
268
(1)	prolonged pre-trial detention when those arrested for their political activities are held incommunicado by police for periods of up to two years;
(2)	the use of torture by police during detention, which has resulted in deaths or disablement;
(3)	poor conditions in prisons and detention centers;
(4)	the use of the death penalty for political offences.
Amnesty International criticized the Moroccan Penal Code's provisions concerning state security, which have been used to interpret non-violent political activities as offences carrying heavy prison sentences and even the death penalty. In addition, it expressed concern that a number of Marxist-Leninist groups, as well as members of established political parties, had been tried by courts which did not conform to internationally accepted standards of impartiality and that defence lawyers had been hindered and intimidated while defendants had been prevented from stating their cases and reporting torture.
The Briefing Paper stated that, in addition to the approximately 200 known political prisoners currently serving sentences in Morocco, several hundred more people were being held in secret detention, either for their left-wing sympathies or because of their ethnic links with the former Spanish Sahara territory, now in dispute.
From November 1977 to January 1978, over 200 Amnesty International adoption groups participated in a campaign to publicize the human rights issues mentioned in the Briefing Paper. The groups also requested the Moroccan Government to review the human rights situation in its country and to grant an amnesty for all political prisoners.
During the period 1977-78, Amnesty International groups continued to work for approximately 180 prisoners of conscience. These include members of the Union Nationale des Forces Populaires, sentenced at various trials in 1967, 1973 and 1976. One of them, Mohammad Atlas, was arrested in 1963 and tried in 1968 when he was sentenced to death. This sentence was commuted to 20 years' imprisonment as the result of an amnesty in November 1977. Other prisoners include members of a radical socialist movement generally known as Frontistes, a group of people of Saharaoui origin living in Morocco, some of whom have been detained without charge or trial since 1976, as well as a group of 11 students serving sentences of up to 15 years' imprisonment on charges of plotting against state security.
In May, June and July 1977, a number of people were arrested, including teachers and students who were alleged to have left-wing sympathies. Amnesty International protested against their prolonged detention in police custody, where they were held incommunicado, and launched a series of appeals, asking that those detained be accorded their full rights.
In November 1977, the Minister of Justice, Maitre Maati Bouabid, announced that over 100 people had appeared before an examining magistrate and that about 25 of these had been given provisional liberty. Eighty-four were subsequently transferred to Meknes civil prison where they remain in detention. During May 1978, Amnesty International received reports that these detainees had gone on hunger strike in protest against bad prison conditions, poor food and insufficient medical facilities. As far as is known, no date has yet been decided for their trial.
269
Amnesty International is currently trying to get further information concerning their cases, with a view to adoption.
In November 1977, 137 political prisoners began an unlimited hunger strike. The 137 were Frontistes who had been tried and sentenced for political reasons in Casablanca in February 1977. Most of these prisoners were being held in Kenitra prison although four were detained in Casablanca. Since their trial, they had been subjected to prolonged isolation, repeated interrogation and other forms of arbitrary punishment. The hunger strike was in protest against prison conditions as well as the fact that four members of the group were held in a different prison. As a result of it, many of those who took part had to receive medical attention and one of the prisoners, Saida Menebhi, who had already been ill while in prison, died on 11 December 1977. Amnesty International appealed to the Moroccan authorities at the start of the hunger strike and again after the death of Saida Menebhi to make an urgent review of prison conditions and the prisoners' grievances in order to bring the strike to an end.
In December 1977 the Moroccan authorities stated that an independent commission, formed of lawyers, members of parliament and doctors would meet to negotiate with the hunger strikers. As a result of this, the hunger strike ended in the latter part of the month.
In February 1978, this same group of prisoners renewed their hunger strike, now in protest against a statement made by the Minister of Justice in which he had denied that there were any political prisoners in Morocco and stated that the hunger strikers were regarded as prisonniers de droit commun. The group also protested that the independent commission had met with them on one occasion only, when their previous hunger strike had ended.
After this new hunger strike, the prisoners were divided and detained in three separate prisons: the central prison of Kenitra, the Prison Agricole Ain Ali Moumen at Settat and Chaouen prison. Amnesty International was concerned that a number of those who were transferred to new prisons were at the time undergoing medical treatment in hospital, as a result of the previous hunger strike, and that many others were in poor health as a result of the previous prolonged hunger strike. It launched an Urgent Action on 9 February 1978, requesting that all prisoners be accorded adequate medical attention in the prisons to which they had been transferred and that their families be told where they were detained.
On 23 November 1977, on the occasion of the Islamic feast day, Id Al Adha, King Hassan declared an amnesty when 37 political prisoners were released, 17 of them Amnesty International adopted prisoners. Most of those who benefited from the amnesty were members of the opposition party Union Nationale des Forces Populaires, who had been sentenced to varying terms of imprisonment in a series of trials between 1967 and 1976.
Others who were released included eight left-wing students and intellectuals who had been tried and sentenced in 1973 on charges of plotting against state security. This was the first amnesty for political prisoners since 1975.
On 13 January 1978, the Minister of Justice, Maitre Maati Bouabid, gave a press interview in which he suggested, among other things, that Amnesty International should send impartial delegates to Morocco, for whom prisons and courts would be open to inspection. Amnesty International wrote in February 1978 to the Moroccan authorities, asking for specific terms of reference for such a mission.
270
