Egypt (the Arab Republic of)
During 1977-78, Egypt continued to be governed under a State of Emergency. This enables certain security laws to be applied to political cases and accords President Sadat certain powers over the judiciary, including the right to refer cases to military courts and to ratify the decisions of special tribunals concerning political cases. This means in practice that the President may veto a court decision on any political case: an example was his veto of a court decision in 1976 to acquit a group of 19 people who were, in consequence, retried in April 1978.
During 1977, new draft legislation, based on Islamic law, was under discussion. The proposed legislation provided, among other things, for the death penalty for any Muslims who changed their religion. The draft legislation was opposed by members of the Coptic Christian community and several Copts were arrested after having expressed their opposition to it. All were released by the end of October 1977, and plans to put this legislation into effect have since been shelved.
In June, 1977, new legislation was introduced (Law 40 of 1977) concerning the formation of political parties. According to Article 28 of this Law, a new political party may be formed only if at least 20 of its potential members are already members of the People's Assembly, while Articles 22 and 23 provide for sentences of imprisonment for any person who establishes or is a member of an illegal political organization. Article 22 also provides for sentences of up to life imprisonment with hard labour for, among others, those who establish an illegal political organization which is hostile to the order of society.
In May 1978 a new law on "national unity and social peace" was promulgated. This law, which had been approved by referendum, states that any person found guilty of violating national unity, social peace or the country's democratic socialist principles may be barred from political life. The ban also applies to persons who participated in the corruption of political life-including those who held leading positions in political parties-before the 1952 Revolution. In addition, the law introduces new measures to discipline the press, stating that persons who write articles which could jeopardize the state's national interests, or instigate whatever is harmful to social peace and national unity, will be regarded as corrupting political life and subjecting national unity and social peace to danger.
At the end of May, it was announced that over 60 Egyptian journalists, including many working abroad, were to be investigated by the Socialist Prosecutor General on account of articles they had written which were considered to be "defamatory to Egypt and threatening the security of the home front". In addition, five well-known journalists were forbidden to leave the country, and two members of the People's Assembly-Abdul Fattah Hassan, a member of the New Wafd Party and Abu A1 Ezz A1 Hariri, a member of the left-wing National Progressive Unionist Party-were expelled from the Assembly. Earlier in 1978, another member of the New Wafd Party, Sheikh Ashour Muhammad Nasr, was expelled for allegedly
254
making abusive remarks in the People's Assembly. At the beginning of June, the New Wafd Party, which had been formed in February 1978, decided to dissolve, and the National Progressive Unionist Party decided to suspend its activities in protest against the new measures.
One of the outstanding events of the year under review was President Sadat's unprecedented visit to Israel in November 1977, where he addressed the Knesset. Although this visit received substantial support in Egypt, some Egyptian citizens who expressed their opposition to the initiative by distributing leaflets or posters were arrested and a number of Palestinians, including the Palestine Liberation Organization's representative in Cairo, were expelled from the country.
Amnesty International adoption groups continued to work for approximately 130 prisoners, over 100 of whom were arrested on political grounds following the food riots of 18 and 19 January 1977 (see Amnesty International Report 1977). During the year most were released pending trial, due to take place in April 1978. During its first hearing, attended by the Assistant Legal Adviser from the International Secretariat of Amnesty International, the Egyptian Bar Association made a formal request to the tribunal concerning the case dossier for the prosecution. This dossier contained 11,000 pages and the number of copies printed was apparently insufficient for the needs of the lawyers for the defence. In addition, the dossier was only available at 500 Egyptian pounds. The Egyptian Bar Association urged that an adequate number of the prosecution dossiers be printed, and that a complete dossier be given to each defence lawyer free of charge. The tribunal agreed to the first request only, although the price of the dossier was reduced. The trial has since been postponed to 18 October 1978.
During 1977-78, Amnesty International was concerned that a number of political cases were referred by Presidential Decree to military courts. One such case involved a group of 16 people, all adopted by Amnesty International, who were arrested in September 1977. All were charged under Article 98A(a) of the Egyptian Penal Code, concerning the establishment or membership of illegal political organizations—in this case, the Egyptian Communist Party and the Egyptian Workers' Communist Party. Sir Osmond Williams, a British magistrate and a former Chairman of the British Section of Amnesty International, attended part of their trial, which began on 18 March, on Amnesty International's behalf. He had talks with the members of the tribunal, and was later able to meet the Minister of Justice, Ahmed Samih Talaat.
On 15 July 1978, Amnesty International learned that one prisoner had been sentenced to five years' imprisonment, three to three years' imprisonment and two others to two- and one-year terms respectively. The court also acquitted seven people and decided that the cases of three others did not fall within its jurisdiction.
Other cases referred to military courts involved members of the Islamic group Takfir wa Higra (Repentance and Flight from Sin, see p. 255) and a group of people, including the well-known poet Ahmed Fu'ad Negm, who had held a political meeting at the University of Ain Shams, Cairo, in November 1977. In the latter case, the court acquitted three defendants, sentenced two others-Muhammad Fathi Mahmoud and Magdi Abdul Hamid Bilal, both students at Ain Shams University—to terms of imprisonment of three years and three months respectively, and sentenced Ahmed Fu'ad Negm to one year's imprisonment. The
255
court decided that the case of a seventh person did not fall within its jurisdiction. All three convicted were adopted by Amnesty International.
Nineteen people arrested in Alexandria in 1973 and charged under Article 98A(a) of the Penal Code have all been adopted by Amnesty International, and on two occasions during 1975, the organization sent observers to attend parts of their trial. The whole group was finally acquitted in May 1976. During 1977, however, President Sadat vetoed the court decision, with the result that the 19 were retried and were again acquitted by a State Security Court in Alexandria in April 1978. The Assistant Legal Adviser in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International represented the organization at part of their trial.
In 1977, Amnesty International received a report that a student at Cairo University, Ahmed Moustafa Ismail, had been tortured while in detention at the Citadel Prison in Cairo: the maltreatment to which he was subjected by prison officials included the insertion of a stick into his anus. On 4 October Amnesty International wrote to the Egyptian Minister of Justice, Ahmed Samih Talaat, expressing concern at this report and asking to be informed of measures taken by the Egyptian Government to investigate the Ismail case. In December the Egyptian Ambassador in London replied, affirming that Ahmed Moustafa Ismail would receive a fair trial, and that "the Egyptian Government continues to uphold and respect the Constitution in letter and spirit... we are committed to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and endeavour to see it implemented." Answering the Ambassador on 13 January 1978, Amnesty International noted his comments and commended the fact that incidents of torture of political detainees in Egypt during the 1960s continued to be investigated, that many of those responsible for ordering the use of torture had been tried and sentenced, or were currently being tried, and that former victims of torture, or their families, had, on occasion, been awarded compensation by the Egyptian Government. Amnesty International asked for assurance that investigations of a similar nature were being-or had been-undertaken into the reported torture of Ahmed Moustafa Ismail.
In November 1977, members of the Islamic group Takfir wa Higra were tried by a military court. Five members of the group, accused of taking part in the kidnapping and murder of a former Egyptian cabinet minister, were sentenced to death. Amnesty International launched Urgent Actions, appealing for the commutation of the death sentences and urging that this group of prisoners be allowed a retrial by a civil court. The judgment of a military court, like the judgments of other special tribunals, is subject only to Presidential ratification, there being no provisions for review by a higher tribunal. In this case, President Sadat ratified the death sentences in January 1978 and the executions were carried out on 19 March.
In January and February 1978, the death sentence was carried out on two more people accused respectively of planting bombs and of collaboration with the Israeli Intelligence Service. In both cases, Amnesty International had appealed on humanitarian grounds to the Egyptian authorities to commute the sentences.
