Switzerland (the Swiss Confederation)
During 1977 - 78, Amnesty International's major concern in Switzerland continued to be the situation of conscientious objectors.
The deadlock in the long debate over the establishment of an alternative civil service for conscientious objectors was finally resolved in 1977 when a resolution to amend Article 18 of the Constitution was put to a popular referendum on 4 December. The proposal read "A person who on religious or ethical grounds cannot reconcile with his conscience the performance of military service in the army shall undertake alternative civil service of equal value. The details shall be regulated by law."
Amnesty International welcomed the proposal in so far as it was the first time that the establishment of the principle of alternative civil service had been suggested. Nevertheless, in some respects the proposal actually strengthened the principal anomaly in the existing system, by making no provision for conscientious objection to military service on grounds of political belief. Furthermore, the proposal was more limited in scope than the recommendation made by the Council of Europe on the matter.
The proposal was rejected in the referendum by a majority of 886,821 votes to 534,297.
The number of convicted conscientious objectors fell last year to 345, 25 of whom gave political reasons for their objection. The average length of sentence in Switzerland is about 8 months.
Amnesty International is also concerned by the reports about the conditions of prisoners who are kept in solitary confinement pending trial. The normal practice is for prisoners to be allowed contact with lawyers only after completion of the first interrogation by the examining magistrate; afterwards, they may be held in solitary confinement until their trial. They are, however, allowed to read books and papers and to listen to the radio, and they have adequate exercise. The
233
solitary confinement of those awaiting trial is justified by the authorities on the grounds of the need to stop prisoners colluding over evidence relating to the crimes with which they are charged and as a means of preventing them from escaping.
When there is a serious chance of prisoners escaping or becoming violent, strict security measures may be necessary. However, in Amnesty International's view, the need for security does not dispose of the authorities' obligation to detain prisoners in conditions which do not endanger their health and which do not interfere with their right to prepare and conduct a proper defence.
The problems involved in prolonged solitary confinement for reasons of security can be seen at their most acute in the case of Gabriele Krocher-Tiedemann and Christian Moller, both members of the 2nd June Movement and both citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany. When they were stopped at a customs post in Switzerland in December 1977 to have their papers checked, they shot and wounded two policemen.
They were charged with attempted murder, complicity in murder, violence against state officials, endangering the lives of others, theft of passports, identity cards and driving licences, illegal entry into Switzerland, importing arms and related offences (Gabriele Krocher-Tiedemann is wanted in the Federal Republic of Germany for other terrorist offences.)
Until their trial in June 1978, both were held in especially strict solitary confinement in Bern prison and went on hunger strike to get the special rules relating to exercise, visiting, smoking and access to information relaxed. Amnesty International is concerned that their health may be harmed by prolonged solitary confinement in such strict conditions.
