Haiti (the Republic of)
During 1977-78, the political structure of Haiti has undergone no change under the autocratic rule of Président à Vie Jean Claude Duvalier. Several initiatives were taken by his Government in the field of human rights in the past year, and Amnesty International is studying the effects of these on the organization's longstanding concerns in Haiti: arrest without legal safeguards; indefinite detention
126
without trial and absolutely incommunicado; maltreatment and torture; and, lastly, failure to inform families even of the death of an imprisoned relative. Since 1973, when Amnesty International began more extensive work on Haiti, the organization has repeatedly made recommendations to the Government about these violations of human rights.
In August 1977, a Tribunal de Sécurité was created, which has jurisdiction over people charged with political offences. It is composed of civilian judges and is intended to ensure that defendants are tried without undue delay and with the necessary legal safeguards. In September 1977, the President issued a decree whereby the authorities could examine the cases of prisoners whose fate after arrest had remained unknown since as far back as the early 1960s, and, following investigation, issue death certificates to enable families to solve legal and financial problems. People who had allegedly invaded the country or engaged in armed rebellion were excluded from the provisions of this measure. September also saw the release of 104 prisoners by Presidential decree and the temporary closure—reportedly for repairs—of Fort Dimanche, the infamous prison for political detainees. In September 1977, the Haitian Government became the fifth member of the Organization of American States to ratify the American Convention on Human Rights. A Haitian League for Human Rights was established in March 1978.
While these are important first steps, it still remains to be seen how far the Haitian Government will progress towards the defence of human and legal rights. Amnesty International has received reports that families have had no response to their approaches to the department in charge of issuing death certificates, that arrests still take place without legal safeguards and that they are often carried out by the security militia, the National Security Volunteers, the Tontons Macoutes or the President's security corps, the Leopards. At the time of writing, there are still many hundreds of political prisoners who have not been accounted for, dead or alive.
In commemoration of twenty years' rule by the Duvalier family, by a Presidential decree, 104 political prisoners were released on 21 September 1977. Amnesty International adoption groups had been working on behalf of 24 of these prisoners, mainly because of the failure of the authorities to bring them to trial. They had been detained for between two and eight years without any legal proceedings being brought against them. After previous amnesties, there had been doubts about the authenticity of the releases: Amnesty International had recommended that the prisoners concerned be presented to the press. In September 1977, all 104 left the prison in the presence of the press and foreign diplomats.
Despite the Government claim at the time of the September amnesty that there were no more political prisoners in Haiti, Amnesty International adoptees and numerous other prisoners whose names are known to the organization have yet to be accounted for by the Haitian authorities. In November 1977, Amnesty International obtained a list from former prisoners (eleven of whom were expelled from the country) of over 100 prisoners who had died in detention in Fort Dimanche prison. It included Marcus André, Jean Claude Duval and the lawyer, Hubert Legros, under adoption by Amnesty International since May 1973. Hubert Legros' case, which had been submitted to the Inter-American
127
Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States by Amnesty International in May 1975, was still being pursued by the Commission a year and a half later. The irregular way in which the Haitian authorities communicate with the Commission is illustrated by the fact that at no time did they indicate that Hubert Legros had died in detention in December 1975. According to ex-detainees, two prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International were executed in prison: René Franex in 1974 and a radio journalist, Marie Thérèse Feval, in 1976. In October 1977, Amnesty International issued a press statement, welcoming the Presidential amnesty, but at the same time urging that the fate of missing persons be revealed. A subsequent press release in November 1977 concluded that "Haiti has one of the world's highest mortality rates among detainees" and that apparently most of those who had been detained were already dead.
As a number of prisoners not included in the amnesty-among them the Amnesty International adoptee, Rochambeau Nestor-had been seen alive in September 1977, Amnesty International organized a telegram appeal on their behalf. In view of the unsatisfactory prison conditions and the high death toll among prisoners in Haiti, doctors in many countries joined in this appeal. To date, no news has been received of the fate of these prisoners after September 1977.
Among the prisoners released in the September amnesty were Emmanuel Federic and Max Bourjolly who had been extradited from the Dominican Republic and were the subject of an Amnesty International Urgent Action. When another political opponent of the Duvalier régime, Delmono Chouloute, living in exile in the Dominican Republic, was extradited in March 1978, Amnesty International coordination groups sent telegrams to the authorities in both Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
During the past year, Amnesty International representatives established contact with the Haitian Embassies in various countries. In Washington, Andrew Blane, a member of the International Executive Committee of the organization, had discussions with the Haitian Ambassador about future direct contact between the Haitian authorities and Amnesty International. Participants in a meeting in Paris of Amnesty International coordination groups came to the conclusion that real progress in the field of human rights and legal safeguards cannot be made anywhere if citizens are not themselves aware of their rights under national and international law. As this was especially true in Haiti, the meeting resolved to work for better distribution within the country of general documents on human rights, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Documents on more specific matters, such as the Standard Minimum Rules for Treatment of Prisoners and the Professional Codes of Ethics should, it was decided, be given to members of certain professions. The work of distribution has been handled mainly by the French Section of Amnesty International. Similar efforts in the local creole language are being made within Haiti by some of the Haitian churches.
Honduras (the Republic of)
General Juan Alberto Melgar Castro has continued, during 1977-78, to serve as Head of State in the military government that came to power in 1975.
Nine leaders of the Isletas Banana Cooperative, detained since 12 February 1977, are still held in Puerto de Trujillo Prison. At the end of March 1978 they
128
were acquitted on charges of "misuse of public funds" but they remain in detention pending a decision of the Supreme Court of Justice whether to hear an appeal by the prosecution. When the Isletas banana plantation was almost destroyed by Hurricane "Fifi" in 1974, the owners-the Standard Fruit Company-suspended operations. The Government land reform agency subsequently supported efforts by the work force to resume production as a cooperative. On 12 February 1977 the army troops occupied the cooperative's offices and detained the nine leaders but no charges were brought against them until five months later. On 14 March 1978 Amnesty International cabled President Melgar Castro, urging him to intervene in this case and expressing concern at the arbitrary way in which the nine had been detained and at legal irregularities in the case. These are the only prisoners of conscience to have been taken up by Amnesty International during the past year in Honduras.
At the end of October 1977, 10 civilians and eight army officers were detained on charges of attempting to overthrow the Government; the civilians included leading business figures. All those detained were granted pardons several weeks after their detention.
In February 1978, two army officers were convicted of the murder, in July 1975, of nine people, including two Roman Catholic priests and leaders of the Union Nacional Campesina (National Union of Peasants) in the rural province of Olancho. Amnesty International has followed the trial since it began {sto. Amnesty International Report for both 1975-1976 and 1977). Major José Chinchilla, the commander of the Olancho military zone at the time when the killings took place, and Lt Benjamin Plata were sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment for murder. Eight others who had been detained in connection with the case were acquitted. They included Manuel Zelaya, the owner of the farm where the nine victims were interrogated and then murdered and the apparent owner of the vehicles used to transport them. The state prosecutor has appealed against the eight acquittals and is calling for the conviction by a higher court of Sr Zelaya, one of Olancho's principal landowners.
