Saudi Arabia (the Kingdom of)
There have been no significant legal changes in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in the period 1977-78, and justice continues to be administered according to strict Islamic law. Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners in Saudi Arabia. Because of the difficulty of obtaining information, Amnesty International is unable to say whether anyone is at present detained for political reasons.
As in 1976-77, there have been a number of reports of executions: in November 1977, a young man was beheaded for kidnapping and raping a girl of seven; on 5 December 1977 a man convicted of murdering six people, including his mother, was beheaded. In February 1978 there were reports that a Saudi princess had been shot and her male companion beheaded for adultery: under Islamic law, adultery is a capital offence and official Saudi sources state that both parties were married. The exact date of these two executions is not known for sure: some reports say November 1977; others say as early as the summer of 1977. On 3 April 1978 two Pakistanis were executed in Jeddah. They had been found guilty of axing to death a man and his wife, also Pakistanis. All the above reported executions were carried out in public.
In a letter dated 30 March 1978, Amnesty International approached King Khalid ibn Abdul Aziz of Saudi Arabia about the carrying out of the death penalty in his country. The letter first acknowledged that Islamic law sanctioned the death penalty for certain well-defined offences (namely murder, adultery and brigandage-which includes armed robbery, kidnapping and rape). It continued by explaining Amnesty International's abolitionist position in regard to the death penalty, which it considered to be the ultimate cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment. It then described the growing number of international and nongovernmental bodies which are working to bring about the abolition of the death penalty, or at least a restriction of the number of capital offences, with a view to complete abolition in time. The letter concluded by saying:
"Islam is, we understand, a merciful religion and the Qur'an in many instances advocates mercy and forgiveness . . . [and] with this in mind, and in the light of a growing world-wide consensus against the death penalty, we most respectfully request that you give consideration to the question of the death penalty in your country and the possibility of abolishing its use."
At the time of writing, Amnesty International has received no reply to this letter.
