Mexico (the United Mexican States)
Mexico has been ruled since 1929 by a single party, known since 1976 as the
129
Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI). At the end of 1976, José López Portillo became President, and has since initiated electoral and political reforms. The number of seats in the Chamber of Deputies is to be increased from 250 to 400 and 100 of the new seats will be allocated on a proportional representation basis to parties other than the PRI. In May 1978, the Communist Party was legalized—for the first time in 40 years.
In the period under review (July 1977-June 1978), human rights violations in Mexico took place in the form of arbitrary arrest without warrant in breach of Article 22 of the Constitution, detention incommunicado of suspects for longer than the three days permitted by Article 19 of the Constitution (for detention without charges), maltreatment and torture of suspects and disappearance after arrest. Human rights violations occurred most frequently in connection with student or labour unrest, land tenure disputes, the anti-drugs campaign and left-wing guerilla activity. The States particularly affected are Guerrero, Oaxaca and Morelos, where the military have assumed functions normally carried out by the police. On 21 April 1978, the Mexican daily newspaper Excelsior reported that in the Federal District of Mexico alone, eight people on average were arrested every day without a warrant, held incommunicado and maltreated by various police bodies. The report was based on statistics obtained from the Third Federal Court of the Federal District. In the first 109 days of 1978, 896 recursos de amparo (habeas corpus writs) were filed in that one court.
Amnesty International is still investigating the cases of six prisoners held in Cuernavaca Penitentiary, Morelos State. They were arrested between August 1975 and January 1976, ostensibly in connection with a raid on a branch of the Banco Nacional de Mexico and the kidnapping and murder of a businessman, Elfego Coronel Ocampo. They have consistently maintained their innocence, insisting that their confessions were extracted under torture and that the true reason for their arrest was their prominence in a peasants' organization. Some of them have now been sentenced: one, Simón Hipólito Castro, was sentenced to 36 years' imprisonment on 15 December 1977, while another, Aquileo Mederos Vázquez, has been sentenced to 45 years' imprisonment, despite the fact that 40 years' imprisonment is the maximum sentence allowed by law in the State of Morelos. One of these prisoners, Gabino Peralta Núñez, died on 1 January 1978. Sixteen prisoners in Cuernavaca Penitentiary sent a document to national and international human rights organizations, claiming that his death was caused by cardiac, respiratory and kidney complaints from which he had suffered since being tortured while he was held incommunicado after his arrest.
In the same document, the prisoners also described the activities of a gang of common (criminal) prisoners, known as a grupo de choque, within the prison. Apparently, they are responsible for continual intimidation of the political prisoners—treating them brutally, and stealing clothes, work tools and materials and other property from their cells. This grupo de choque is said to be controlled by the state judicial police.
In February 1978, the Frente Popular Pro Defensa de Los Derechos Humanos (Popular Front for the Defence of Human Rights) in Morelos accused the State authorities of permitting ill-treatment of political prisoners in Cuernavaca Penitentiary in order to make them denounce either fellow inmates or people in other prisons in the state. Furthermore, it was alleged that the judicial police
130
had tortured three political prisoners to force them to denounce other inmates in Acapulco prison. One of the three was Raúl Mendoza Salgado, who was the subject later of an Urgent Action by Amnesty International, following his abduction and alleged torture on 6 August 1977.
Over the past year, Amnesty International has been concerned at the continuing occurrence of disappearances in Mexico. The organization intervened urgently on behalf of 21 individuals who had disappeared after arrest: it was feared that they were held in illegal detention centers such as Campo Militar No. 1, the principal army base in Mexico City, which is often cited as a torture center. Amnesty International recently appealed to the Mexican Government and the Governor of Guerrero State to clarify the legal situation of 14 farmworkers whose homes in six villages had been raided on 6 April 1978 by soldiers from Military Units 35 and 42, and to provide information on their whereabouts. However, at the time of writing, the 14 are still missing.
The activities of the Brigada Blanca, a special anti-guerilla unit composed of members of Mexico's principal police forces, are reported to be continuing unabated. Many sources have accused them of using illegal methods, and of torturing and killing their victims.
During 1977 and 1978, there were demonstrations and violence in Oaxaca State, partly because of alleged vote-rigging at the municipal elections and partly because of land tenure disputes. On 14 December 1977, the Universidad Autónoma Benito Juárez de Oaxaca was occupied by the army. During ensuing weeks, Amnesty International received many reports suggesting that, from the beginning of December, there had been systematic brutality towards and torture of the students and teachers at the University who had been abducted and detained. Those supposedly responsible for the repression in Oaxaca during this period were the Dirección Federal de Seguridad (Federal Security Service), the Policía Judicial Federal (Federal Judicial Police), Policía Judicial del Estado de Oaxaca (Oaxaca State Judicial Police), Policía Preventiva del Estado de Oaxaca (Oaxaca State Preventive Police) and the Brigada Blanca.
On 22 December 1977, the Rector of the University, Felipe Martinez Soriano, presented a writ alleging that 46 members of the University had been illegally arrested and their lives possibly endangered. He himself was abducted on 7 February 1978, together with Arturo Cortes Gutiérrez, head of Preparatory School No. 5 and leader of the Movimiento Democrático Universitario (University Democratic Movement). The wife of Arturo Cortes Gutiérrez, nineteen-year-old Mirna Gómez Zárate, and Señora Gómez Zárate de Cortes, Dr Cortes' mother, were detained also. According to eye-witness accounts, the latter was badly tortured. She was subsequently charged with terrorist activities but released on bail. Dr Felipe Martinez Soriano too was later released. He stated that he had been held in Campo Militar No. 1 in Mexico City and that he had been tortured there by the Deputy Chief of the Federal Judicial Police, Miguel Nassar Haro. He added that he had been forced under torture to sign a letter of resignation from his post as Rector of the University. He said also that Miguel Nassar Haro controlled 11 unofficial detention centers in the city of Oaxaca.
In early June 1978, the Central Independiente de Obreros y Campesinos (Independent Organization of Workers and Peasants—CIOC) protested at the kidnapping by the military in Guerrero State of the peasant leader Pablo Cortes Barona
131
and at the murder of Heraldo Núñez Arrejón. The latter was killed during a raid on an ejido (one of the agricultural communities established by the agrarian reform program).
When the Amnesty International Report 1977 was published, the Mexican Attorney General, Oscar Flores Sánchez, made a public statement in which he rejected the organization's assertion that there were between 100 and 200 political prisoners in the country. He invited Amnesty International to visit alleged unofficial detention centers and to supply lists of missing and detained people. Accordingly, Amnesty International's Secretary General visited Mexico in early January 1978 and met the Minister of the Interior, Jesús Reyes Heroles, to whom he gave an interim list, prepared by the organization, of 312 missing people, mostly from the State of Guerrero. He also met relatives and friends of disappeared people and political prisoners, as well as lawyers and members of political parties. He gave a press conference, at which he reported on his meeting with the Minister of the Interior and talked about Amnesty International's work.
During the discussion between the organization and the Mexican authorities, the Comité Nacional pro Defensa de Presos, Perseguidos, Desaparecidos y Exiliados Políticos (Committee for the Defence of Political Prisoners, Missing Persons and Exiles) published a list of people who have been detained or who have disappeared, allegedly for political reasons, over the past several years. On 10 January 1978 the Attorney General's office issued a correction to the Committee's information and denied that anyone was being held for political reasons. The Mexican Government is, however, known to be considering granting a further amnesty to prisoners and exiles.
