Czechoslovakia (the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) (CSSR)
Czechoslovak citizens who exercise their civil and political rights in ways disapproved of by the authorities remain liable to prosecution. At the January 1978 session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights the representative of the CSSR, Dr Otto Kunz, said with regard to the implementation in Czechoslovakia of Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (guaranteeing freedom of expression) that this freedom had to be "consistent with the interests of the working people". The Czechoslovak judicial authorities take the same position when dealing with political dissent.
Active supporters of human rights continued to be harassed, arrested and
207
imprisoned throughout the past year (July 1977 — June 1978). Despite this, the Czechoslovak human rights movement Charter 77 issued numerous documents on violations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, both of which have been ratified by the CSSR and which are part of Czechoslovak law. These documents, as well as a number of reports and statements by spokesmen and other human rights defenders, provided valuable information on matters of concern to Amnesty International.
The majority of cases taken up by Amnesty International in the past year were of people imprisoned for writing, distributing or merely possessing texts critical of the Government's record on human rights. Most of them were sentenced to imprisonment after being convicted under provisions of the Penal Code which specifically prescribe imprisonment for the exercise of freedom of conscience. The clauses of the Penal Code which provide for their imprisonment include Article 98 ("subversion"), Article 100 ("incitement") and Article 202 ("breach of public peace").
The six Charter 77 associates whose arrests in January 1977 were reported in the Amnesty International Report 1977 were brought to trial in the latter part of the year. Amnesty International delegated Bernard M. Simons, a British lawyer, to observe their trials but the Czechoslovak authorities did not grant him a visa to enter the country. In the first trial, held in September 1977, Vladimir Lastuvka, a nuclear physicist, and Ales Machacek, an agronomist, were convicted of "subversion" for possessing and distributing Charter 77 documents, together with books and journals published by Czechoslovak émigrés and were sentenced to three-and-a-half years' imprisonment. At the appeal hearing in January 1978, Vladimir Lastuvka's sentence was reduced to two-and-a-half years.
The other four defendants, all well-known in Czech cultural life, went on trial in October 1977 in Prague. Their trial aroused considerable international interest. Amnesty International tried- to observe the trial but its official representative, Dr Wolfgang Aigner, an Austrian lawyer, was excluded from the proceedings on grounds of "lack of space in the court room". The four defendants were accused of sending literary texts abroad for publication in émigré journals. Ota Ornest, a theatre director, and Jiri Lederer, a journalist, were convicted of "subversion" and sentenced to three-and-a-half years' and three years' imprisonment respectively. Dr Frantisek Pavlicek, a writer and theatre director, was convicted of assisting in "subversion" and received a seventeen-month sentence, suspended for three years. Vaclav Havel, a playwright, was convicted of "attempting to harm the interests of the republic abroad" and received a fourteen-month sentence, suspended for three years. On the two days of the trial, and shortly before it opened, at least 30 people were detained for questioning by the police and several others were warned to stay away from the trial.
On 9 January 1978, before the opening of the appeal hearing, Amnesty International cabled the Czechoslovak judicial authorities reiterating that it regarded the four men as prisoners of conscience and urging that their sentences be quashed and the appeals be heard in open court. The Supreme Court upheld the sentences passed on Jiri Lederer, Frantisek Pavlicek and Vaclav Havel and reduced Ota Ornest's sentence to two-and-a-half years. He was released in April 1978.
Another Charter 77 associate, Frantisek Pitor, an electrician, whose arrest in
208
June 1977 was reported in the Amnesty International Report 1977 was charged with "incitement" for tape-recording and distributing the Charter 77 manifesto, and sentenced in November 1977 to three years' imprisonment. In February 1978, Amnesty International learned that at the same trial Alena Klimova, a civilian employee in the Czechoslovak army, had been sentenced to one year's imprisonment for assisting Frantisek Pitor.
Among other human rights activists whose cases were taken up by Amnesty International during the past year was Miloslav Cerny, arrested in March 1977 for writing leaflets critical of the Czechoslovak Government in connection with Charter 77 and posting them in public places in Liberec in Northern Bohemia. He was sentenced in July 1977 to three years' imprisonment for "incitement". Jan Princ, a signatory of Charter 77, gave a house party in July 1977 attended by a number of Charter 77 signatories and non-conformist musicians. Although the party was orderly, the police raided the house and held 10 people for questioning. The following day nine were set free but Jan Princ was kept in custody, and, in September 1977, sentenced to three months' imprisonment for "breach of public order". Ivan Jirous, an art historian, who was artistic director of the non-conformist rock group called "Plastic People of the Universe" and a signatory of Charter 77, was sentenced in April 1978 in Prague to eight months' imprisonment for "breach of the public peace". He had been arrested in October 1977 at an exhibition at which he spoke lightly of youth organizations and made an "offensive remark" about an official. In May 1978, the appeal court increased the sentence to 18 months.
Jirous' arrest came one month after his release from a previous eighteen-month prison sentence. Miloslav Lojek, a Protestant priest serving in the army, was arrested in December 1977 for distributing Charter 77 documents among his fellow soldiers. He was sentenced in March 1978 by the Military Court in Plzen to 15 months'imprisonment on charges of "incitement and undermining the political and moral authority of the army". Gustav Vlasaty, an employee in the chemical industry and an active trade unionist, was arrested in January 1978 for putting up on his wall clippings from the party newspaper Rude Pravo announcing salary increases and next to them his pay slips-showing no rise in his own pay. He was sentenced in April 1978 to 20 months' imprisonment for "incitement".
Other Charter 77 supporters who were awaiting trial at the time of writing of the present report include Michal Kobal, Ivan Manasek, Marian Zajicek, Robert Gombik, Petr Cibulka, Libor Chloupek, Petr Pospichal, Josef Brychta, Pavel Novak, Jiri Grusa, Pavel Roubal and Jan Simsa.
Among prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International last year was a conscientious objector, Jaroslav Vozniak, a drummer with the "Plastic People of the Universe" rock group. He was arrested in March 1978, together with a number of other non-conformist musicians and held for a month in detention. Because he was a conscientious objector and also because he had psychological problems, he did not appear before a military commission when called up for military service later on. Although in October 1976 a military psychiatrist had declared him unfit for military service, he was arrested, and, in December 1976 sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment suspended for three years for evading military service. The Prosecutor appealed against the sentence as being too low and the appeal court sentenced Vozniak to two years' unsuspended. Because he was suffering from a
209
gastric ulcer he was allowed to start serving his sentence in August 1977. He was recently reported to have been set free but may have to face another trial. Military service in Czechoslovakia is compulsory: the law allows no exemption on grounds of conscience.
Amnesty International groups were working on 60 adoption or investigation cases in the CSSR in June 1978. In the absence of reliable information it is not possible to be precise about the number of prisoners of conscience in the CSSR but there is evidence that it has recently increased.
Amnesty International is concerned that people in Czechoslovakia tried for political offences are not given a fair trial. They are invariably convicted and only the length of their sentence is decided in court. Moreover, none of the arrests and. trials of political prisoners in the past year (with the exception of Ota Ornest, Jiri Lederer, Frantisek Pavlicek and Vaclav Havel) has been publicized in the Czechoslovak news media.
In a letter to the Czechoslovak judicial authorities on 22 November 1977, Amnesty International expressed concern that contrary to international standards and to Article 199 of the Czechoslovak Code of Criminal Procedure, at the October 1977 trial of Ota Ornest, Jiri Lederer, Frantisek Pavlicek and Vaclav Havel public access to the court was drastically restricted. With the exception of four members of the families of the accused, the general public was excluded from the proceedings and the court room was so small that it could not hold even a small number of all the people who wished to be present. The letter from Amnesty International stated that in other respects also the trial fell short of the internationally recognized standards for fair trials.
In the year covered by this report (July 1977 - June 1978), Amnesty International learned about two cases of prisoners who had been subjected to treatment which endangered their health. One of them, an Amnesty International-adopted prisoner of conscience, Miloslav Cerny, who is serving a three-year prison sentence, is an epileptic. The prison doctor refused to give him his medicines, and, as a result, he had epileptic fits while in prison. As punishment for his insisting on being given his medicines, he is now not allowed to receive either parcels or mail. In March 1978, Amnesty International carried out an Urgent Action on his behalf. Ladislav Hejdanek, a spokesman for Charter 77 and a former prisoner of conscience, was picked up by the State Security Police in January 1978 and allegedly roughly handled during 9 hours of questioning before being released. He subsequently complained that he had been kicked in the back and forced to lie down on a bare floor in an unheated room with the windows wide open. Professor Hejdanek is a philosopher who now works as a furnace stoker. In 1972, he served nine months in prison for circulating leaflets informing the public of their constitutional right to abstain from voting in the general elections and was adopted by Amnesty International in the same year. He was featured in the Amnesty International Newsletter in April 1978.
During the past year, the CSSR news media reported four death sentences for offences involving murder. In August 1977, K. Kalmer was executed for murder and other criminal offences. Miloslav Z... was sentenced to death in October 1977 for strangling one woman and stabbing another to death after attempting to rape them. The Czechoslovak News Agency (CTK) did not state whether the latter sentence had been carried out. In March 1978, Lubomir A... was sentenced
210
to death for murder and other criminal offences. A man of twenty-one was sentenced to death in June 1978 for raping two women and murdering one of them. Neither of these two sentences has yet been confirmed.
In March 1978 some 350 Czechoslovak citizens publicly called on the Czechoslovak Federal Assembly to abolish the death penalty.
On 25 February 1978, when Czechoslovakia celebrated the 30th anniversary of the Republic's becoming a socialist state, Amnesty International appealed to the President, Gustav Husak, to mark the occasion by an amnesty for all prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International groups also appealed to the President on behalf of their adopted prisoners, but no amnesty was announced.
