Niger (the Republic of)
The political situation in Niger was relatively stable during 1977 and early 1978.
67
However, the military Government led by President Seyni Kountche continued to detain without trial the former President of Niger, Hamani Diori, and members of his Government, which was overthrown by Lieutenant-Colonel Kountche himself in a military coup in 1974. Also detained were Djibo Bakary, Hamani Diori's main political rival from pre-independence days, and a number of his supporters.
In early 1976 Amnesty International first took up the cases of 18 people who were arrested in August and October 1975. Most of these detainees were alleged to be supporters of Djibo Bakary, the former leader of the Sawaba ("Freedom") Party which was banned by Hamani Diori shortly before independence in 1960. Djibo Bakary lived in exile throughout the period of Hamani Diori's rule, but after the army overthrew the civilian Government of Hamani Diori in April 1974, he was allowed to return home to Niger, on condition that he took no part in politics. However, he was arrested in August 1975 after the Vice-President in the military Government had attempted to take control of it. Djibo Bakary was accused of complicity in the attempted coup and of attempting to re-establish the banned Sawaba Party. A number of Djibo Bakary's associates were arrested in October 1975. They have neither been charged nor brought to trial, but were still detained in June 1978.
Several political detainees were freed in a partial amnesty announced in April 1977, the third anniversary of the military coup which overthrew Hamani Diori. They included Boubou Hama, the former President of the National Assembly, and four of the prisoners taken up by Amnesty International, although one of these, Dodo Hambali, was put under house arrest. President Kountche granted a further amnesty in April 1978. Among those released on this occasion were four former ministers in the Government of Hamani Diori and two detainees who have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. They were Ibrahim Issa, once President of Niger's National Union of Writers, and Ahmed Garba, the former Secretary General of Niger's most important trade union, Union Nationale des Travailleurs du Niger (UNTN). Dodo Hambali was also released from house arrest.
