Syria (the Syrian Arab Republic)
On 8 February 1978 Hafez Assad was re-elected by popular referendum as President of the Syrian Arab Republic for a second seven-year term. In his speech to the People's Assembly on 8 March 1978 after taking oath, he said that the use of martial law was prohibited "except in connection with the security of the state as stipulated by the law". He went on to say that "there have been certain cases where martial law regulations were used outside the framework which I have just mentioned." The President's public reference to the misuse of martial law regulations and his prohibition on their further misuse is central to Amnesty Inter-
271
national's principal concerns in Syria—namely long-term political detention without trial under martial law provisions and the ill-treatment of prisoners under the jurisdiction of the security forces. The total number of untried political detainees cannot be precisely estimated.
Various human rights provisions contained in the Syrian Constitution of 1973 are suspended by Article 153 of the Constitution (which states that "legislation in effect and issued before the proclamation of the Constitution will remain in effect until amended so as to be compatible with its provisions") as well as by Article 101 which states that "the President of the Republic may declare a state of emergency and may cancel it in the manner defined by law". The principal legal instruments relating to Amnesty International's concerns are Decree No. 51 of 22 December 1962 on the law for a State of Emergency, and Decree No. 47 of 28 March 1968 on the formation of the Supreme State Security Court. All the powers of internal and external security are held by a martial law judge, who is understood by Amnesty International to be the Minister of the Interior by delegation of the Prime Minister. Among his extensive powers are "precautionary arrest of suspects or of anyone endangering public security and order" and "authorization to investigate persons and places" (Decree No. 51, Article 4a).
Political detainees are subject to these decrees and may thus remain in indefinite detention without trial.
Amnesty International groups are currently working on behalf of 45 adoption and 41 investigation cases, all prisoners detained without trial for some years. Among the adoption cases taken up in the past twelve months is that of Ahmed Roummo, a forty-two-year-old history teacher, married, with six children, who is a supporter of the Iraqi wing of the Baath Party. He was arrested in mid 1975, with many others, after a sharp deterioration in Syria's relations with Iraq. He has since been detained in A1 Mezze Prison, near Damascus.
Amnesty International continues to work for members of the previous regime -still imprisoned after seven years without trial—with the exception of Professor Anis Kenjo, who was reportedly released in 1977. Zouheir Shulak, a fifty-nine-year-old lawyer and writer, and the father of nine children, is still detained in A1 Mezze Prison, seven years after he was abducted from Lebanon for writing newspaper articles critical of the Syrian Government.
Amnesty International has received many reports of continuing abductions from Lebanon. Some hundreds of people are reportedly detained, often after a period of interrogation by Syrian security forces in the detention centers at Shtaura or Mazna in Lebanon. Amnesty International has asked the Syrian Government for information about 44 such detainees.
Amnesty International has adopted the cases of four Lebanese abducted from their country and detained without trial in A1 Mezze Prison: they are Dr Omar Abdel Hayy, a university Professor of Law, arrested in Tripoli, 3 December 1976; Fuad Adhami, a government official, arrested in Tripoli, 3 December 1976; Dr Nabil Kulaylat, a physician from Beirut, arrested on 7 November 1977; Dr Adnan Sino, a surgeon from Beirut, arrested on 1 June 1977. All four are believed to be supporters of the Iraqi wing of the Baath Party. At the time of writing, there is no news of their release. Amnesty International has taken up 11 further cases of Lebanese abducted and detained without trial in Syria, initially as investigation cases.
272
The 8 March 1978 declaration by the President had immediate effect: the announcement of the release of 179 prisoners who had been incorrectly detained under martial law regulations. Amnesty International learned that these cases were mainly of minor civil infractions and that there were very few political cases among them. Amnesty International has, however, asked the Government for the names of 104 political prisoners reportedly released in February 1978.
Numerous acts of sabotage and an increased number of political assassinations of the ruling Alawite minority have occurred in the period 1977-78. An attempted attack on the Syrian Foreign Minister, Abdel Halim Khaddam, in Abu Dhabi in October 1977 was blamed on the Iraqi Government. However, reports received by Amnesty International suggest that the opposition to the Alawite leadership is largely internal. Many arrests have been reported in this connection. No information about trials is available.
Amnesty International has asked for information about the reported death in detention on 10 September 1977 of Abdel Ghani Attar, arrested with his brother and several other prominent businessmen on corruption charges.
The organization has submitted to the Syrian Government a report of a medical examination of a released prisoner, carried out by Amnesty International's Danish medical team. This was consistent with the prisoner's allegations of torture.
Three executions have been reported in the past year. Amnesty International has expressed its concern to the Syrian Government over the public hangings on 23 January and 23 May 1978 of three men convicted of murder, and has requested information concerning the trial procedures.
A mission, composed of the French jurist Christian Bourguet and a member of the Research Department in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International, visited Syria from 11-17 March 1978 on Amnesty International's behalf. They raised with the Minister of Justice, Adib Nahawi, the full range of Amnesty International's concerns in Syria, as well as the cases of individuals for whom Amnesty International is working. They inquired in detail about the legal framework for the detention of political prisoners. The delegates also discussed Amnesty International's activities with Dr Haitham Kelani, Director of International Organizations at the Syrian Foreign Ministry, and with other high-ranking officials.
Legal discussions were held with the President of the Syrian Bar Association, Maitre Sabah al Rikabi, the President of the Constitutional Court, Maitre Jamal Naamani, and several other leading experts in penal law, with particular regard to the application of martial law regulations within Amnesty International's sphere of concern.
