Turkey (the Republic of)
Amnesty International's major concerns in Turkey during the period 1977 - 78 have been the existence of legislation contrary to international human rights standards, the imprisonment of non-violent political activists, the use of torture and the retention of the death penalty.
During the past year, there have been two changes of government in Turkey. No party got sufficient seats in the June 1977 elections to form a government, and it was not until August 1977 that Suleyman Demirel was able to obtain a vote of confidence for a coalition Government made up of members of the Justice Party, the National Salvation Party and the National Action Party. This Government lasted only until January 1978, when Mr Demirel resigned after losing a vote of confidence in the National Assembly. He was succeeded as Prime Minister by Bulent Ecevit, who formed a coalition Government from members of his own Republican People's Party, together with 10 independent members, two Republican Reliance Party members and one Democrat Party member.
The Republican People's Party is committed to the abolition of Articles 141 and 142 of the Turkish Penal Code, under which nearly all Amnesty International's adopted prisoners have been charged, and is in favour of the abolition of the death penalty.
In April 1978, the Chairman of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee, Thomas Hammarberg, together with the researcher responsible for work on Turkey in the organization's International Secretariat, had meetings in
234
Turkey with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, Mehmet Can and the Minister of the Interior, Irfan Ozaydinli. Subjects discussed during these meetings included the abolition of Articles 141, 142 and 163 of the Penal Code, the abolition of the death penalty, allegations of torture, prison conditions, missing people in Cyprus since the events of 1974 and the question of Turkey's ratification of the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its agreement to the right of individual petition to the European Commission on Human Rights.
Although Amnesty International groups are still officially responsible for 34 adoption and investigation cases in Turkey, in June 1978 only four adoptees were actually in prison. Amnesty International's remaining 30 cases are of former prisoners who are either living under police surveillance in places designated by the authorities or are free while their trials continue. These are all people who have been charged under Articles 141 and 142 of the Penal Code (although some have also been charged under other articles) which prohibit forming organizations "aimed at establishing the domination of a social class over other social classes" and "making propaganda for the domination of a social class over other social classes". They are all left-wing activists and have for the most part been involved in the publication of left-wing newspapers and periodicals. Amnesty International knows of many other prosecutions under Articles 141 and 142 but the defendants are free while their trials continue.
Amnesty International knows of no prisoners charged under Article 163 of the Penal Code at the present time. This Article provides from two to seven years' imprisonment for "Whoever opposes secularism, forms or organizes, plans, manages or administers a society aiming, even partially, to impose religious principles on the basic social, economic, political or legal order of the state ..."
Since the closing of the State Security Courts in October 1976, because of a Constitutional Court judgment, trials of political prisoners have been conducted in the civil courts. The only complaints received by Amnesty International concerning trial procedures during the past year have been that, in some instances, prisoners have been moved to prisons at a distance from the places where their trials were being held, with the result that they have been unable to be present at their trials. This matter was raised in April 1978 with the Minister of Justice, who gave Amnesty International assurance that, in future, steps would be taken to ensure that prisoners were able to attend their trials.
In 1977, Amnesty International received allegations that left-wing activists had been tortured at police stations during interrogation. Methods used were said to have included electric shocks, beatings of the soles of the feet, extraction of fingernails, the application of lighted cigarettes to the body and beating with truncheons. In October 1977, an Urgent Action was undertaken by Amnesty International on behalf of a lawyer, Cemil Orkunoglu, after reports that he was being tortured. Allegations of torture of right-wing activist prisoners too were made by the National Action Party after the formation of the new Government in January 1978. When the question of torture was raised by Amnesty International's representatives during their meetings with the Turkish authorities in April 1978, they were assured that all future allegations of torture would be investigated.
Although Turkey retains the death penalty for some political and criminal offences, Amnesty International has heard of no executions during the past year -
235
although this does not necessarily mean that none took place. Amnesty International is concerned about politically motivated killings by extreme left- and right-wing groups. There were over 200 of them during the first half of 1978.
