Paraguay (the Republic of)
The autocratic rule of General Alfredo Stroessner was given a new lease in February 1978 with his re-election as President of Paraguay for another five-year term. The opposition, although divided, agreed not to contest the election. In order to permit President Stroessner to stand for re-election, the Constitution was revised by a Constituent Assembly in 1977. The State of Siege, which has been in force throughout President Stroessner's twenty-four-year rule, was lifted on election day. The Government interprets the provision of the State of Siege as empowering it to detain anyone without trial at the discretion of the President. Although bills to regulate the State of Siege have been introduced by minority opposition legislators, no law to that effect has ever been passed. Despite national and international criticism of this use of the State of Siege, several people have been detained untried for up to 19 years.
Because it is the practice to hold members of the political opposition in preventive detention, there were no political trials between 1958 and 1975. Although it is very doubtful whether trials will be either prompt or impartial, political prisoners in Paraguay announced during the past year that they wanted to be brought to trial. During the period covered by this report (July 1977—June 1978), 53 people have been tried under Code Law 209, in Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons, which prescribes one to six years' imprisonment for publicly inciting "hatred between Paraguayans and destruction of the social classes". During the year, 169 political prisoners have been released, leaving 74 who are either in preventive detention, committed for trial or have disappeared since being arrested. There were at least 40 new arrests, mostly in August 1977 and at the beginning of 1978. People continued to be arrested without any form of legal safeguard and in some cases were ill-treated and tortured.
Amnesty International has taken up 49 cases during the past year, including a number of peasant farmers who were arrested in 1976 under the State of Siege decree but who had not been charged or brought to trial by the end of 1977. Three long-term prisoners, Alfredo Alcorta, Antonio Maidana and Julio Rojas, for whose release Amnesty International had worked since the early 1960s, were
134
allowed to leave the country in 1977 via the Peruvian Embassy, where they had sought political asylum.
In December 1977, 42 prisoners who had been detained without trial were set free, among them Ignacio Chamorro, arrested at the age of 19 and held for 18 years, and Antoliano Cardoso, held for 17 years. Amnesty International cabled President Stroessner, welcoming these releases, and recalling the situation of ten other long-term prisoners who had been held without trial for between 12 and 19 years. These included a peasant farmer, Calixto Ramírez, Maria Lina Rodas and Ananias Maidana Palacios (one of Latin America's longest-held political prisoners, having been in detention for 19 years). All but three were released in March 1978. Amnesty International again cabled the President, urging that the remaining three long-term prisoners, Idolina Gaona, Virgilio Barreiro and Severo Acosta, held without trial for 12 or 13 years, be freed. On 11 June 1978, these three, together with 13 other political detainees in the Emboscada prison camp, all went on hunger strike as a protest against their continuing detention without trial.
After Dr Juan Félix Bogado, the playwright, Antonio Pecci and 13 other Paraguayan intellectuals were arrested in July and August 1977, Amnesty International cabled the President, requesting full legal safeguards for them. They had been arrested in connection with a national debate of great economic and political significance—on whether or not Paraguay should alter its voltage system after the completion of the hydro-electric dam in Itaipú. These 15 intellectuals, some connected with the review Criterio, constituted the most vocal opposition to the expected change-over to Brazilian voltage which the Government seemed to favour. During 1977, articles appeared in Criterio, strongly critical of the growing Brazilian influence over the Paraguayan economy, and the purchase of land by Brazil, especially in the border area.
Six of the 15 were committed for trial under Law 209 on charges of association with the Communist Party and possession of subversive literature; the remaining nine were released uncharged. In April 1978, Dr Bogado was sentenced to two years' imprisonment, although he denied any connection with the Communist Party; the other five received one-year sentences. During the trial, the prosecution relied heavily on the police report which was presented as "evidence of criminal responsibility against the defendants" and contained "confessions" extracted from some of them while they were initially held in the Department of Investigations. Amnesty International heard from many sources that several of the 15 had been maltreated during their detention in the Department. The judge upheld the prosecution's case and stated in the verdict that "the affirmations contained in the police report can in no way be an invention or a product of the imagination."
In December 1977, Amnesty International launched an appeal on behalf of 24 trade unionists arrested during a meeting of rural and urban labour organizers, many of them connected with various rural projects supported by the Roman Catholic Church. Shortly after the arrests, five of the detainees were released without charges. The arrests were carried out brutally: the victims were beaten. Several were reported to have been tortured. Amnesty International publicized the arrests and launched another appeal on behalf of the remaining 19 who were subsequently charged under Law 209. The Paraguayan Government claimed that the trade unionists were trying to reorganize the guerilla movement Organización Primero de Marzo (OPM). There were national and international protests about
135
the arrests, and the United States trade union organization, the American Federation of Labour—Congress of Industrial Organizations, sent two delegates to Paraguay to make direct representations to the authorities. All 19 were released in February 1978 as there was insufficient evidence that they were connected with the OPM or any other guerilla group.
Nearly all political prisoners are held in the Emboscada prison camp, 40 kilometres from Asuncion, where they await the decisions about their cases by the courts or by executive order. Despite a limited diet, there are more safeguards against maltreatment at Emboscada, where conditions are considerably better than in local police stations. Medicine, additional food and clothing may be given to the prisoners. Once a week, friends or relations may visit them and they can see their lawyers. Amnesty International has been concerned about the lack of legal safeguards in cases of politically motivated arrest. The habeas corpus provision is not operative in most political cases, nor in those covered by the State of Siege decree. Furthermore, the judicial authorities do not deal with habeas corpus writs when the Government tells them that these concern a political prisoner or when the writ is on behalf of someone whorh the superintendent of a police station or commander of a barracks denies holding. In the case of the peasant Doroteo Grandel, arrested on 2 May 1976 and adopted by Amnesty International, the commander of the military division where he was held stated that he was "not known". He was considered to have "disappeared", and it was not officially acknowledged until early 1978 that he was in detention.
The torture of political prisoners during their initial interrogation, or even before any interrogation starts, is common in Paraguay. Torture is used also as a punishment and as a means of discouraging political dissent. In October 1977, Amnesty International launched a campaign against torture in Paraguay, in which all the organization's national sections took part, and which lasted well into 1978. A pamphlet entitled Deaths Under Torture and Disappearance of Political Prisoners in Paraguay was published in English and Spanish. It is an account of 13 people who had been killed at the time of their arrest or who had died under torture in military or police custody, including the army veteran Mario Arza-mendia Flores, aged 61, and Joel Filartiga Speratti, aged 17, who were tortured to death. It also lists the names of 20 people who have been missing since their arrests. (Such "disappearances" have been described by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights as a simple expedient for doing without legal safeguards.) The pamphlet features, among others, Dr Agustin Goiburu (who was abducted in Argentina), four brothers, Elixto, Policarpo, Francisco and Adolfo Lopez, and the lawyer Miguel Angel Soler, General Secretary of the Paraguayan Communist Party. (These have all disappeared.) The families of those who have disappeared are left in a tragic state of uncertainty—as is illustrated by the following extract from an open letter to the Minister of the Interior in 1977: "I am a humble 84-year-old peasant. . .before I die, I should like the consolation of knowing whether my son is alive or whether he has been killed so that I can at least say a prayer for him."
During the campaign, several thousand people signed a petition to President Stroessner requesting an independent inquiry into the deaths and disappearances. Among the signatories were clergy, trade unionists and members of parliament. The petitions were presented to Paraguayan embassies or sent directly to the President.
136
In May 1978, Amnesty International publicized the case of Ana González, a young woman, whose mutilated body was delivered to her family after she had suffered protracted torture in the Third Police Station in Asunción. She had been arrested an hour after being dismissed from her job in a textile factory.
During the past year, Amnesty International has conducted 10 Urgent Actions on behalf of torture victims needing immediate attention, people held incommunicado and people who had been arrested in an illegal way. One such case was that of Juan Miguel Sánchez, who was arrested on 1 April 1977 on the grounds that he was in possession of left-wing literature, and held incommunicado until he went to Emboscada prison in January 1978. He was in very poor health and had been severely tortured. He was released on 1 May 1978 and now lives in Brazil.
This past year has seen the release of an unprecedented number of prisoners held in administrative detention: legal proceedings against people arrested for political reasons have, in some cases—following initial declarations before the courts—resulted in definite or provisional release. Although individual prisoners have benefited from these measures, there is still no fundamental change in the system of administrative detention which is unregulated by legislation. Normal legal safeguards are further impaired in that the same judge who carries out the initial inquiry to determine if there is sufficient cause to commit a person for trial is responsible for final sentencing. This is particularly questionable in trials of a political nature where judges appear to rely heavily on police reports. Political detainees continue to be tortured and "confessions" extracted under torture are still an important factor in trial proceedings. Despite the high number of releases in the past year and the lifting of the State of Siege in three departments (excluding the capital, Asunción) in May 1978, much remains for the Paraguayan Government to change.
In December 1977, Amnesty International made a submission to the UN Commission on Human Rights concerning people in Paraguay who had died as a result of torture in police and/or military custody or who had disappeared after arrest. Also included in the submission were the cases of 11 victims of long-term detention without trial. In June 1978, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights presented a carefully documented and highly critical report on the situation of human rights in Paraguay to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States.
Peru
President Francisco Morales Bermudez, head of the military Government of Peru since 1975, announced in late 1977 preparations for a return to civilian government. Elections for a Constituent Assembly, which is to draft a new Constitution, were held on 18 June 1978.
A State of Emergency and the suspension of constitutional guarantees was decreed on 20 May 1978. This happened after the announcement of Government austerity measures, following Government negotiations in Lima with a team from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over terms for stand-by credit to meet Peru's severe financial crisis.
Opposition leaders protested that the conditions imposed by international financial bodies for financial credits were political as well as economic, that they would seriously jeopardize the proposed return to civilian government and lead
137
directly to large-scale violation of human rights. Street disturbances and a nationwide general strike in the days following the announcement resulted in an estimated 6,000 arrests; at least 38 people were shot dead by security forces. An estimated 2,000 were believed still to be in detention at the end of June 1978.
Similar disturbances had occurred in July 1977 as a result of government measures raising transport and other prices. They culminated in a general strike on 19 July 1977. Sixty-nine of the 1,800 thought to be detained in connection with the strike, and with street demonstrations in support of the strikers, were adopted by Amnesty International. Most were freed by early October 1977. Official military court sources told Amnesty International that 742 prisoners were acknowledged to have been detained in the July 1977 incidents, and that less than five were convicted of crimes. However, many of these prisoners were held for six months before being released.*
An urgent intervention was made by Amnesty International in January 1978 on behalf of 200 people detained for going on hunger strike in protest at the dismissal of over 5,000 trade unionists following the July 1977 general strike. The prisoners were charged under the Health Code which provides for six months' imprisonment for participation in a hunger strike. They were all released by presidential order at the end of March 1978, after their strike was suspended.
Four campesinos (peasant farmers) from the mountain village of Huacataz were shot dead and others were seriously wounded on 18 February 1978 when Guardia Civil troops fired on a crowd. Amnesty International subsequently pressed for the release of three women and two men who, despite serious injuries, were transferred to police cells shortly after emergency surgery. Amnesty International also urged the release of six people detained as they returned from the city of Cajamarca with coffins for the dead. All the detained Huacataz campesinos were released on 24 March 1978 but the charges against them are still pending.
An official Amnesty International mission was in Peru from 6 to 14 April 1978. It met private individuals and organizations concerned with human rights, and members of the Government, the judiciary and the military courts. The mission was led by Senator Hans Rau of the Federal Republic of Germany, a specialist in Latin American law, who was accompanied by a member of the Research Department in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International. Meetings were held with the President of the National Council of Justice, with officials of the Ministry of War and the Foreign Ministry, and with the Prefect of Lima. No member of the Cabinet received the mission.
However, it was able to have extensive talks with military court officials, including the President of the Supreme Council of Military Justice and his legal staff. The mission attended a session of the Supreme Council of Military Justice, at which a request for a special appeal hearing made by two convicted police officers was denied. The two men were sentenced to one and two years' imprisonment respectively on the charge of "Abuse of Authority". This was in connection with the death of a criminal suspect after a six-hour interrogation in the provincial city of Juliaca.
*A law of general amnesty was promulgated on 18 July 1978, ordering the release of all prisoners charged or convicted of "social-political" crimes. All political prisoners, including those convicted of guerilla activity, were subsequently released, with the exception of the political prisoners Justo Arizapana and Raimundo Zanabria, who await trial before a military court for an attack on a police officer.
138
The mission was expressly denied permission to visit any of the 36 political prisoners then held in the Lima area, or the prison used solely for political prisoners, the Centro de Readapcion y Reabilitacion Social (CRAS) in Callao, where conditions are reported by prisoners and church organizations to be appalling. The mission did visit parts of the prison CRAS in Lurigancho, but its civilian Director-who otherwise gave his full cooperation—informed the mission members that he had been specifically ordered to prohibit them from inspecting the wing in which political prisoners were isolated, or from speaking to any prisoners.
The mission was especially concerned that it was prevented from interviewing prisoners charged by military courts with guerrilla activities. These were prisoners who gave Amnesty International detailed, consistent, written reports of torture, mainly attributing it to forces of the State Security branch of the Peruvian Investigative Police and to the special assault unit of the Guardia Civil, the Batallon Sinchi, both of which are under the command of the Minister of the Interior.
