Dominican Republic (the)
During the past year (July 1977-June 1978), the Dominican Republic has continued to be governed by President Joaquin Balaguer, leader of the Partido Reformista (Reform Party). Doctor Balaguer was elected President of the Republic in June 1966, was subsequently re-elected in 1970 and 1974 and was again a candidate for the elections on 16 May 1978. On 17 May the army stopped the counting of votes. Reliable sources report that more than 300 people were arrested, including members of the electoral commission, and that some of them were severely ill-treated. It is also reported that at the time when the army intervened. Antonio Guzman, the opposition candidate of the Partido Revolucionario Dominicano (Dominican Revolutionary Party) had a clear lead over President Balaguer. On 23 May, Amnesty International issued a press release expressing its concern about the arrests; at the same time it organized an Urgent Action, requesting that the detainees' legal situation be made known, that they not be maltreated and that any who might have been injured be given the necessary medical attention. The vote counting was subsequently resumed and confirmed that Antonio Guzman had won a clear victory. (He is due to take office on 16 August 1978.)
Although Article 8 of the Dominican Republic's Constitution establishes that anyone deprived of liberty must be brought before the appropriate judicial authorities or freed within forty-eight hours of arrest, in practice this has rarely happened. People have been tried several times for the same crime, or by two
118
separate courts. In some cases, police have refused to free prisoners immediately in spite of the fact that they have been acquitted.
The Constitution, Penal Code and Code of Penal Procedure have been frequently violated or interpreted inconsistently, in particular where members of the opposition or vulnerable social groups (for example, peasants and Haitians) were concerned. Although, in theory, the Constitution establishes a separation of power, in practice, the judiciary has been subservient to the executive.
Amnesty International believes that there are probably only a few dozen political prisoners in the Dominican Republic at present. The scarcity of information about individual cases has made it difficult to determine whether or not they are prisoners of conscience. Some of them are serving sentences of up to 20 years' imprisonment—Adalberto Grullón Morillo, a student leader, for example. Others have not been tried after spending several years in prison. Some political prisoners are held in La Victoria (the country's main penal establishment), isolated in a section called El Pasillo de la Muerte (The Corridor of Death).
In October 1977, prisoners (both political and non-political) in La Victoria held a peaceful protest in an attempt to get better food. It was followed by severe repressive measures on the part of the prison authorities: many prisoners were seriously wounded and kept in isolation. In December 1977, two political prisoners, Rafael Ubaldo Rodriguez Mendez and Adalberto Grullón Morillo, were taken secretly to frontier prisons at Jimani and Pedernales, near the border with Haiti, as punishment for taking part in the protest at La Victoria prison. Although torture as such does not appear to have been generally inflicted on political prisoners in the Dominican Republic, maltreatment and police brutality have, it seems, been common. In many cases, the narrow borderline between brutality and torture seems to have been crossed by Dominican security forces.
In recent years, Amnesty International has received many denunciations of maltreatment of political prisoners. Because their fate is less publicized, it is less known that other sections of the population frequently suffer from arbitrary arrests which have a political motive. Three which should be mentioned are peasants, people living in the poor districts of the capital and the Haitian workers who come each year to help harvest the sugar cane. Many Haitians stay in the Dominican Republic, some for economic reasons, others for political reasons, living illegally in the country. The Dominican police and army have periodically carried out massive arrests and deportations. In May 1977, the Secretary of the Armed Forces stated that, from 1976 until April 1977, a total of 4,307 Haitians had been deported. Although he also gave an assurance that political considerations had no part in the deportations, evidence exists of close collaboration between the Haitian and Dominican authorities over the question of political exiles.
Since the end of 1973, Amnesty International has been asking the Dominican Government to allow a mission to Santo Domingo to investigate violations of human rights. The replies were evasive. However, in April 1977, President Balaguer wrote to the Secretary General of Amnesty International, saying, "Este Gobierno, sin embargo, siempre que estas aclaraciones no resulten a usted satisfactorias, no tendría inconvenientes en recibir a un miembro calificado de esa institución,
119
investido de solvencia moral suficiente y de honestidad insospechable, para que visite nuestras cárceles y compruebe la realidad de cuanto en esta comunicación me he permitido adelantarle." ("Should this explanation not prove satisfactory, my government would have no objection to receiving a qualified member of your organization invested with sufficient moral solvency and impeccable honesty, to visit our prisons and verify the truth of all that I have told you in this letter.")
However, in September 1977, the Dominican Government, through its Ambassador in London, wrote to Amnesty International as follows: "Although the invitation from President Balaguer of 21 April was addressed to Amnesty International, in his letter he pointed out that he was willing to accept a Commission composed of a person of acknowledged integrity and of international reputation, chosen by both parties and having no ties whatsoever with Amnesty International or the Dominican Republic." Clearly this constitutes a withdrawal of the earlier invitation.
Amnesty International launched an international publicity campaign on 1 May 1978 about the serious violations of human rights in the Dominican Republic. It was hoped that President Balaguer would declare an amnesty for prisoners before the elections scheduled for 16 May 1978.
Amnesty International welcomes the fact that on 4 January 1978, the Dominican Republic acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol and that on 19 April 1978 it ratified the American Convention on Human Rights.
