Executions resumed. The authorities failed to deliver on promises to amend a law governing freedom of assembly. A corruption scandal affecting the judiciary prompted calls for judicial reform. Migrant workers continued to face multiple abuses of their rights.
Background

The government continued reviewing all laws, regulations and administrative measures for alignment with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Local activists questioned whether completion to a high standard was feasible by the December 2011 deadline.
Top of page
Death penalty

In April, four people were executed, the first executions since 2005. On 28 May, Taiwan’s Constitutional Court rejected a petition to halt executions made on behalf of 44 death row inmates, four of whom had been executed in April. Four new death sentences were imposed, bringing the total number of prisoners awaiting execution to more than 70. In October, an expert panel established in the Ministry of Justice recommended abolition of the death penalty.
Top of page
Freedom of expression

In September, the Taipei District Court suspended prosecution of two academics and leaders of human rights organizations, Lin Chia-fan and Lee Ming-tsung, for leading demonstrations without permits in 2008. The court submitted Lee Ming-tsung’s case for constitutional interpretation of several articles of the Assembly and Parade Law to assess possible infringement of citizens’ rights to assembly and free speech. In November, students protested against the government’s failure to deliver on its 2009 proposals to amend the law, including removing the requirement for prior police approval of demonstrations.
Top of page
Justice system

In July, the president of the Judicial Yuan resigned after a major corruption scandal involving high court judges. The crisis prompted demands for effective evaluation of judges and the draft Judges Act, under deliberation for more than 20 years, finally became a priority in the Legislative Yuan.
Top of page
Migrants’ rights

Migrant workers in Taiwan faced multiple abuses of their rights, including the right to transfer between employers and to form unions. Harsh and discriminatory working conditions, and exorbitant brokers’ fees contributed to large numbers leaving their original employer and becoming undocumented. Domestic workers are not protected by the Labor Standards Law, and are particularly vulnerable to sexual harassment, inadequately paid overtime and poor living conditions.
