Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, long-term incommunicado detention of political prisoners, inadequate legal safeguards in political trials, allegations of torture and of insufficient medical care for prisoners, extra-legal executions and the death penalty.
In March 1981 the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya celebrated the fourth anniversary of "direct popular democracy" as the basis of its political system. Executive authority had been vested in popular bodies which included "people's congresses", "revolutionary committees" and "people's committees". On 8 December 1981 the official press reported that "the people's congresses alone have the right of making decisions and laws". In 1981 a number of reports suggested that the role of the popular bodies in suppressing dissent at home and abroad had grown. However, information about alleged abuses committed in the name of the revolution, or about the workings of these popular bodies, proved difficult to obtain. Access to the country was strictly controlled.
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of 74 adopted prisoners of conscience. All were detained and tried under legislation explicitly restricting the exercise of fundamental human rights (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981). Many were serving life sentences in Tripoli Central Prison and in Kuweifiya prison, Benghazi. Amnesty International repeatedly called for the release of these prisoners of conscience, but the authorities rarely responded, except to assert that there were no political prisoners in Libya, However, in a speech on 2 March 1981, Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi declared that". .. those who are put into (the Jamahiriya) prisons are there because they are the enemies of the people and they fight for restoring the government above the people. There is no shame and there is nothing wrong in putting these persons in prisons or in treading on them with your feet."
Amnesty International received reports that prison conditions for prisoners of conscience had deteriorated. Many were allegedly transferred to overcrowded cells and their books and writing materials confiscated. In addition, several were said to be suffering from severe depressioa
In June 1981 Amnesty International received reports that 60
336
students from Benghazi had been arrested in early May for alleged opposition to national policies. Amnesty International was not able to confirm these reports and the students' whereabouts remained unknowa
Amnesty International also learned in 1981 of the arrest in early
1980	and trial in February 1981 of a number of senior military and civilian officials. They were tried by revolutionary courts set up at the revolutionary committee's annual meeting in February 1980. Amnesty International was concerned that legal safeguards at such trials were inadequate: the tribunals were composed of members of the revolutionary committees rather than of the judiciary, and the rights of the defence were extremely restricted.
Amnesty International was concerned about Law No. 4 of 1981, prohibiting lawyers from practising privately, which came into force. Fears were expressed by the Arab Lawyers' Union about its effects on the independence of lawyers and on their freedom to provide proper legal defence for political prisoners. In November
1981	a number of Libyan lawyers abroad issued a statement denouncing this measure and alleging that the courts were ruled "by the absence of conscience and law".
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Detainees were allegedly tortured in various centres under the authority of the intelligence services and revolutionary committees in Tri|X)li and Benghazi. They were reportedly held incommunicado for long periods and their families not informed of their whereabouts. The most common torture techniques were said to be electric shocks, in particular to the head and genitals, and beatings on the soles of the feet (falaqa).
Libya retains the death penalty for numerous offences,.many of a political nature not involving the use or advocacy of violence. On 25 February 1981 a revolutionary tribunal in Tripoli passed the death sentence in their absence on four Libyans in exile. Mohammad Youssif Lamgarief, former Libyan Ambassador to India, was reported to be one of them. He was one of four senior diplomats abroad who reportedly resigned their positions in 1980 and 1981.
Official calls for the "physical liquidation of enemies of the revolution" cont\n\XQd{sQQ Amnesty International Report 1981). In many official pronouncements and press interviews in 1981 Colonel Gaddafi explicitly sanctioned the continuation of the international assassination campaign against his opponents. On 3 March 1981 several popular bodies, including revolutionary committees, were also reported to have reaffirmed "their determination to liquidate the enemies of the people's authority at home and abroad".
Since the first call for "physical liquidation of enemies of the
337
revolution" in February 1980 more than a dozen Libyan citizens had been killed or wounded in assassination attempts in the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United States of America, Italy, Greece and the Lebanon. In seven of these cases the suspects arrested and brought to trial were Libyan nationals.
