Zambia
Amnesty International's main concerns were detention without trial, allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners, and the conduct of a political trial in which 13 defendants faced charges of treason.
At least 15 people arrested in October 1980 after President Kenneth Kaunda announced that a conspiracy to overthrow the government had been uncovered, were still detained uncharged at the beginning of 1981. They were held under administrative detention orders of unlimited duration imposed under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations and signed by the President. In late 1980 two of the detainees, Edward Shamwana and Valentine Musakanya, had separately applied for writs of habeas corpus to obtain their release. Edward Shamwana, a prominent lawyer and Commissioner of the High Court who was reportedly about to be appointed Acting Chief Justice at the time of his arrest, was unsuccessful. Valentine Musakanya obtained a writ of habeas corpus only to be rearrested immediately and served with a new detention order. Fresh attempts to obtain habeas corpus writs were made by both men in early 1981 but were not successful. They then prepared a comprehensive petition which they tried to have presented to the Speaker and members of the National Assembly. The petition argued that the President's use of the Preservation of Public Security Regulations to authorize indefinite detention without trial was in breach of the constitution. However, the petition was banned by the President on 23 March 1981 before it could be considered by members of parliament.
Ashroff Mansoor, a Sri Lankan lawyer living in Zambia who had helped the detainees compile their petition, was arrested on 27 March, the day the banning of the petition was announced. He was
100
charged with possession of a prohibited publication, namely the petitioa He was acquitted on 20 April by a magistrate but then summarily deported. When the petition was banned Edward Sham-wana and Valentine Musakanya were moved from Lusaka prison to prisons at Chipata and Lundazi in eastern Zambia. They remained virtually in solitary confinement until they were returned to Lusaka to be charged in May 1981.
Amnesty International urged the government in January 1981 and again in April to release these detainees if they were not to be charged and brought to trial. In May 12 were charged with treason. In addition Brigadier-General Godfrey Miyanda, earlier described as a leading conspirator by President Kaunda, was brought back to Zambia from Zaire in May in unexplained circumstances and added to the list of accused. He claimed that he had been kidnapped in Zai re by Zambian security officers and forcibly returned in chains to Lusaka. He later sought a writ of habeas corpus alleging illegal detention, but in November the High Court dismissed his application and declared his detention valid.
The 13 defendants were all remanded in custody after their first court appearance in May but their trial did not start at once. The Attorney General ordered them to be sent for summary trial in the High Court without a preliminary hearing in a magistrates' court The defendants objected, arguing that the Attorney General had exceeded his powers, but their efforts to obtain a preliminary hearing were unsuccessful. The trial was eventually set down to start in November but procedural argument caused further delays and it had not begun by the end of the year.
In August one of the defendants, Major-General Christopher Kabwe, was suddenly released without explanation. He had been appointed to command the air force only days before his arrest in October 1980 and was regarded as one of the principal accused. He was apparently released unconditionally although his name was added to the list of witnesses to be summoned to give evidence for the state. His release coincided with the arrest of Mundia Sikatana, a Lusaka lawyer, whose partner had gone to South Africa shortly before the discovery of the alleged'conspiracy and had subsequently been named as a main conspirator. Mundia Sikatana was placed under a presidential detention order. He was also added to the list of accused in the treason trial although he was said to have previously received a presidential pardon in return for information about the alleged plot
Two other lawyers were among a number of people detained in June and July following reports that the government had discovered a plan to set free the treason trial defendants and overthrow the government Geoffrey Haamaundu, a Lusaka lawyer, was arrested in
101
June and allegedly beaten during interrogation by security officers. His case was taken up for investigation by Amnesty International. On 2 July Nkaka Chisanga Puta, Valentine Musakanya's defence counsel, was arrested at his office in Ndola. He was taken to Lilayi Police Training Camp near Lusaka where he was allegedly threatened and tortured during three days' interrogation. His relatives were not informed and his whereabouts were not disclosed until more than a week after his arrest. No detention order was issued until 9 July, by which time he had been illegally detained for seven days. He was placed under a presidential detention order of indefinite duration on 14 July, and this was still in force at the end of the year. An application for habeas corpus was dismissed by the Lusaka High Court in late November although the trial judge reportedly ordered that he should be compensated for the ill-treatment he had suffered in custody. He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
Allegations of torture were also made by Ronald Chansa, an army major arrested in June in connection with the alleged escape plot In an affidavit to the High Court, he claimed that he had been beaten and subjected to mock execution while under interrogation by security police at Lilayi and then taken blindfolded to an unidentified place where he was tortured He too was held under a presidential detention order and had not been charged by the end of 1981.
On 27 July four leading trade union officials were detained under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations follówing months of industrial unrest particularly on the Copperbelt, and growing tension between the government and trade unions. Those detained were Frederick Chiluba, Chairman of the Zambia Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU), Newstead Zimba, the ZCTU's Secretary General and his deputy, Chitala Sampa, and Timothy Walamba, Vice-Chairman of the Mineworkers' Union of Zambia. President Kaunda accused the trade union leaders of instigating strikes and holdmg secret meetings with the aim of bringing down the government For a time further industrial strife seemed imminent but there was no general strike. The four trade union leaders all challenged their detention orders in the High Court by applying for writs of habeas corpus and on 28 October Frederick Chiluba's release was ordered by the Lusaka High Court The state gave notice that it would appeal against the judgment but no new detention order was imposed. The Ndola High Court ordered the release of Newstead Zimba on 9 November and, four days later, the release of Chitala Sampa and Timothy Walamba, ruling that their detention orders were invalid.
Amnesty International was not able to estimate the number of detainees held under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations but they were believed to total more than 100. They included several
102
held without charge or trial for a number of years, such as Emmanuel Mwamba, a businessman and former diplomat who had been held since August 1979 for allegedly distributing subversive literature. Another detainee, Faustinos Lombe, was detained without trial from late 1978 to March 1981, when the Supreme Court ordered his release. He was rearrested in July 1981 under a new detention order and was still reportedly held uncharged at the end of the year.
The use of detention without trial was criticized by the Law Association of Zambia and by a number of members of parliament and former prominent politicians in early 1981. However, in May Ludwig Sondashi, Minister of State for Legal Affairs, rejected calls for a government review of the detention laws but invited the Law Association to make proposals on possible amendments.
No political detainees were included in an amnesty granted in October to mark the 17 th anniversary of independence although more than 150 criminal prisoners were released
