Romania
As in past years Amnesty International learned of Romanian citizens who were imprisoned as a result of their attempts to obtain official permission to emigrate or because they had tried to leave the country without official authorization, generally after their applications to emigrate had been refused repeatedly by the authorities. Such people were frequently accused of "parasitical" or "anarchic" conduct, an offence punishable under Decree 153/1970. This decree, which allows for summary trial without legal defence, provides sentences of up to six months' imprisonment or compulsory "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty". This punishment means that a person is assigned to a particular place of work, may not leave the area without the permission of the local militia, and receives greatly reduced wages. Elisabeth Simut, aged 26, from Dubraveni was arrested in early June while attempting to leave the country without official authorization and was sentenced to six months' imprisonment under Decree 153/1970. Before her arrest she had repeatedly but
287
unsuccessfully applied for permission to be reunited with her husband who had lived in the Federal Republic of Germany since 1979. Other would-be emigrants were sentenced under Article 245 of the criminal code which makes the attempt to cross the border without official permission an offence punishable by six months' to three years' imprisonment or "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty".
Among such prisoners of conscience were loan Duda, a 33-year-old Seventh Day Adventist from Bucharest, who was arrested in August while trying to cross the border near Timisoara. He was reportedly sentenced under Article 245 to one year's imprisonment Another was Gheorghe Sirbu who was arrested in November 1980 near the border with Yugoslavia while making his third attempt to leave Romania without official permission. He was reportedly attacked by frontier guard dogs and so severely beaten by members of the security forces that he had to be admitted to hospital. In April he was sentenced by a court in Braila to 10 months' corrective labour at a work site in Bordei Verde. In August he escaped from Bordei Verde and again tried to leave the country by crossing the Danube to Yugoslavia using diving equipment. He was once more arrested and detained
On 20 August a presidential decree was issued which granted pardons to people serving prison sentences of up to five years and reduced by one sixth sentences of five to eight years' imprisonment The decree excluded people convicted of murder, robbery, rape, giving or taking bribes, indecent assault and escape from prison. Some prisoners of conscience were released, including Silvia Tamiceru and Elena Boghian who had been sentenced in March to 15 months' imprisonment for trying to leave the country without permission. Also freed were five Christians sentenced in January to prison terms of between one-and-a-half and four years in connection with the smuggling of Bibles into the USSR (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of the adopted prisoner of conscience. Father Calciu-Dumitreasa, a Romanian Orthodox priest, who was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in 1979. He was reportedly charged with " conspiracy" because of an alleged connection with the founders of the Sindicatul Liber al Oamenilor Muncii din Romania (SLOMR), the Free Trade Union of Romanian Workers, a movement founded in early 1979 for the protection of human rights, in particular those of workers (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Father Calciu was confined to Jilava Prison Hospital at the end of 1980 after going on hunger-strike in protest against prison conditions and to demand a public retrial. In September 1981 he was reported to have gone on hunger-strike again.
288
According to reports received by Amnesty International he was protesting against being treated with drugs against his will. He was forcibly fed by the prison authorities. His health was believed to have seriously deteriorated and Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for his release.
Active Christians, many of them members of Protestant evangelical sects, who demanded greater religious freedom continued to be persecuted Those who held religious services without official approval or who tried to distribute religious works despite official restrictions were particularly penalized In November Amnesty International appealed for the release of Klaus Wagner, a member of the Brethren Church from Sighisoara, and for the release of Fibia and Maria Delapeta from Carpinis, members of the Lord's Army, a sect of the Romanian Orthodox Church which was not officially recognized They were reportedly arrested at the beginning of October in connection witii the smuggling of Bibles into Romania and their distribution, after the authorities had discovered and confiscated a large number of Bibles on a ship which docked at Tumu Severin at the end of September. Amnesty International received allegations that Klaus Wagner was so badly beaten by the police after his arrest that by early November he was still under intensive care in hospital. It was reported that neither he nor the Delapeta sisters were allowed access to defence counsel during investigation proceedings. On 17 December Klaus Wagner was sentenced to six years' imprisonment reportedly on charges of complicity in bringing contraband into Romania. Fibia and Maria Delapeta are said to have been sentenced to five years' imprisonment each on similar charges.
During 1981 Amnesty International received many other reports of religious dissenters being arrested They included: the Pentecostal preacher Gavrila Giurgiu from Cluj; Silviu and Mircea Cioata, members of the Brethren Church from Ploiesti; the Baptist loan Teodosiu from Cluj; and the Romanian Orthodox priest Ambrus Cemat All were reportedly members of the Apararea Libertatii Religioase si de Constiinta (ALRC), the Romanian Christian Committee for the Defence of Freedom of Religion and Conscience, founded in May 1978 by a group of Christians critical of official restrictions on religious freedom. During their detention in police custody they were reportedly threatened and intimidated in an attempt to dissuade them from their religious activities and from maintaining contacts with religious believers abroad Some, including loan Teodosiu and Gavrila Giurgiu (who was reportedly beaten in police custody), were fined for writing letters to foreign radio stations and religious organizations. Such reports raised serious concern about the treatment of people in custody and pre-trial detention, and
289
about the efficacy of legal safeguards.
Former prisoners of conscience consistently reported that during investigation proceedings they were denied access to defence counsel and had little access to relatives. Political trials were almost invariably held in camera, or with only immediate family members present Amnesty International did not know of any political trials which resulted in acquittal.
Reports from former prisoners of conscience described prison conditions as poor, with serious overcrowding and inadequate food and medical care, in particular in the prisons of Aiud, Gherla and Galati.
In December Amnesty International appealed to Head of State President Ceausescu to commute the death sentences, confirmed by the Supreme Court, passed on Gheorghe Gheorghita, Nicu Bade a and Gheorghe Stefanescu. Gheorghe Gheorghita and Nicu Badea had been convicted of particularly grave murder. Gheorghe Stefanescu, a Bucharest wine merchant, was convicted of "embezzlement with especially grave consequences". According to press reports he was found guilty of having amassed large profits from the sale of adulterated wine obtained illegally. He was also convicted of corruption and trafficking in favours. This death sentence conflicted with official policy statements in 1977, according to which, in a pending reform of the criminal code, the death penalty would no longer be imposed for economic crimes.
