Kampuchea
Little information on individual prisoners of conscience was available in 198L On 8 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Government of the People's Republic ofKampuchea(PRK) to introduce its work and inquire about certain of its concerns. It asked about officials and soldiers of the former administration of Democratic Kampuchea who had been sent for "re-education" in accordance with Decision No. 2 of the Instructions of the People's Revolutionary Council Regarding Criminals, of 15 April 1979. According to these instructions former officials and soldiers had to appear before the new local authorities. Those who had "contracted a blood debt vis-à-vis the people", that is, had been responsible for murder, were to be tried Those against whom there was no such evidence were to be "re-educated" about the political policies and values of the new government. Most of these were believed to have been released.
Amnesty International urged the release of political prisoners who had not used or advocated violence, including those detained under the provisions of a memorandum from the Interior Ministry of 29 November 1979 on the arrest and "re-education" of "any person carrying out propaganda campaigns to sabotage internal unity and the Kampuchea-Laos-Viet Nam soHdarity". It asked for information on Theam Sovanneirand, a radio broadcaster arrested in January 1980. It also expressed concern that Article 3, paragraph (d) of Decree Law No. 2-DL of 15 May 1980, which prescribes the imprisonment of "any counter-revolutionary who injures the people's unity, [or] opposes the domestic and foreign policies of the revolutionary power", might be used to detain people for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expressioa
According to unconfirmed reports about 20 government officials were arrested in early December 1981. They included Pen Sovan, who resigned from his posts as Head of the Council of Ministers and Secretary General of the Kampuchea People's Revolutionary Party on 5 December 1981; Ros S amay, former Minister of Economy and Planning and several directors of government departments. Ros Samay was said to have been under house arrest for most of the year. Observers suggested that they were arrested because of their dissenting views on the government's foreign policy.
Alleged supporters of various armed opposition groups were also detained. These groups included the army of the Government of
207
Democratic Kampuchea (Khmers rouges), overthrown in January 1979, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front(KPNLF), and the Moulinaka forces led by Norodom Sihanouk, Others were also believed to have been arrested because of non-violent opposition to the government. Amnesty International asked about reports that in early 1981 a number of people were arrested for possessing a tape-recording of a message from Norodom Sihanouk,
The National Assembly elected on 1 May 1981 adopted the first constitution of the PRK on 24 June 1981. The constitution guarantees freedom of religious belief, speech, press and assembly; the right to set up associations as defined by law and to join mass organizations; the right to active participation in the political, social and cultural life of the country; the right to petition state organs and mass organizations; the right not to be arrested, detained or charged except as provided by law and the right to have the evidence for an arrest reviewed promptly by a competent body. The right to freedom of expression and assembly is limited by considerations of public order and national security; religious activities have to respect people's interests. All rights are restricted by the duty of all citizens to '"carry out the state's political line" and "to serve state affairs".
In its letter Amnesty International welcomed the prohibition of cruelty towards imprisoned officials and soldiers of Democratic Kampuchea contained in the Instructions of the People's Revolutionary Council Regarding Criminals of 15 April 1979. It recommended that the government introduce into the constitution the right of all prisoners not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
Decree Law No. 2-DL provides the death penalty for counterrevolutionary activities, treason and certain criminal offences. Unconfirmed reports have been received of criminal offenders being executed Amnesty International urged the government not to seek the imposition of the death penalty, to commute those sentences already imposed and to abolish this punishment
208
