Israel and the
Occupied Territories
Amnesty International's concerns in Israel and the Occupied Territories were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the use of administrative measures to physically restrict individuals or detain them without charge or trial, and the lack of effective safeguards to protect those in custody from ill-treatment
During 1981 Amnesty International called for the release of 28 prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 12 possible prisoners of conscience.
Ten of the prisoners of conscience were administrative detainees, of whom nine were released during the year. Administrative detention (provided for under Article 111 of the 1945 Defence (Emergency) Regulations for Israel proper, and Military Order 815 for the Occupied Territories) enables the authorities to hold individuals without charge or trial for renewable periods of up to six months. Ali Awad al-Jamal, on whose behalf Amnesty International continued to work, had been detained in this way since May 1975. On 1 June 1981 five Druze leaders from the occupied Golan Heights (annexed by Israel on 15 December 1981) were served with three-month administrative detention orders. These were renewed on 1 September 1981 for another three months. Their detention followed the publication of a "National Covenant of the Syrian Citizens of the Occupied Golan Heights", written and signed by 30 members of the Druze community. The covenant opposed the authorities' policy of issuing Syrian Arabs in the Golan Heights with Israeli identity cards, and condemned those who were willing to accept Israeli citizenship. The five Druze leaders were released in October 1981.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of 12 prisoners of conscience physically restricted by administrative order. Under Article 110 of the 1945 Defence (Emergency) Regulations for Israel proper and Article 86 of the 1970 Security Provisions Order 378 for the Occupied Territories, the military autiiorities are empowered to impose restrictions on individuals. These included confinement to a particular town, village or district house arrest and limitations on travel. Individuals could be restricted without being formally charged or brought before a court of law, since the Military Commander issuing the order is under no obligation to specify the alleged offence. Restriction orders were usually issued for an initial period of six
331
months, and could be repeatedly renewed Amnesty International knew of 11 people restricted in this way for 18 months. The law allows appeals against such orders to the Supreme Court of Justice in Israel, but this court rarely reversed the decision of the Military Commander.
Amnesty International was concerned about the increasing use of restriction orders, which were imposed on prominent Palestinian politicians, journalists, lawyers and trade unionists, among others. It learned of 48 restriction orders issued in 1980 and 1981. Amnesty International feared that restriction orders may have been imposed on people solely for their non-violent political activity and the nonviolent exercise of their right to freedom of expression.
In one such case two residents of the Golan Heights were placed under town and house arrest for refusing to accept Israeli identity cards. On 12 August 1981 the restriction orders against the editors of three important East Jerusalem newspapers — Bashir Barghuti of Al-Tali'a, Ma'mumal-Sayyidof.i4/-/'iy>andAkramHaniyyehof.4/-Sha'ab — were renewed for a further six months. They had been under town arrest since 7 August 1980. Eight members of the Bir Zeit University Student Council were placed under restriction orders for six months for allegedly inciting students to demonstrate against the introduction on 1 November 1981 of a civilian administration on the West Bank, replacing military rule in certain fields.
Four IsraeH Arabs from the village of Umm al-Fahm — Ghassan Aghbaria, Raja Aghbaria, Hassan Ahmad Jabarin and Muhammad Salama Mahajina — were placed under town and house arrest on 26 June 1980 for six months. Their restriction orders were renewed on 27 December 1980 and again on 5 July 1981 for additional periods of six months each. The four Arabs were active members of Abna' al-Balad, a legal organization in Israel whose declared aims were equal rights for the Arab citizens of Israel and their right to self-determination.
In response to inquiries by Amnesty International about restriction orders the Attorney General stated "such orders are issued in very few and special cases where there are grounds to believe that the individual against whom such an order is issued is involved in activities endangering public order and safety". Amnesty International was concerned that, since neither the restricted person nor his or her lawyer were given details of the charges, they were unable to refute the evidence or challenge the orders.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the imprisonment of individuals refusing to do military service in the Israeli Defence Forces. Prison sentences of from one month to one year were passed on Israeli Jews refusing to serve in the Occupied Territories and on draft resisters from the Druze community, for whom military
332
conscription was compulsory. Gadi Elgazi, an Israeli high school student, was adopted as a prisoner of conscience after being sentenced to one year's imprisonment for refusing to serve in the Occupied Territories. He was released in March 1981 after having served half his sentence.
In previous years Amnesty International had been concerned at the sentencing of prisoners of conscience for security offences specified under the Defence (Emergency) Regulations of 1945 and subsequent administrative orders. In 1981 Amnesty International was also concerned about people charged and sentenced under the amendment to the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance, promulgated in July 1980. The amendment made it an offence to commit "public acts of sympathy with 'terrorist organizations' " by means of placards, slogans, flags or anthems.
Such acts may be punished by up to three years' imprisonment. Three residents from Shafa 'Amr — 'Ali Sakhniye, Ibrahim Nafawi and ' Aref Hamadi — were among the first to be charged under this law. They were sentenced to three to four months' imprisonment on 1 September 1981 for distributing leaflets declaring that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) was the "sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people". On 23 September two Arab students from the Hebrew University were sentenced to three months' imprisonment and a nine months' suspended sentence under the same law. Bassam Sa'adi and Mohammad Zghayar were charged with distributing leaflets on campus supporting the PLO. Amnesty International believed that they had been convicted for the non-violent expression of political views.
Amnesty International made inquiries about Rabbi Uri Blau, one of a group of ultra-orthodox Jews who protested in September against an archeological dig seeking to uncover the biblical city of King David. He was charged with illegal assembly and sentenced to three months' imprisonment with a six-month suspended sentence.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned that certain legal provisions and practices enhanced the possibility of ill-treatment and that existing administrative procedures did not enable the Israeli authorities to bring forward conclusive evidence to refute allegations of ill-treatment (see Report and Recommendations of an Amnesty International Mission to the Government of the State of Israel, published in 1980). On 11 November 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Israeli authorities expressing concern about reports of the deaths of three prisoners in custody. It asked for information on the circumstances leading to their deaths and for details of medical findings. Salah 'Abbas died on 14 September 1981 in Ashkelon Prison Hospital and 'Ali Shatarit died on 19 October in Ashkelon
333
Prison. Faiz 'Abd al-Fattah Tarayra died on 26 October in Tel Hashomer Hospital. He had reportedly complained to his lawyer of ill-treatment during his four months' detention, and was admitted to hospital twice before his death with a cerebral haemorrhage. Medical records made available to Amnesty International stated that Salah 'Abbas and *Ali Shatarit both died of heart attacks (coronary occlusion) and that Faiz 'Abd a!-Fattah Tarayra died as a result of a blood-clot (embolism) in his bt"ain.
The death penalty is retained under Israeli law but is not mandatory. Until 1979 standing orders from the Attorney General and the army prosecutor general prevented prosecutors from asking foi- the death sentence. In April 1979 the Israeli cabinet sanctioned the use of the death penalty for "acts of inhuman cruelty", but no death sentences were passed. On 17 December 1981 four Palestinians —' Adnan Jabir, Yasir Zaidat, Muhammad Shubaki and Taisir Taha — were sentenced to life imprisonment by the Nablus military court. They were found guilty of an attack on Jewish settlers in Beit Hadassah in May 1980, in which six Jews were killed and 16 wounded. The military prosecutor demanded life sentences for the four Arabs although "two of the three judges had wanted to impose tiie death sentence" {Jerusalem Post, 18 November 1981). The last execution to be carried out irf Israel was in 1961.
■	
	yj* ^ fa
