Syria
345
The main concerns of Amnesty Intemational continued to be the wide powers of arrest and detention used to detain hundreds of political prisoners, detention without trial, summary procedures in trials of political prisoners by state security and military courts, the use of torture and the death penalty. Many of these violations took place under provisions of the state of emergency which had been in force since 1963. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned by increasing reports of human rights violations by Syrian security forces, including arbitrary imprisonment of political prisoners, "disappearances", extra-legal executions and torture.
During 1981 Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of 70 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 76 possible prisoners of conscience. It learned of the release of 18 prisoners including Dr Youssef Zu'ayyen, former Prime Minister of Syria in the 1960s, who had been held without charge or trial for more than a decade in al-Mezze military prison, Damascus. Dr Zu'ayyen was one of 18 Amnesty Intemational adopted prisoners of conscience who had either served in or were connected with the previous government They were arrested after the November 1970 coup which brought President Hafez Assad to power, reportedly for refusing to collaborate with the new government After his release in late 1981 Dr Zu' ayyen was flown to a hospital in London for an emergency operation. Amnesty Intemational had issued medical appeals on his behalf several times. Two other members of this group of prisoners, Major 'Abdul Karim Nassif and Mahmud Yunis, were also reported to have been released during 1981.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release of 'Abdul Hamid Husain Sino and Nazir Shams al-Din Mustapha, two of seven Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) members held without trial since 1973, who were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Nine Kurds were originally detained for protesting in a memorandum to President Assad against the displacement of Syrian Kurds from their homes in northem Syria Two were released in 1980 but no information was made available on the fate or whereabouts of the other five Kurds in this group.
The 23 lawyers adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience in December 1980 were not charged or tried but reports reaching Amnesty Intemational at the end of 1981 suggested that several might have been released The lawyers were arrested in April
346
1980 after the government had dissolved the General Congress and regional councils of the Syrian Bar Association (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Temporary councils were appointed by the government until elections in October 1981. At the same time the Doctors' and Engineers' Associations councils were dissolved and council members were arrested. In August 1981 a new law, No. 39, was introduced to replace law No. 14 of 22 April 1972 concerning the tasks and aims of the legal profession. As a result of the concern expressed in regional and international legal circles the Arab Lawyers' Union set up a special committee to study the extent to which this law might affect the independence of the legal profession and the rights of the defence.
In February 1981 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 10 members of the banned Communist Party Pohtical Bureau (CPPB), including its Secretary General, Riad al-Turk, and his wife' Asmah al-Feisal. Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Riad al-Turk after reports that he had been tortured and rushed to an intensive care unit of a hospital in Damascus for emergency treatment Reports received later in the year put the number of detained CPPB members at oyer 200. Amnesty International was investigating reports that several members of the legal Syrian Communist Party, led by Khalid Bakdash, were detained at the time of the elections for the Syrian Peoples' Assembly in November 1981. The Communist Party lost all its seats at the elections.
Another case of concern to Amnesty International was that of' Aql Qurban, a44-year-old former Syrian police officer who was abducted from the Lebanon by Syrian security forces in 1970 and detained without trial ever since in al^ezze military prison, Damascus. He was reportedly suffering from a serious kidney complaint, was partially paralysed, almost blind and periodically lapsed into unconsciousness. A former prisoner in al-Mezze military prison informed Amnesty International that 'Aql Qurban, on whose behalf Amnesty International appealed in June 1978 and August 1981, was for the most part held in solitary confinement in the prison.
Amnesty International continued to receive disturbing information about human rights violations by the security forces and specifically by the Saray	SpecialDefence Units) under the command of
President Assad's brother, Rifa'at Assad. The security forces possess extraordinary powers of arrest and detention under emergency legislation. They used these powers often in recent years after acts of sabotage, assassinations and attempts on the lives of President Assad and people associated with his government Security forces frequently sealed off large areas in towns, conducted house-to-house searches and arrested numerous inhabitants. Many detainees were taken away
347
in lorries to unknown destinations.
In October Amnesty International began investigating the cases of 38 youths detained in the town of Deir al-Zor following an anti-government demonstration. Three months after their arrest they were transferred to an unknown destination and, despite appeals to President Assad, their parents were not told their fate or whereabouts.
Amnesty International was also investigating the "disappearance" of Tawfiq Drak al-Siba'i, a 35-year-old neurologist and father of five. In May 1980 he was summoned to the office of the head of prisons in the town of Homs after a letter sent to him by relatives in Saudi Arabia was intercepted by the Syrian censors. On 2 June 1980, a week after his arrest, he was transferred to an unknown destination. The prison authorities in Homs denied any knowledge of his whereabouts when approached by his relatives. Amnesty International submitted details of his case to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
During 1981 Amnesty International received numerous allegations of torture and ill-treatment and more than 50 torture testimonies from former prisoners who had been detained by the security forces at different times and in different prisons between June 1979 and April 1981. The methods of torture most commonly referred to were: beatings, whippings with steel cables while suspended in a tyre (dullab), beatings on the soles of the feet (fallaqa), cigarette burns, sexual molestation and electric shocks. Although Amnesty International was not able to verify fully these allegations they were consistent with reports received over many years, some of which were supported by medical evidence (see Amnesty International Report 1981 diTid Amnesty International Briefing: Syria, 1978). Amnesty International was concerned that the security forces were routinely and systematically torturing detained security suspects.
In June 1981 the Syrian News Agency, SANA, reported the execution by firing squad of two Syrian soldiers and a civilian after they had been found guilty of murder and theft by a military court in Tartous. Although these were the only executions officially acknowledged in 1981 there were numerous unconfirmed reports of executions. They were reported to have taken place in public and within prison walls, after trials by military courts with summary rules of procedure which denied the defendants the right to defence by lawyers and the right of appeal.
On the night of 23 April 1981 Syrian security forces reportedly sealed off parts of the town of Hama, carried out house-to-house searches, dragged residents from their homes, lined them up in the streets and shot them. Some reports putthe number killed at 350, with over 600 injured. Amnesty International received the names of over
348
100 of those reported killed. In July 1981 Amnesty International wrote to President Assad of Syria expressing grave concern about the reports and asking him to set up a commission of inquiry to examine the facts and make public its findings. Amnesty International also referred to its letter of August 1980, following reports of the massacre of hundreds of prisoners at Tadmur (Palmyra) Prison, and to its request for a similar inquiry at that time. Amnesty International received no response from the Syrian authorities.
Amnesty International was also concerned about allegations that Syrian security forces were responsible for the assassination abroad of several prominent exiles opposed to the government After the assassination of Salah al-Din al-Bitar in Paris in July 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1981), Banan Ali Tantawi, wife of 'Issam al-'Attar, the Director of the Islamic Centre in Aachen, Federal Republic of Germany, and a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, was shot dead at her home in Aachen, In November 1981 Nizar al-Sabbagh, in exile from Syria for over 10 years and the leader of the Muslim Brotherhood in Spain, was killed by unknown assailants in the streets of Barcelona. It was reported that the Syrian authorities had, on several occasions, unsuccessfully sought his extradition.
