Sri Lanka
Amnesty Interaational's concerns were the continued use of the Prevention of Terrorism Act which suspends important legal safeguards and provides for incommunicado detention in undisclosed places; allegations of arbitrary arrest and torture by the army and poUce; the reported deaths in police and army custody of several civilians in the Tamil-speaking northern province; and the extension of the death penalty. A few non-political detainees also died in police custody allegedly as a result of ill-treatment Amnesty International remained concerned that the "disappearance" of three young Tamils in July 1979 was not clarified.
In April and May 1981 some 30 members of the Tamil minority were arrested without warrant and held incommunicado following a bank raid in Neerveli in which two policemen were killed Their relatives were not informed of their whereabouts or the reason for their detention. On 30 April and 11 June Amnesty International expressed its concern to President J.R Jayewardene about these reports and urged him to allow all detainees immediate access to lawyers and relatives. It called on the government to publish the names of those arrested and the charges against them; and if no charges were brought, to release them.
The government replied to worldwide Amnesty International appeals in May and June by stating that acts of violence had occurred It described the detainees as "terrorists whose names were known to the poUce and who had been avoiding arrest". It said that their cases were being investigated and that they would be charged or released. It also stated that the families of the detainees were aware of the detentions and where the prisoners were held However, at the end of 1981, 22 were still held without charge or trial in Panagoda Army Camp; five in solitary confinement The government stated that it had been found "essential" for detainees held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act not to be allowed to see their lawyers until preliminary inquiries had been " successfully completed". Amnesty International subsequently received allegations that all the detainees had been tortured. Habeas corpus petitions on behalf of four detainees resulted in their first court appearance on 28 July, and their first meeting with lawyers on the courfs order one day eariier. On 20 August Amnesty International cabled the President welcoming the news that four detainees had been brought to court but expressed its concern at
242
reports of torture and ill-treatment contained in the habeas corpus petitions. In its judgment on these petitions of 21 September the Appeal Court ruled that torture and ill-treatment had occurred in two cases (S. Arunagirinathan and Chelliah Kulasegararajasingham); in a third case the court said that the allegation of severe assault was " exaggerated" but added that "the use of violence of whatever degree on a prisoner is illegal". By the end of 1981 other detainees were still awaiting their first meeting with a lawyer. The detainees were held under the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act which allows detention without trial for up to 18 months " in such place and subject to such conditions as may be determined by the Minister", that is, without safeguards to protect them during detention. Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 22 of the detainees to establish whether they were prisoners of conscience.
A few days before the District Development Council elections of 4 June 1981 violence broke out in Jaffna. Two police officers were killed and two others injured at an election rally held by the Tamil United Liberation Front Subsequently, the police reportedly set fire to buildings, beat residents and looted shops. A state of emergency was (temporarily) imposed on the northern district on 2 June. In eariy June at least four Tamils were reportedly killed by members of the army and police. Velupillai Balajothy was shot by a soldier at the home of a Tamil member of parHament at Tiruelvely. Kanapathupillai Shanmugam Nadesu and S. Parameswaran were reportedly shot in custody by police after having been taken away in a police jeep. Another Tamil, Mr Navaratnam, died in hospital, reportedly as a result of assault by the police. Amnesty International cabled the President on 11 June expressing its concern at the killings and urging the government to conduct an independent inquiry and to publish the findings in full.
A Parliamentary Select Committee was set up in 1979 to investigate the reported deaths in police custody of three young Tamils and the "disappearance" of three others: R. Balendran, S. Parameswaran and S. Rajeswaran. After two years it had still not completed its report The fate of the three "disappeared" men remained unknown: their families said they were arrested by the police in July 1979 and beheved that they had died in pohce custody as a result of torture. The government apparently denied that they had been arrested. Amnesty International submitted information about these three "disappeared" Tamils on 20 March to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances estabUshed by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.
In July and August 1981 violence broke out between the Sinhalese and minority Tamil communities throughout the country; 25 people
243
were reported to have died On 17 August the government reimposed the state of emergency, which had been in force from 2 to 9 June, and invoked the PubUc Security Act prescribing the death penalty for arson and looting. On 25 August emergency regulations were promulgated allowing the death penalty to be imposed in the northern province for unlawful possession and transport of weapons and explosives. The onus was put on the suspect to prove legitimate possession of the firearms. In November the Sri Lankan press reported that the government intended to make the death penalty mandatory for certain offences under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, but these reports were not confirmed Amnesty International cabled the President on both 20 and 28 August expressing concern at the successive extensions of the application of the death penalty and urging the government to revoke them. In a letter to the President on 27 October Amnesty International welcomed the government's announcement on 17 October of the commutation of death sentences imposed for criminal offences on 32 mea Although death sentences had been passed since the United National Party government assumed office in 1977, no executions took place.
Amnesty International was investigating reports that students and sympathizers with left-wing parties, including the Janata Vimukhti Peramua (JVP), the Communist Party and the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP), had been arrested since late 1981 for calling for the reinstatement of dismissed strikers and for participating in peaceful demonstrations against the government's White Paper on education. A number were reportedly detained for several weeks having apparently been arrested under the broad provisions of Section 120 of the penal code, which deals with incitement to disaffection, and denies bail.
A prisoner whose case had been investigated by Amnesty International was released on bail on 15 December. D.I.G. Dharmasekera, the General Secretary of the Lanka Democratic Front, was arrested on 8 August 1980 in connection with the general strike of 18 July 1980. At the time of his release on bail he had not been charged or tried
By 31 December 1981 Amnesty Internarional had still not received the government's comments on its memorandum submitted in May 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Amnesty International had been informed in November 1980 that it would receive a formal reply to the memorandum. On 27 October 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the President requesting discussions with the government about the implementation of the recommendations in the memorandum, only one of which had been implemented by the government by June 1980 when it ratified the International
244
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (but not the Optional Protocol to the former as Amnesty International had recommended). Concerned about the human rights violations reported to it during 1981, Amnesty International proposed to the government that a mission visit the country.
		i
		
		„ ^
