Italy
Amnesty Intemational's main concern was that people accused of politically motivated crimes were held in preventive detention for excessive periods. It continued to work for the rights of conscientious objectors to military service.
Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which Italy has ratified, states that "... everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time" and Amnesty Intemational, under Article 1(b) of its Statute, opposes ". . . by all appropriate means the detention of any Prisoner of Conscience or any political prisoner without trial within a reasonable time . . .".
All people detained on suspicion of politically motivated crimes were affected by the law of 6 Febmary 1980, Urgent Measures for the Protection of the Democratic Order and Public Security. In cases involving terrorism or "subversion of the democratic order" the law allows the period within which each of the four stages of the judicial process must be completed to be extended by one third In the most serious cases this could mean a period of up to 10 years and eight
277
months before a final verdict is reached (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981).
The "7 April/21 December" case (so called because most ofthe defendants were arrested on these days in 1979) was of mounting concern to Amnesty International. By the end of 19 81 the defendants had been held for between two and two-and-a-half years. They were allegedly connected with the extra-parliamentary left-wing movement Autonomia Operaia (Workers' Autonomy). The judicial investigation into the activities of this movement and groups allegedly linked to it, accused of violent subversion of the Italian state, was split into two parts, one conducted in Padua, the other in Rome. Although the inquiries were completed, trial dates had still not been fixed by the end of the year.
Sixty-mne ofthe defendants in the Rome inquiry and another 69 defendants in the original Paduan inquiry were committed for trial in 1981. Charges were withdrawn against a further 65 people. The order committing the defendants for trial of the investigating judge in Padua, Dr Giovanni Palombarini, dated 4 September 1981, argued against a basic contention of the prosecution case. The prosecution maintained that, as members or leaders of the defunct Porere Operazb (Workers' Power), a number of the defendants had constituted or participated in an armed band, and that they had continued their subversive and armed activities in a subsequent organization, Autonomia Operaia, In his 1,045-page committal for trial order Dr Palombarini argued in considerable detail thatPoiere Operaio asiA Autonomia Operaia could not in themselves be classed as armed bands, although he did not dispute that within them individual people or groups had carried out armed activities.
The cases being investigated by Amnesty International were among those in which all charges were dropped Some of these defendants had been closely associated, at the Political Science Faculty of Padua University, with Antonio Negri, a leading defendant of the Rome inquiry. Alisa del Re, Alessandro Serafini, Massimo Tramonte, Guido Bianchini and Carmela di Rocco had been rearrested in January 1981 after a successful appeal by the prosecuting authorities against their earlier release (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
Luciano Ferrari-Bravo, whose case was also being investigated by Amnesty International, was charged with "insurrection" under an arrest warrant issued by the Paduan authorities on 7 April 1979. Because the charge referred to organizing and leading the Red Brigades and to crimes which the Red Brigades had committed in various places, his case was transferred to Rome. On 7 July 1979 the Rome authorities substituted a fresh warrant in place of the earlier
278
one. He was charged with establishing an armed band, subversive association and provoking civil war. The charge of insurrection was also retained. However all references to the Red Brigades, although not formally withdrawn, had disappeared from the warrant They were replaced by references to "several variously named armed bands". He was not charged with any specific act of violence. The charge of provoking civil war was later dropped, but a recommendation from the Procura Generale (Attorney General's office) that the charge of insurrection be withdrawn was rejected by the judge. Committed for trial in Rome on 1 April 1981, Luciano Ferrari-Bravo had been held in preventive detention since April 1979 even though he had not been examined by an investigating judge since July 1979. Dr Palombarini criticized the fact that the case of Luciano Ferrari-Bravo had been transferred to Rome. In his view evidence had not been provided that would justify his prosecution on these charges.
In January 1981 fresh charges were brought against several "7 April" defendants being held at Trani maximum security prison, in connection with the kidnapping of Judge Giovanni D'Urso by the Red Brigades (see Amnesty International Report 1981). The prisoners wrote a document disclaiming all part in the kidnapping and in a riot which took place in the prison on 28 December 1980. On 23 May 1981 the investigating judge Dr Ferdinando Imposimato dropped charges against these defendants on grounds of "absolute lack of proof of responsibility".
On 22 October 1981 Amnesty International wrote to Severino Santiapichi, President of the First Section of the Assize Court of Rome, about a "7 April" defendant the Genovese surgeon Dr Giorgio Raiteri, who was seriously ill. On 29 September 1981 the President of the Order of Doctors of Genoa, Professor Eolo Parodi, informed Amnesty International that, despite having been in intensive care for over two months at the Regional Hospital of Genoa, Dr Raiteri's health was continuing to deteriorate. In view of his prolonged preventive detention Amnesty International asked for the decisions to continue his custody to be reviewed (decisions of the Rome Assize Court and Rome Appeal Court of 22 July and 18 August respectively). It requested President Santiapichi to take every possible step to prevent a further deterioration in the health of the prisoner. Amnesty International received no reply.
On 10 August 1981 Amnesty International wrote to investigating judge Ugo Dello Russo about Laura Motta, who was arrested on 10 October 1980 on charges of "subversive association" and "participation in an armed band". According to Amnesty International's information Laura Motta underwent two major operations, but, after her return to San Vittore prison in Milan on 11 March 1981, she
279
reportedly continued to be seriously ill. Amnesty International referred to a report that the judge had undertaken to appoint a group of experts to examine the prisoner. It asked if the experts had been nominated, and for information as to the outcome of the examinatioa Again, no reply was received.
Mario Dalmaviva, a "7 April" defendant, went on hunger-strike at Fossombrone maximum security prison on 12 January 1981. Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, Adolfo Sarti, on 2 February urging a fair and prompt trial for him. It also asked for clarification of his judicial position and that of a number of his co-defendants (see Amnesty International Report 1981). No reply was received.
On 3 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, Dr Clelio Darida, to express its humanitarian concern about the health of Giovanni Valentino, Roberto Pironi and Giro Paparo who were on hunger-strike in Milan and Parma. The three prisoners went on strike to press for a hearing. They had been in custody since April and October 1980 and April 1981 respectively in connection with criminal offences said to have been committed for political motives. The three hunger-strikers were also protesting against conditions within San Vittore prison in Milan, which they considered to be physically and mentally threatening, and at violent incidents connected with the transfer of prisoners on 22 and 23 September 1981. Amnesty International wrote to Dr Fernando Pomarici, Deputy Procurator of the Republic for Milan, welcoming the opening of an inquiry by the Procurator of the Republic into the transfers. He informed Amnesty International on 30 December that the relevant documents would be transmitted to the investigating judge in January 1982 but could give no indication of their contents or the probable time required for the investigation.
1981 saw changes in the situation of conscientious objectors to military service. A law altering the military judicial order in peacetime (Ordinamento Giudiziario Militare di Pace) was passed on 7 May 1981. The law introduced a Military Court of Appeal based in Rome, with sections in Verona and Naples, and the right to appeal against the decisions of this court to the Court of Cassation (supreme appeal court) according to the standards of civilian law. The Supreme Military Tribunal was replaced by an autonomous office of the state prosecutor, composed of military judges.
Between May and September, while the tribunals were being reconstituted, few new trials of conscientious objectors took place. However on 28 August the military tribunal of Padua sentenced Sergio Cattaneo, an anarchist and total resister to any form of military service, to one year's imprisonment Sergio Cattaneo, who was
280
adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, was arrested at his home in Lecco on 15 April 1981 and taken to the military prison of Peschiera del Garda.
In September 1981, when the reformed military tribunals started to function. Amnesty International began to receive further information. For example Ettore Sanità, an anarchist and total resister, was sentenced by the military tribunal of La Spezia to seven months' imprisonment but, under the altered procedure, remained at liberty pending appeal. On 4 November the military tribunal of Turin sentenced Giorgio Raimondi, whose application for alternative service was rejected, to four months' imprisonment
Amnesty International continued to follow the case of former prisoner of conscience, Sergio Andreis. His trial on 10 October 1980 had been attended by an Amnesty International observer (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981). Sergio Andreis had been charged with revealing and attempting to reveal, restricted information about Gaeta military prison (which has since been closed). He was sentenced to 10^ months' imprisonment suspended forfive years. His appeal was the first to be heard by the newly-formed Military Appeal Court of Rome, which reduced his sentence to a five-month suspended sentence. Sergio Andreis, who insisted he was innocent of any crime, intended to appeal to the Court of Cassation in the hope of obtaining a verdict of not guilty.
