Sierra Leone
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of trade unionists and poor prison conditions.
In June 1981 the Sierra Leone Labour Congress (SLLC), a federation of 15 trade unions, submitted a memorandum to the government containing a list of proposed reforms in the field of economic policy, including tighter controls on food prices. On 14 August, when the SLLC had apparently received no response, it called a national strike in protest. After five days the government agreed to reduce the price of rice by 60 per cent and the strike was called off. However, negotiations with the government on the rest of the SLLC's proposals broke down and the strike resumed on 1 September.
On the same day President Siaka Stevens declared a three-month state of emergency which empowered the President to detain without trial anybody "acting in any manner prejudicial to public safety and order". About 15 leading trade unionists were immediately arrested and the headquarters of the SLLC was sealed off by security forces. There were clashes between the paramilitary force, the Special Security Division, and supporters of the strike in the capital, Freetown. The opposition newspaper The Tablet had its offices ransacked and presses wrecked. On 19 September violence broke out in the provincial town of Makeni after a visit by President Stevens. About 50 people were apparently arrested, and eight youths subsequently sentenced to five years' imprisonment for rioting and looting In all, at least six people were reported to have been killed in the violence in Freetown and three in Makeni.
The arrests continued and by the end of September about 180 people were detained in Pademba Road Prison, Freetown. Most were trade unionists but some were critics of the government and people involved in the rioting. The detainees included James Baimba Kabia and Ibrahim Langley, Secretary General and President of the SLLC respectively, trade union leaders such as Tejan Abdul Kassim, Alimamy Baimba Mansaray and Uriah Davies, and journalists such as Ibrahim Ben Kargbo, assistant editor of The Tablet, and Lans Joe Sesay of the Daily Mail Conditions at Pademba Road Prison were believed to be harsh: food was poor and bedding inadequate; the detainees were kept locked in their cells 24 hours a day and allowed to wash only rarely.
In response to international trade union organizations who called
72
for the release of the trade unionists President Stevens said that the strike call had been illegal and would have led to a breakdown of law and order. On 28 September Amnesty International asked the authorities for information as to whether the detainees had been charged and whether they had access to their families and lawyers. No reply was received At the beginning of October all the detainees were released and the government set up a Commission of Inquiry to look into the status, administration and activities of the SLLC.
