Zaïre
Amnesty International remained concerned by the detention without charge or trial of suspected opponents of the government, the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience convicted after unfair trials, the administrative banishment of other prisoners of conscience, harsh prison conditions, and reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
In July 1981 an Amnesty International mission visited Zaire at the invitation of the government. The purpose was to discuss its concerns with members of the government, representatives of the ruling party, the Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR), People's Movement for the Revolution, and other senior officials concerned with state security, justice and prisons. The mission delegates also visited prisoners in Makala central prison in Kinshasa; Luzumu prison, 60 kilometres southwest of Kinshasa; N'Dolo military prison; and a detention centre at the headquarters of the internal security service, the Centre national de recherches et d'investigations (CNRI), National Research and Investigation Centre.
After the mission Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to President Mobutu Sese Seko. It contained an analysis of the penal system, based on information given to Amnesty International during the mission and information received during the preceding year. It described in detail the cases of eight prisoners illustrating Amnesty International's concerns. The memorandum pointed out the problems caused by the large number of civilian and military security services in Zaire, all of which were authorized to carry out arrests and to detain suspects incommunicado without charge and without reference to the judiciary indefinitely. It concluded by suggesting that an independent commission should be set up to review the cases of
95
uncharged detainees and that a central registry should be established to coordinate information about all uncharged detainees held by the security services.
During a visit to London in December 1981 President Mobutu met Amnesty International's Secretary General and invited the organization to send a further mission to Zaire. Amnesty International was told that the government was planning a detention review commission. The Secretary General was also informed that the prisoner of conscience Dikonda wa Lumanyisha, whose case had been detailed in the memorandum, would be freed at the end of the year.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the detention without trial of many prisoners arrested during 1980 and about a series of arrests in 1981. Some detainees were released during 1981 but others remained in custody. The authorities often alleged that detainees had been involved in subversive activities and used this to detain them for long periods while their cases were investigated. This was the case when Dikonda wa Lumanyisha, a social scientist, was arrested in Kinshasa in March 1981 for having allegedly been interviewed incognito in a Belgian television program. Wamba dia Wamba, a history lecturer at the University of Dar es Salaam, was arrested in December 1981 by members of the Service de renseignement et de sécurité militaires, Military Intelligence and Security Service, known as "G2". He was detained at Kinshasa's Ngobila beach when he arrived by boat from Brazzaville and accused of possessing subversive documents. He had lived outside Zaïre since 1971 and was returning to visit his family when he was arrested. He had been involved with a group of Zairian exile academics who had published commentaries on developments in Zaire.
It was difficult to establish why certain individuals were arrested and detained by different branches of the security services; for example, Wamba dia Wamba was arrested by the Military Security Service, although Dikonda wa Lumanyisha was held by the CNRI. In most cases reported to Amnesty International long-term detainees were eventually transferred to the custody of the CNRI, which either held them at one of its three detention centres or sent them into internal banishment. Kapepa Ibonga, arrested in Kinshasa in October 1980 and accused of being in possession of subversive documents, was still held at the CNRI detention centre in Kinshasa at the end of 1981. Musokayi Ilunga Mwabi, a doctor who had been arrested in September 1979, was released from the CNRI detention centre in Kinshasa inDecember 1980 and then restricted to the town of Mwene Ditu, in Kasai" Oriental region.
Internal banishment was used to punish former detainees and to
96
silence critics of the government. Following their arrest in January 1981 for having signed an open letter to President Mobutu, 13 People's Commissioners (elected members ofthe Legislative Council) and a member of the MPR Political Bureau were deprived of their civil and political rights by the Disciplinary Commission of the MPR Central Committee and sent into internal banishment. They were moved from place to place and from May 1981 onwards were restricted to villages or towns in their regions of origin. All 14 were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. In August 1981 the authorities announced that President Mobutu had lifted all restrictions on the 13 People's Commissioners, but several months later Amnesty International confirmed that they were in fact still confined to isolated villages. The restrictions were not lifted until ihe end of December 1981.
Amnesty International also learned that a number of detainees of non-Zainan origin who had been arrested for political reasons by the CNRI or the external security service, the Service national d'intelligence ( SNI), National Intelligence Service, were expelled from Zaire and forcibly repatriated to their countries of origin. In June 1981, for example, Godfrey Miyanda, a Brigadier General in the Zambian armed forces, was returned to Zambia. He had escaped arrest on treason charges in Zambia in October 1980 by crossing into Zaire, but was arrested in Lubumbashi and transferred to Kinshasa, where he was held by the SNI without charge or trial for eight months. He was forcibly repatriated to Zambia and rearrested upon his arrival there.
Arrests and detentions without charge were particularly widespread in Kivu region. Most of the people reported to have been arrested in mid-1980 in Sud-Kivu sub-region, designated a military "operational zone", were released or escaped from detention during 1981. However, further arrests took place in Uvira and in Fizi zone. Jean Anzuruni, who had been detained without charge since July 1980, escaped from detention in Uvira in January 1981. His wife, Citoyenne Tchala, was then arrested, imprisoned for a month and then restricted to Uvira town. Others arrested in Sud-Kivu were transferred initially to Bukavu and then to Kinshasa. For example, Kibanga, an official of the Jeunesse du MPR (JMPR), MPR Youth, in Fizi zone, was arrested after a group of Belgian and French journalists had visited the zone in January 1981. Kibanga was accused of having spoken critically about conditions in Fizi zone to the journalists. He was detained first in Uvira and then in Bukavu and at the CNRI detention centre in Kinshasa.
Amnesty International learned of a number of arrests in September 1981 at Bukavu, the capital of Kivu region. A doctor of Rwandan
97
origin, Sebera Inkaka, was detained on 25 September and accused of complicity in the distribution of leaflets which criticized a new Zainan nationality law adopted in June 1981. Under the terms of the new law former refugees from Rwanda who had fled to Zaïre in the early 1960s and been given Zainan nationality in 1972 lost this nationality and had to reapply for it Dr Sebera was released after three weeks but was rearrested on 16 November 1981 and was still detained incommunicado by the CNRI at the end of the year. In September 1981 several teachers were arrested in Bukavu during a strike for higher wages. Two were released after a few days, but the chairman of the local teachers' trade union branch {Président du comité syndical des enseignants de Bukavu), Chahihabua Mutambuisa, was held without charge by the CNRI for two-and-a-half months and then only released conditionally {en liberté provisoire).
In Kinshasa more than 1,200 civilians were arrested in late September and early October 1981. The official reason for these arrests was that their identity papers were not in order. However, the detainees included school children and others who held valid papers at the time of their arrest, but whose identity documents were then deliberately destroyed. The detainees were taken to N'Dolo military camp and soon transferred, either to their home villages or to undisclosed destinations. The wave of arrests was similar to previous round-ups of young unemployed men sent to a "re-education" camp at Lokandu in Kivu regioa However, this time â far wider range of people was detained. It was not known what happened to them after their transfer from N'Dolo camp. They were not charged, nor were they able to appeal agaiilst their detention and removal from Kinshasa. Amnesty International's inquiry about the arrests did not receive a response.
Amnesty International was also concerned by the continuing imprisonment of prisoners of conscience convicted by military courts or by the State Security Court Although some convicted prisoners of conscience were released during 1981 after completing their sentences or being given remission, seven military prisoners convicted in March 1978 of complicity in a plot to overthrow President Mobutu were still held at the end of 1981 at Angenga Military Prison in Equateur region and at N'Dolo Military Prison in Kinshasa. Two civilians convicted in November 1980 of membership of an illegal political party were serving three-year sentences at Makala prison in Kinshasa.
In July 1981 a diplomat and two students who had been living in Brazzaville were convicted by the State Security Court of giving a document to a Yugoslav diplomat based in Brazzaville. The trial was in camera and the three defendants were given little opportunity to defend themselves. Two were sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment
98
and the third to 12 months. Amnesty International's delegates were given conflicting information about the charges against these prisoners during their mission to Kinshasa. They were alleged by one official to have divulged state secrets, but were reported by another official to have been arrested by the SNI for having helped the former State Commissioner for Higher Education, Mungul-Diaka, to escape from house arrest and cross the Zaïre river to Brazzaville in January 1980. The prisoners were reported to have been tortured by the SNI and served their sentences at the Deuxième cité de VOUA (OUA 2), Second OAU City, a detention centre, which is under military rather than civilian administration. Two of the three had been released by the end of 1981 after completing their sentences.
Amnesty International received other reports of torture during 1981. Dikonda wa Lumanyisha was reported to have been repeatedly beaten and subjected to a finger torture known as the "dactylo" by the CNRI in March 1981. A Kinshasa baker, Nkanu Mbote, was arrested by the Military Security Service in January 1981 because he was suspected of trying to kidnap the daughter of the Service's commander. Colonel Bolozi Gbudu Tanikpma. In addition to being beaten and subjected to a mock execution, Nkanu Mbote was reported to have been given poison and apparently lost his sanity until he received medical attention months later. He was detained at the National Gendarmerie detention centre, known as "B2", until June 1981. He was later cleared of all charges against him by a court in Kinshasa.
In late 1981 other individuals were reportedly tortured in the custody of the Military Security Service; they included Muteba Tshitenge, who was accused of possessing subversive documents and tortured in November 1981 at the OUA 2 detention centre. Amnesty International also received reports that detainees held by the Military Security Service, the National Gendarmerie and the CNRI in Kivu region had been tortured during the year. Political detainees held by the various security services all over Zai re were reported to have been regularly beaten throughout 1981. No adequate measures were known to have been taken by the Zainan authorities to prevent such ill-treatment
Amnesty International also learned of the deaths of several detainees in the custody of the armed forces in Sud-Kivu sub-region in March 1981. The bodies of two detainees were found shot through the head at the edge of Lake Tanganyika. No investigation of these killings was known to have taken place.
Amnesty International remained concerned by the frequency with which the death penalty was imposed by the courts and by the number of executions which were carried out For example, nine prisoners
99
were sentenced to death by a local court {tribunal de premiere instance) in Mbandaka after being convicted of armed robbery and criminal association {association de malfaiteurs). Their sentences were confirmed by the Appeal Court in November 1981. In March 1981, 21 people convicted in early 1980 of armed robbery and murder were hanged at Luzumu prison. When some of the victims did not die immediately on the gallows, they were shot dead by guards.
