Korea
(the Democratic People's Republic of)
As in previous years little significant information emerged from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) about human rights violations. Although some internationally respected human rights are acknowledged by the constitution and laws of the DPRK Amnesty International has been concerned over the years about the punishment of political offences and the imprecise definition of such offences. Article 20 of the "Law Governing the Organization of the Procuracy and Internal Affairs" may be applied to anyone considered untrustworthy by the authorities. This article provides for prosecution for such broadly defined crimes as subversive conduct and association with subversive intent. The legal procedure for prosecuting " state crimes" comes under a special statute that is referred to in the code of criminal procedure but is not known to have been made public.
The law allows people to be interrogated by officials of the Public Security Office for up to two months after arrest. However, this period may be extended twice by the provincial procurator's office or the Procurator-General. In practice it appeared that if the agreement of the Chief Prosecutor had been obtained the interrogation period could be extended indefinitely. The Venezuelan communist and poet Ali Lameda, whose account of imprisonment in North Korea Amnesty International published in 1979, was held for interrogation for 12 months before he was charged Amnesty International continued to receive reports that people had been banished to remote and isolated areas because of their opposition to the growing political power of Kim Chong-il, son of President Kim Il-sung.
On 14 September 1981 the DPRK acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Amnesty International received no information on the appUcation of the death penalty. Provisions for the death penalty exist in law, but the government published no statistics on its use.
209
Korea
(the Republic of)
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, reports of ill-treatment and torture of political prisoners, and the use of the death penalty. On 2 March 1981 Amnesty International launched a worldwide campaign to publicize these concerns and published Republic of Korea: Violations of Human Rights.
Martial law, in force since October 1979, was lifted on 25 January 1981. Many prisoners of conscience and others were released under successive presidential amnesties. The detention and arrest of prisoners of conscience continued, however, under other legislation. This included laws passed or revised by the Legislative Council for National Security, an appointed body which acted as interim parliament from 27 October 1980 to the end of ^^arch 1981. During 1981 Amnesty International worked on behalf of about 300 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience.
Many students were arrested during 1981. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience more than 50 students charged under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations. They were accused of leading or participating in anti-government demonstrations or of distributing anti-government leaflets on university campuses in various cities during the spring and autumn academic terms. Many more were detained briefly and released without charge. The students had demanded greater workers' rights and press and academic freedom Some had demanded the resignation of President Chun Doo-hwan, whom they held responsible for deaths during disturbances in Kwangju in May \ 99>0 {^qq Amnesty International Report 1981). In late 1981 students campaigned for the release of the arrested demonstrators, the reinstatement of those expelled from universities for political activities and the removal of security agents from campuses. Some students were arrested for criticizing government publicity about the 1988 OlympicGames to be held in Seoul. Most of the students were sentenced to between eight months' and three years' imprisonment
Amnesty International appealed for the release of another group of around 20 students who had been arrested after university campus demonstrations between September and December 1980. They had demanded the lifting of martial law and the release of political prisoners, or protested against the new constitution promulgated in
210
October	Amnesty International Report 1981). They were
charged under martial law regulations and, in some cases, under the Anti-Communist Law (ACL), and were sentenced to up to four years' imprisonment
Amnesty International received reports that during the first half of 1981 many young people were detained without warrant, in some cases for over two weeks, and interrogated about their political views. Some were subsequently charged under the National Security Law (NSL). Thisprovides penalties ranging from five years' imprisonment to death for activities related to an "anti-state organization" or which are beneficial to North Korea. During 1981 more than 50 trade union activists and students were charged under this law. Park Jae-soon and five other members of a Bible study group in Taejon were arrested in mid-March 1981 and reportedly accused ofrespecting Marxism and communism" and of planning anti-govemment activities. The evidence against them apparently included statements on Korean and international affairs diey had made in lectures to high school students and comments on the South Korean social system in the group's diary. They were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
In early July Cho Bong-hoon, a former student previously imprisoned for political activities, was rearrested He was held on suspicion of writing anti-government leaflets circulated in Kwangju, collecting documents on the disturbances in Kwangju in May 1980 and preparing to publish them in a book. Numerous arrests followed his interrogation. A total of 26 people were reportedly charged in this case; Cho Bong-hoon and 12 others were still in detention at the end of the year. All 13 students were adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International also adopted as a prisoner of conscience Lee Mok-hee, a former staff member of the National Textile Workers' Unioa He was arrested in June 1981 and charged under Article 12, Section 3 of the revised Labour Union Law which prohibits the intervention of outsiders in trade union matters. He was accused of agitation and contributing to a union publication. Amnesty International did not learn the outcome of his trial.
Up to 28 people were charged and tried in the Democratic Students Federation and Democratic Labour Federation case. The main defendant was Lee Tae-bok, the president of a small publishing firm. He was arrested in late June 1981. In early August he was charged with setting up student and labour leagues and publishing pro-communist books in an attempt to create unrest and prepare for a communist revolutioa His co-defendants were charged with belonging to the leagues or organizing anti-government demonstrations. They included students; trade unionists, some of whom were allegedly
211
dismissed in late 1980 because of their activities; students expelled from universities for political reasons who became factory workers; and staff members of the Urban Industrial Mission, an organization related to protestant churches in South Korea and abroad which assists low-paid workers. The trial started at the end of October 1981.
More than 35 people were accused under the NSL of communicating industrial and military information to North Korea and, under instructions from that country, instigating student or labour unrest to overthrow the government Amnesty International was concerned that, in other cases, defendants on similar charges were known to have been denied fair trials. Some had been detained because of their political beliefs and wrongly convicted of espionage. On 15 October 1981 it cabled President Chun Doo-hwan about the arrest of five people^ including three university students, for allegedly leading demonstrations under instructions from North Korea. Amnesty International urged the government to make the charges and evidence public. It called on the government to ensure that constitutional rights not to be tortured or forced to confess be fully respected, as well as the right to legal assistance.
The Public Security Law, which allows political prisoners to be detained after completing their sentence, was used against Kang Jong-kon. He had served a fïve-year sentence, reportedly for participation in a subversive group and anti-government activities under instruction from North Korea, which expired on 14 February 1981. Amnesty International believed that his detention was prolonged because he refused to change his political views; It adopted him as a prisoner of conscience. Another prisoner of conscience, SohJoon-shik, had been detained under this law since 1978 (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
In cables and letters to President Chun Doo-hwan Amnesty International welcomed the release or reduction of sentences granted to prisoners of conscience under successive amnesties. On 23 January 1981 the President commuted Kim Dae-jung's death sentence and reduced the sentences on his 11 co-defendants. Thirteen prisoners of conscience were released and three prisoners had their death sentences commuted in presidential amnesties on 3 March and 3 April \ {stt Amnesty International Report 1981). Twenty-two prisoners of conscience were among the 65 political prisoners released on 11 May 1981. They included Kim Dae-hyun and Kim Hong-il, the brother and son of Kim Dae-jung; the Reverend Lee Hae-dong, a co-defendant in Kim Dae-jung's trial; the lawyer Han Seong-hon; and several journalists and students. A number of political prisoners were released on 15 August 1981. Many had been arrested in May 1980 but some had been detained since 1974 and 1975.
212
Among them were: Han Hwa-kap, Kim Ok-doo and Han Yoon-shik, associates of Kim Dae-jung eight people convicted in connection with the disturbances in Kwangju in May 1980, including Father Kim Song-yong Lee Kang-chul, sentenced in 1974 in the National Federation ofDemocratic Youth and Students case; and Han Myung-sook, sentenced in the Korea Christian Academy case of March 1979. Four people had their sentences reduced from life to 20 years' imprisonment under the same amnesty. Normally resident in Japan they had been convicted in 1974 and 1975 of "espionage" and anti-government activities. Three of them — Kim Oh-ja, Lee Chul and Kim Chul-hyon — were adopted as prisoners of conscience. Three further prisoners of conscience were released in another amnesty on 25 December 1981. They were Hong Nam-soon, a lawyer, Professor Myong No-keun and Kim Tae-hong, former President of the Journalists Association of Korea (see Amnesty International Report 1980. and 1981).
On 10 November Amnesty International wrote to President Chun Doo-hwan to welcome the amnesties. It also pointed out that many prisoners of conscience were still detained and urged their release. It drew the President's attention to 16 prisoners convicted in the People's Revolutionary Party case of 1974; several individual prisoners convicted of espionage or anti-government activities under instructions from North Korea, whom Amnesty International believed were wrongly convicted and detained because of their political beliefs; Kim Dae-jung, the opposition politician and his co-defendants; and Chung Dong-nyon and others arrested after 17 May 1980. Amnesty International reiterated its appeal for a fair and open retrial of the prisoners convicted in the South Korea National Liberation Front (SKNLF) case of 1979.
Amnesty International was concerned by reports that several prisoners of conscience had been denied proper medical care. During the year Amnesty International launched urgent appeals on behalf of Lee Shim-bom, a law student, arrested in May 1980 and reported to suffer neck and back pain caused by beatings; Koh Eun, a poet arrested in May 1980, who needed an operation for a serious ear infection; Choi Chul-kyo, sentenced to death in 1974, suffering from a chronic kidney complaint; and Kang Woo-kyu, sentenced to death in 1977, who had high blood pressure, arterial sclerosis and a cataract Some were subsequently given medical attentioa On 7 December 1981 Amnesty International cabled President Chun Doo-hwan to deplore the death of Lee Jae-mun, convicted in the SKNLF case, allegedly as a result of lack of medical care. It asked for information about the circumstances of his death and urged proper medical attention for all prisoners.
213
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture and ill-treatment Among the incidents reported were the beating of :onvicted prisoners in Taejon prison in April 1981; the ill-treatment of people, including Lee Mok-hee, detained during the investigation of the Suhtong Company Trade Union in May and June 1981; the beating by police of students arrested after demonstrations; and the torture of writer Han Soo-san, reportedly given electric shocks, at the end of May. Some people interrogated in the Democratic Students Federation and Democratic Labour Federation case were reportedly unable to walk after back injuries incurred under interrogation. In its letter of 10 November 1981 Amnesty International asked for these reports of torture and ill-treatment to be investigated, and the results made public. It also urged the government to bring regulations on the treatment of prisoners into line with United Nations standards.
On 8 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to Minister of Home Affairs Suh Chung-hwa about reports of torture and ill-treatment by the police. These included prisoners being beaten, tied by the ankles and hung upside-down for long periods of time, and the "leg-stick treatment", when a truncheon is placed behind the knees of a person who is forced to squat and pressure applied to cause pain. The letter referred in particular to the alleged torture of Cho Bong-hoon and of a group of people arrested after a demonstration in Inchon, near Seoul, at the end of May 1981. Amnesty International asked the Minister to order an impartial investigation into these cases. It also recommended measures for consideration in the establishment of a "mechanism to protect the human rights of suspects" which the Director of the National Police had announced at the end of October 1981.
At least 10 prisoners were known to be under sentence of death for political offences. They were convicted under the NSL of espionage or of leading an anti-government organization. Sohn Yoo-hyung and Park Tong-sun were sentenced to death by courts of first instance in October and December 1981. Sentences on the others had been confirmed by the Supreme Court; some applied for a retrial. Five prisoners under sentence of death were adopted as prisoners of conscience. They were Choi Chul-kyo, Kang Jong-hon, Paik Ok-kwan, Kang Woo-kyu and Chin Tu-hyon. Amnesty International made repeated appeals for the commutation of all death sentences for both political and criminal offences.
President Chun Doo-hwan commuted the death sentence on Kim Dae-jung in January 1981 and on three other political prisoners in April 1981. Amnesty International wrote to welcome this and urged him to commute all other death sentences and abolish this punishment
214
