Uruguay
Amnesty International's concerns were the large number of prisoners of conscience; harsh and inhumane prison conditions; the use of emergency powers to deprive detainees of legal safeguards; torture; and the trial of civilians before military courts whose procedures did not conform to internationally recognized standards for a fair trial.
On 1 September 1981 Lieutenant General (Retired) Gregorio Alvarez succeeded Dr Aparicio Méndez as President. The presidential term was shortened from five to three-and-a-half years. The new government announced that presidential elections by direct suffrage would be held in November 1984. The Political Affairs Commission of the Armed Forces (COMASPO) held consultations with representatives of three political parties — the Blancos (National) party, the Colorados and the Unión Cívica (Civic Union) — on drafting a new statute to govern the activities of political parties. Since November 1973 the Blanco party, the Colorados and the Partido Demócrata Cristiano (Christian Democrat Party) had been *'in recess". Parties belonging to the opposition QoaWúon Frente Amplio (Broad Front) and other independent left-wing parties had been illegal. The government announced its intention to prepare constitutional proposals to be put to a national referendum in 1984. A previous draft constitution was rejected in November 1980 by about 57 per cent of the electorate (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
In October a government official stated that there were 1,060 political prisoners in Uruguay, 924 men and 136 women. These figures excluded detainees who had not yet been sentenced. Civilians accused of offences under the Ley de Seguridad del Estado y el Orden Interno, Law of National Security, (1972), continued to be tried by military courts. Approximately 330 prisoners were adopted as prisoners of conscience or were being investigated as possible prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. A number of prisoners on whose behalf Amnesty International had worked were released during the year when their sentences expired. However, Amnesty International was concerned that release procedures were not fair and impartial. Although a number of prisoners were released on parole shortly before completing their sentences many had to wait for periods ranging from a few days to several months after their release date. Release from a military prison led in some cases to a
173
further indefinite period of confinement in a military barracks. Prisoners were rarely informed until the last moment
Ledys Castro Techera, a prisoner in Punta de Rieles military prison, was told that she could go home a week after her release date on 28 July 1980. She claimed that she was instead transported in handcuffs in a military vehicle to the Infantry Brigade Barracks No. 1, Camino Maldonado, close to the prison, where she was held until 29 December 1980. She was then transferred to the central prison of the police headquarters in Montevideo where she remained until she was expelled from the country on 22 January 1981. In December 1981 Amnesty International was informed that Cristina Arnabal de Costa, Pilar Asencio de Serboni, LuciaFabri Garrido and Marisa Albarengade Caravia, who had been taken to the same infantry barracks when their sentences expired in 1980, had been returned to the women's prison at Punta de Rieles.
On 2 September 1981 Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of Washington de Vargas Saccone and Ignacio Fonseca. The two were serving minimum sentences of 40 years' and 36 years' imprisonment respectively. Amnesty, International had received reports that they had been removed from the prison and tortured In a letter dated 15 November Colonel Dr Carlos Maynard Director ofthe Oficina Central de Información de Personas {OCW), Central Office for Information on Persons, stated that both men were being considered for retrial for insubordination because they had refused to sign their sentences. Augusto Kennedy Arbiza was due to complete an eight-and-a-half-year prison sentence in December 1980. On 20 February 1981 he was taken from prison with two other prisoners — Julio César Etchecury Moreira and José Luis Frustaceo — to a barracks of the Sixth Infantry Battalion in the province of San José, where he was held incommunicado and allegedly tortured for 10 days. On 22 April he was taken to a military court and informed that a new case was being opened against him for attacking the government while in prison. On 30 September the military magistrate asked for an additional sentence of eight years. In a letter to President Alvarez of December 1981 Amnesty International expressed its concern at such proceedings, which could be used to keep prisoners in prison indefinitely. A list was appended of 24 prisoners who had been retried or were facing retrial, most of whom had already completed or were shortly to complete their sentences.
Throughout 1981 Amnesty International continued to receive reports of inhumane conditions in the two major military prisons for political prisoners: Penal de Libertad (for men), officially known as Establecimiento Militar de Reclusión No. I, zxíá Penal de Punta de Rieles (for women), officially known as Establecimiento Militar de
174
Reclusión No. 2. In November 1981 Amnesty International published a testimony from a prisoner of conscience recently released from Libertad Prison. This described a penal regime apparently designed to undermine the psychological stability of prisoners by continual harassment, humiliation and arbitrary punishment, such as the withdrawal of visits or recreation and solitary confinement for periods of up to 90 days. To cope with the permanent stress many prisoners were taking high doses of tranquillizers and several suicide attempts had been reported. Some 150 prisoners classified as "highly dangerous", serving sentences ofl5 to45 years, were held on the second floor of the prison in particularly inhumane conditions. Death threats, threatened reprisals against relatives, the wrecking of prisoners' cells and possessions, and the banging of cell doors to disrupt prisoners' sleep patterns were frequently reported.
Amnesty International appealed for urgent medical treatment for 20 seriously ill prisoners. Alberto Ahesor, a 68-year-old ex-trade unionist and member of parliament, and a prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, was reported to be in urgent need of major surgery. Amnesty International appealed for him to be allowed an operation abroad. In December 1981 an Argentine heart surgeon was authorized to examine him and further tests were carried out. On 12 September Gerardo Cuesta Villa, another ex-member of parliament and a prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, died in the military hospital while undergoing a routine gall bladder operation. In December 1981 Amnesty International learned of the death of another prisoner, Miguel Coitiño, who had undergone major heart surgery in the Sociedad Española de Socorros Mutuos, a private medical clinic. Amnesty International gave the President details of 25 prisoners who were seriously ill and requested that an independent medical group be allowed to visit the prisons.
José Carmelo Pacella Giglio, Ariel C asco Fischetti, Héctor Mario D'Alessandro Breña and Sonia Amalia Fossatti Eguren, who were arrested in July 1981 and subsequently charged with organizing a clandestine printing press for the banned Uruguayan Communist Party (PCU), were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. They were charged with subversive association, which carries a prison sentence of six to 18 years.
The number of police and army raids increased during the latter months of 1981. In December Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of 15 people, including Omar Pérez, aged 28, a medical student, and Ana Maria Varela, a teacher of philosophy. They were abducted at 2.00 pm on 20 September in the Parque Posadas district of Montevideo, according to an eye-witness who saw them being arrested in the street by two men and a woman in civilian
175
clothes. Another medical student Gonzalo Fernando Mujica Denoit, who, fearing persecution, had left Uruguay for Brazil on 2 October, was arrested on 21 October after his return to Montevideo. The medical students were among 45 pepple reported to have been arrested after a meeting in a private house on 18 September to discuss university reforms. An official communique from the Minister of the Interior published on 2 October accused the students of trying to create a political scandal and maintained that the meeting had been instigated and controlled by the Juventud Comunista (Communist Youth). Shortly afterwards notices appeared in the medical faculty of the university reiterating a ban on all unauthorized meetings, whether held on university premises or not, and reminding staff, students and ancillary workers of their obligation to report any breach of these regulations immediately. Unconfirmed reports later claimed that 36 detainees had been seen m La Tablada detention centre.
}n May 1981 Amnesty International submitted information for consideration under the United Nations procedure set up to examine "a consistent pattern of gross violation of human rights".
The Human Rights Committee established uncjer the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights reached conclusions on six Uruguayan cases. In all six cases the Uruguayan Government was found responsible for serious violations of the covenant; in the cases of Sergio Rubén López Burgos, Rosario Pietrarroia Zapala and Lilian Celiberti de Casariego, all adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International, it asked for their immediate release and compensation for the violations suffered. Sergio Rubén López Burgos was freed in mid-1981, having completed his sentence. In December Amnesty International appealed to the President to release Rosario Pietrarroia Zapala and Lilián Celiberti de Casariego. It called for the release of the three other prisoners in whose cases the committee had found serious breaches of the covenant, who had also been adopted as prisoners of conscience: Ismael Weinberger Weisz, Luis Alberto Touron Landaburu and Dr José Luis Massera. The committee ruled on the case of Raúl Sendic Antonaccio in October 1981. He had been arrested in 1972 and was held in particularly harsh conditions in a military barracks. Uruguay was found to have violated four articles of the covenant, including those relating to torture and the right to a fair trial. The committee asked for the prisoner to be treated in accordance with Articles 7 and 10 of the covenant and to be given a fresh trial "with all the procedural guarantees prescribed by Article 14 of the Covenant".
Asia
Preventive detention of political prisoners remained the focus of much of Amnesty International's work in Asia. Provisions for detention without charge or trial, in some cases for indefinite periods, exist in most countries of the region including China, Pakistan, Nepal, India, Sri Lanka, Viet Nam, Laos, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei and the Philippines. In most of these countries people were detained under these provisions for the non-violent expression of their conscientiously held beliefs.
In several countries, for example the Republic of Korea (South Korea), Taiwan and Pakistan, prisoners of conscience were imprisoned after trials which fell far short of international standards and in which minimum legal safeguards were lacking. The imprisonment of prisoners of conscience for their political, religious and other beliefs remained widespread throughout the regioa At the same time 1981 saw a disturbing tendency towards an increased use of the death penalty in the region. In some countries extra-legal executions also increased. Continued fighting throughout the year in Afghanistan, Kampuchea and East Timor and lack of access to these countries seriously hampered the collection of information about human rights violations.
In China the authorities used detention without trial to curb dissent. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 20 editors of and contributors to unofficial journals, arrested in April for the non-violent expression of their fundamental human rights. In November several Roman Catholic priests were arrested in Shanghai, some of whom had already been previously detained for up to 20 years.
Detention without trial in Viet Nam was the main focus of an Amnesty International report published in June. The report documented the widespread use by the Vietnamese authorities of detention
178
in "re-education" camps to hold thousands of members of the former South Vietnamese administration and armed forces. These prisoners, many of whom were ill, had been detained since 1975. In addition, others were detained who had no connection with the former administration. In neighbouring Laos, although a significant number of prisoners were released in the first half of 1981, thousands of other political prisoners remained detained without charge or trial in "reeducation" camps. In India 400 people were ofiicially reported to be detained without trial under the National Security Act as of October 1981.
A welcome development during the year was the fall in the number of detainees held under the Internal Security Act (ISA) in Malaysia and Singapore. In Malaysia the number of political prisoners, the majority of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience, had been reduced by half since November 1978, when an Amnesty International mission visited the country and learned of 883 detainees. Nevertheless, some prisoners remained detained without trial after more than 10 years. In Singapore the number of detainees held under the ISA at the end of 1981 was believed to be 15, the lowest for several years. It also appeared that the authorities were no longer requiring prisoners to renounce their political views before release.
Respect for human rights deteriorated seriously in 1981 in Pakistaa This was the subject of a report, Pakistan — Human Rights Violations and the Decline of the Rule of Law, which was presented to the government in November 1981. The report documented the widespread use of political imprisonment to detain peaceful critics of the government, torture, and Ae virtual termination of the powers of the independent judiciary to protect human rights. All major political parties were proscribed and all political and trade union activities banned Moreover, as a result of the Provisional Constitutional Order of 24 March 1981, political prisoners effectively lost the right of habeas corpus. They were tried before military courts using summary procedures with no right of appeal.
The human rights situation in the Republic of Korea (South Korea) was the subject of an Amnesty International report in March 1981 which highlighted the continued arrest and detention of prisoners of conscience, ill-treatment and torture and the use of the death penalty for both criminal and political prisoners. Arrests continued throughout the year of students, intellectuals and trade unionists for the nonviolent expression of their beliefs. Reports of the ill-treatment and torture of political prisoners in the Republic of Korea continued to reach Amnesty International in the latter part of 1981.
In August 1981 Amnesty International published an exchange of memoranda between the organization and the Government of the
179
Republic of China (Taiwan) which drew attention to the serious human rights situation in the country. At least 20 prisoners of conscience detained in Green Island prison had been held for more than 30 years. Amnesty International continued to work for the release of these and many other prisoners of conscience, including joumahsts attached to the former Formosa magazine, imprisoned after a trial in March 1980.
A disturbing phenomenon was the increase in reports of extra-legal executions as a means of political persecution. In recent years such killings occurred in several Asian countries, notably on a massive scale in Democratic Kampuchea between 1975 and 1979. Amnesty International was concerned in 1981 by frequent reports of extralegal executions in the Philippines. An Amnesty International mission to investigate this and other human rights abuses visited the country in November. The mission found that "disappearances" and killings had occurred in several regions and in many cases could clearly be attributed to government agents. Evidence gathered by the mission indicated that many of the killings took place after interrogation and torture or after the victim had been detained. The Philippine Government appeared to have consistently failed to investigate these killings and to punish those officials responsible. The mission also found evidence of the widespread use of torture during interrogation.
Amnesty International also received allegations of extra-legal executions in Thailand and in December the National Police Director publicly acknowledged the existence of "death squads". In some parts of India the killings of political activists in staged "encounters" with the police continued to be reported occasionally.
There was little or no progress towards abolition of the death penalty in Asia. Papua New Guinea, Nepal and New Zealand are the only countries in the region that do not have provision for the death sentence for ordinary offences, although no executions have taken place in Sri Lanka since the present government assumed office in 1977. In several Asian countries there appeared to be an increased use of the death penalty in 1981. In China at least 87 people were reported to have been executed in the 11 weeks between 10 June and 25 Augustl981. Moreover, the National People's Congress decided in June that for a two-year period there would no longer be an automatic review of all death sentences by the Supreme Court In Viet Nam at least 14 death sentences were passed in the last six months of 1981, far more than had been reported for any comparable period in recent years. Amnesty International continued to appeal for the commutation of death sentences passed on at least 40 prisoners in Japan. In South Korea at least 10 political prisoners were known to be under sentence of death. Fifty political prisoners, sentenced in
180
connection with the alleged attempted coup of 30 September 1965, were believed to be still under sentence of death in Indonesia. Several convicted prisoners in India were executed until a November Supreme Court ruling stayed all executions.
The total number of executions in Pakistan in 1981 was believed to be several hundred Amnesty Intemadonal did not learn of presidential clemency being exercised in a single case. Amnesty International was particularly concerned that many death sentences had been imposed by military courts applying summary procedures and denying the condemned person the right of appeal. At least two political prisoners were known to have been executed in 1981. In Bangladesh 12 men were executed in September after being convicted of killing President Ziaur Rahman. Their execution followed a trial before a military tribunal held in camera, in which the accused were denied the right to lawyers of their own choice and had no right of appeal to a court of law. At least 15 political prisoners were executed in Afghanistan in 1981, apparently without the minimum safeguards for a fair and open trial and without the right of appeal.
During the year Amnesty International submitted reports documenting consistent patterns of gross violations of human rights in Pakistan and the Republic of Korea to the United Nations. It presented details of cases of "disappearances" in the Philippines, East Timor and Sri Lanka to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the UN Commission on Human Rights. Amnesty International also made statements of its concerns in East Timor and the British-protected Sultanate of Brunei to a sub-committee of the UN Special Committee on Decolonization and to the UN General Assembly.
Regional mechanisms for the protection and promotion of human rights in Asia were virtually absent In August 1981 the Lawasia Standing Committee on Human Rights, a non-governmental body, held its second meeting in Bangkok and confirmed its willingness to act as a liaison body and a document clearing house for regional human rights groups. In November an All-Asia Bar Association was formed at a meeting of 72 lawyers representing 13 Asian countries at Kochi in Japan. Among the immediate principal activities of the association was to be the protection of lawyers in the performance of their professional duties, the monitoring of the human rights situation in each country and the promotion of human rights. Discussions continued at the UN regarding the convening of a seminar in 1982 to explore the establishment of regional human rights arrangements in Asia.
On 14 September 1981 the Democratic People's Republic of Korea acceded to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
181
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
