Costa Rica
In March 1981 Amnesty International urged the Costa Rican authorities not to expel a number of Central American refugees arrested during police raids on local human rights groups and exile organizations. If returned to their countries of origin Amnesty International believed their lives would be in danger. Six Guatemalans were expelled to a third country on 4 April 1981.
Amnesty International asked for information about the killing in prison of a young woman terrorist suspect on 1 July by a civil guard at the prison. The authorities informed Amnesty International that they intended to investigate the matter fully and had submitted the case to the Inter-American Court on Human Rights. For procedural reasons the court referred the matter back to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Cuba
Amnesty International's concerns were the arbitrary resentencing of political prisoners who had completed their sentences; the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the imprisonment of people charged with criminal offences where the real reasons for their imprisonment appeared to be political; allegations of ill-treatment of political detainees; trial procedures which fell short of internationally recognized legal standards; and the imposition of the death penalty.
Armando Valladares Pérez, an adopted prisoner of conscience, was reported to have spent several months during 1981 in a punishment cell in Combinado del Este Prison in Havana He alleged that the medical treatment he had been receiving for his paralysis had been withdrawn, and that he was not allowed to go out into the open air or receive any visitors or correspondence. On 14 May 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Cuban authorities expressing concern about the suspension of his medical treatment and the fact that, despite medical advice, he was being given food to which he had been found to be allergic. On 9 July 1981 Amnesty International sent a telegram of concern to Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez. No
129
reply was received Amnesty International later learned that Armando Valladares Pérez was transferred to the prison hospital in September 1981. Amnesty International called repeatedly for the immediate and unconditional release of Armando Valladares and Angel Cuadra, also a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned about the resentencing of political prisoners who had completed their sentences. It knew of more than 50 political prisoners who, since 1977, had received additional sentences reportedly because of their " rebellious attitude" in prison: refusing to wear prison uniform or to participate in rehabilitation programs. In some cases, courts dealing with offences against the security of the state ruled that the prisoner's attitude required a medida de seguridad post-delictiva — a further term of one or two years' imprisonment in a work camp with the possibility of it being extended again if the prisoner did not conform. During 1981 several political prisoners who had completed their sentences were not released. Among them were José Oscar Rodriguez Terrero, alias "Napoleoncito", whose 20-year sentence ended in February 1981. It was reported that in March 1981 he was summoned to the office of the director of Boniato Prison, Santiago de Cuba, where he was held and subjected to a so-called trial. He was charged with participating in hunger-strikes and refusing to participate in the, "re-education" program. A few days later he was informed in writing that he had been sentenced to a further two years' imprisonment Other prisoners, such as Pedro Santana Canejo (originally sentenced to 20 years), Manuel Hernández Cruz (20 years), Eduardo Capote Rodríguez (15 years) and Sergio Montes de Oca (20 years) were only told orally that their sentences had been extended for a further year.
Amnesty International was concerned that the judiciary had never reviewed the sentences of some 240 long-term political prisoners, known as plantados on account of their refusal to obey prison regulations in protest at being treated as ordinary criminals. Evidence in Amnesty International's possession suggested that their sentences, which had been passed by revolutionary tribunals in the early 1960s, were harsh, and that trial procedures did not always conform to internationally recognized standards. Although Amnesty International did not adopt any of the plantados as prisoners of conscience it appealed for their cases to be reviewed.
The prison conditions of the plantados, who were transferred in July 1979 from Combinado del Este Prison to the eastern prison of Boniato, deteriorated sharply during 1981. Several plantados went on hunger-strike in late 1980 and early 1981 in an attempt to obtain improvements. On several occasions the prison authorities reportedly disciplined prisoners to force them to wear prison uniform and obey
130
regulations. Such measures allegedly included the withdrawal of visits, medical attention and special diets for those who were ill. It was also alleged that prisoners had been beaten by prison guards.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of several Cubans who sought asylum in the Peruvian Embassy in April 1980. They were allegedly granted safe conduct but upon leaving the embassy were arrested, brought to trial and sentenced to imprisonment.
Amnesty International was concerned that the death penalty continued to be imposed for politically motivated as well as other offences. Amnesty International learned during 1981 of several people sentenced to death who were awaiting the results of their appeals to the Consejo de Estado, Council of State. Raudel Rodríguez Rodríguez and Eduardo Delgado were arrested after allegedly attacking a policeman on 25 January 1980, disarming and wounding him. In December 1980 they were both tried and sentenced to death for " rebellion". The sentence was ratified by the Supreme Court and the charge on which they were convicted was altered to "attempted murder aimed at rebellion". At the end of the year their cases were before the Council of State which has the final authority to commute death sentences. Amnesty International appealed to the government in December 1981 not to execute the two men. In 1981 Amnesty International received allegations that several people reportedly convicted of political offences had been executed.
During 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the government to abolish the death penalty in Cuba In response the Vice-President of the Council of Ministers, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, wrote stating that the death penalty was a necessity in Cuba in the case of "horrible and brutal" crimes and because "several administrations in the United States have been systematically utilizing Cuban citizens, in Cuba and abroad, in attempts to kill Fidel Castro and other leaders of the country .... It is impossible to fight against these attacks by ordinary legal means." Amnesty International continued to urge the abolition of the death penalty.
131
