Thailand
Amnesty International was concerned by the use of detention without trial for political offences and by the imposition of the death penalty. However, it had no adopted prisoners of conscience in Thailand during 1981.
In April 1981 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister General Prem Tinsulanond about 200 people who had been sentenced by administrative procedure to terms of imprisonment without trial under martial law provisions between 1976 and 1978. Twenty-eight had received life sentences and a further 89 were sentenced to 10 or more years' imprisonment. The 200 included some prisoners whose cases were political in character and others accused of purely criminal offences. In its letter Amnesty International pointed out that the continued detention of these prisoners contravened the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It urged the authorities to release the detainees or bring them to an early trial.
In June the Minister of Justice, MarutBunnag, informed Amnesty International that the government was seriously seeking an effective solution to the problem of the 200 prisoners. A working committee formed by the government to look into the cases recommended in November that they should be pardoned by government decree.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the detention without trial of more than 50 Chinese and Vietnamese awaiting deportation on charges of illegal immigration. Some had been held in prison for more than 20 years. A group of 186 such prisoners was freed in December 1980.
Other prisoners were detained without trial under the provisions of the Anti-Communist Activities Act of 1979 (ACAA) which allows people accused of communist activities to be detained for up to 480 days. The number of people held under this act was not divulged by the authorities. Most arrests were believed to have occurred in northeast or southern Thailand.
248
Vimol Pientamdee, 54 years old, partially blind and suffering from heart disease and severe diabetes, was arrested on 10 January 1981. She was detained under the ACAA at the Bangkhen Detention Centre and was still there at the end of 1981. According to the government she was accused of connections with the underground Communist Party of Thailand (CPT) and had stored supplies for them. Amnesty International was investigating her case as well as the "disappearance" of her son Kamol Pientamdee. He was reported to have been arrested and detained at the Chipravat Army Camp in Nakhon Sawan in December 1980.
Several death sentences were passed during the year. In September Laor Naisap was sentenced to death for murder by a court in Ayuthaya. Four other men convicted of murder were sentenced to death in late October by a Bangkok court Amnesty International was also concerned by the persistent reports of officially sanctioned "death squads" operating in isolated areas of the country. In December 1981 the Police Director General Suraphol Chullapram was reported to have acknowledged the existence of such units which he said were "now operating in most of the provinces to fight against criminals". The death squads reportedly consisted largely of serving police officers and were formed to liquidate people against whom there was evidence of involvement in serious criminal activities. Other reports reached Amnesty International and Thai human rights organizations of kiUings by Army Ranger Units. In March 1981 a local trade union leader in southern Thailand, Vichien Prangthong, was allegedly killed by an Army Ranger Unit Reports of such killings seldom reached Bangkok and Amnesty International was not in a position to substantiate allegations of individual killings by units of the Thai army or police.
