Lesotho
Amnesty International sent two missions to Lesotho in the last quarter of 1981 following a series of political killings, the detention without trial of more than 40 people under the Internal Security (General) Actofl967, and the death in police custody of a detainee.
On 4 September a group of armed men attacked the home of Benjamin Masilo, Chairman of the Christian Council of Lesotho (CCL) and Vice-President of the Lesotho Evangelical Church (LEC), killing his young grandson. Benjamin Masilo narrowly escaped death and went into exile abroad. He subsequently alleged that his attackers were members of the paramilitary Police Mobile Unit (PMU). On 7 September armed men who identified themselves as police officers abducted Edgar Motuba, editor of the LEC weekly newspaper Leselinyana la Lesotho. Edgar Motuba was an outspoken critic of the government and a former detainee who had previously been threatened on several occasions by members of the PMU. He was found murdered the next day. The bodies of Lechesa Koeshe and Sello Machache, two friends who had accompanied him when he was taken from his home, were found beside him.
On 6 September security police arrested Litsietsi Putsoa, also a member of the CCL executive committee. He was detained uncharged under the Internal Security (General) Act and held incommunicado until he was visited in detention by an Amnesty International delegate in late September. He complained to Amnesty International's delegate that he had been assaulted during interrogation by security police officers. He was later released uncharged after more than a month in detention.
The murder of Edgar Motuba and the attempted murder of Benjamin Masilo occurred shortly after a series of bomb attacks in Maseru which damaged the international airport and two main hotels. Responsibility for these attacks was claimed by the Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA), the military wing of the exiled faction of the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) led by Ntsu Mokhehle. The LLA had become increasingly involved in guerrilla warfare in Lesotho since early 1979. The long-standing antagonism between the BCP and the ruling Basutoland National Party (BNP) government of Prime Minister Leabua Jonathan dates from 1970, when the government declared a state of emergency and cancelled the results of a general election which it appeared to have lost
50
The purpose of the Amnesty International mission to Lesotho in September was to obtain information about the murder of Edgar Motuba and the attack on Benjamin Masilo, and to inquire into the detention of Litsietsi Putsoa. Amnesty International's delegate met senior officials of the government and the security forces. He expressed concern over the apparent lack of progress made by the authorities in investigating these incidents. During the mission other killings of civilians were brought to his notice, including thatof Odilon Seheri, a former senior civil servant in the Ministry of Education and private secretary to the Head of State, King Moshoeshoe II. Odilon Seheri's incinerated body had been found in a burnt-out car earlier in the year. According to some sources he too had been abducted and murdered No inquest into his death had been carried out by the time of the Amnesty International mission.
Following a bomb explosion in early October at Teyateyaneng, in which two alleged members of the LLA were killed, a number of students and others were detained by security police under the Internal Security (General) Act They were held uncharged under a provision which permits 60 days' incommunicado detention for interrogation. Their names were not disclosed by the authorities and their relatives were unable to obtain information as to their whereabouts or the reasons for their arrest On 11 November the authorities announced that one detainee, Setipa Mathaba, had died in security police custody. A post-mortem examination was carried out in the presence of a private pathologist representing his family, but its findings had not been made available by the end of 1981.
On 11 November Amnesty International appealed to the government to charge or release all detainees without delay and permit them immediate access to relatives and legal counsel. In late November Amnesty Intemationaf issued an international appeal on behalf of eight named detainees, all students at the Lerothole Technical Institute in Maseru, who had been detained between 13 and 29 October.
There were also disturbances in November at the National University of Lesotho in Roma. Following the detention of a student, Makabi Kabi, other students boycotted lectures. King Moloi and Mothusi Lekalake, respectively President and Vice-President of the Students' Representative Council, fled to Botswana, allegedly to escape assassination by a secret "death squad" calling itself" Koeeoko" and according to some reports made up of members of the PMU. In view of these developments Amnesty International sent a second mission to Lesotho in December. The delegate sought from the authorities a report on the progress of investigations into the September killings. He was also granted access to 10 detainees of the
51
45 then known to be held Although they were interviewed in the presence of a magistrate and senior police officer, they almost all alleged that they had been assaulted under interrogation, denied information on where they were detained, held in solitary confinement and blindfolded whenever they were moved from one place to another. The detainees' allegations were generally consistent and mutually corroborative. According to the authorities and the detainees themselves they had not been in contact with one another before meeting the Amnesty International delegate. Their allegations were consistent also with information from former detainees.
Amnesty International's delegate wrote to Prime Minister Jonathan on 26 December to request an urgent meeting to discuss the findings of the mission. He drew attention particularly to "prima facie evidence of brutal and potentially fatal systems of interrogation", evidence of cruel and inhuman conditions of detention, and "prima facie evidence of the existence of a group or groups of individuals, allegedly involving members of the PMU, which have been instrumental in the issuing of death threats, 'hit lists' and who are implicated in acts of violence, murder and attempted murder".
In March the first major political trial since 1975 began in the Maseru High Court The defendants, 11 alleged supporters of the LLA, were charged with high treason. They were said to have participated in an attack on a police station in the Mafeteng district in early 1980. Three were acquitted and discharged in May. Five were convicted of treason and sentenced to prison terms of from two to seven years, and three others were jailed for sedition for from two to four years.
In August the government announced that 15 South African nationals had been deported following an increase in crime. All were believed to have been asylum seekers. The government claimed that none were genuine refugees who had left South Africa because of persecution. However, at the end of the year Amnesty International received information that at least four of those deported had been charged in South Africa with political offences and would soon go on trial there.
52
