Upper Volta
Throughout 1981 Amnesty International appealed for the trial or release of some 30 former senior officials arrested after the 25 November 1980 coup which brought to power the Comité militaire de redressementpour le progrès national (CMRPN), the Military Committee of Recovery for National Progress. The CMRPN abolished the constitution of December 1977 and banned all political parties. Those arrested and held without trial included former head of state General Sangoule Lamizana, National Assembly President Gérard Kango Ouedraogo, Prime Minister Joseph Conombo, 17 government ministers and several former high-ranking officials. Most were held in the military camps at Ouagadougou, the capital, andBobo-Dioulasso, where they were not allowed visits. In June 1981 the authorities published a decree stipulating that the detainees were " administrative internees", with retroactive effect to the date of their arrest The authorities did not respond to Amnesty International's appeals for their prompt trial or release.
Amnesty International was concerned by the arrest and detention withouttrialoftrade unionists during 1981. In late February 1981 six teachers and three members of the Syndicat des techniciens et ouvriers voltaïques (STOV), Trade Union of Technicians and Workers of Upper Volta, were arrested and detained for several weeks. Reports suggested that they were suspected of being members of the banned Parti communiste révolutionnaire voltàique (PCRV), Revolutionary Communist Party of Upper Volta. In early April 1981 the authorities banned meetings organized by the Association des étudiants voltaïques de Ouagadougou (AEVO), the Association of Upper Voltan students in Ouagadougou, and arrested its President Joseph Ilboudo. He was detained without trial at the gendarmerie (police station) in Ouagadougou. Also arrested at that time was Norbert Zongo, who was reportedly deported from Togo following allegations by Upper Voltan students in Lomé (the capital of Togo) that they were being harassed by the Togolese authorities for political reasons. He was held without trial in Dori, a remote town in northern Upper Volta. In late May 1981 the STOV union section in Ouagadougou called its members out on strike. The authorities arrested some 15 trade unionists, 10 of whom were interned in Dori. On 1 November 1981 the authorities banned all strikes and decreed that defiance of the ban would lead to three to six months' imprisonment
94
and a heavy fine. Following a strike call issued in mid-November 1981 the Confédération syndicale voltàique (CSV), Trade Union Confederation of Upper Volta, one of the country's four trade union confederations, was dissolved by the authorities and a warrant for the arrest of its leader, Soumane Toure, was issued. On 25 November 1981 the 10 STOV members held in Dori were released.
