Mozambique
Amnesty International was concerned by the use of detention without trial and the death penalty, and by the trial of political prisoners before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal.
There were further clashes during the year between government forces and guerrillas belonging to two opposition groups, Africa Livre, Free Africa, and the apparently more active Resistencia Nacional Moqamhicana (RNM), Mozambique National Resistance. In October the government alleged that civilians taken prisoner by RNM guerrillas in the Chimoio area had been tortured and mutilated. At the end of the year two expatriate workers, John Burlison and Moisés Carril, were reportedly abducted by the RNM.
In early 1981a series of arrests followed a South African military raid into Mozambique at the end of January. Houses occupied by members of the African National Congress (ANC) were destroyed in the raid and several ANC members killed Others were forcibly taken back to South Africa. On 14 February eight piembers of the Mozambican armed forces were paraded at a rally in Maputo and publicly accused of treasoa President Samora Machel said that they would be tried before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal when investigations had been completed However, no trial was known to have taken place by the end of 1981. One of the soldiers was reported to have escaped in July.
In March six United States citizens were expelled for alleged espionage and a number of people were detained Several foreign nationals among those arrested were all believed to have been released by early May. A number of Mozambicans were also arrested, but it was not known whether they too were freed
Several large groups of prisoners were released during 1981. In August President Machel toured Niassa province and visited a "reeducation" camp at Msawize. Those detained there reportedly included former members of the Portuguese secret police held since 1974. The President announced that the camp would be closed and that the inmates, numbering almost 500, would be resettled in the Niassa area. Their famihes would be permitted to join them. The following month President Machel visited two more "re-education" camps at Chaimite and Ruarua in Cabo Delgado province. Their inmates reportedly included former nationalist guerrillas and others sent for "re-education" for alleged criminal offences. He reportedly
62
ordered the release of 684 detainees from Chaimite and said that some had been held there unjustly. At Ruarua the President criticized the detention there for minor offences of former guerrillas of the Frente de Libertaqao de Mozambique (FRELIMO), Front for the Liberation of Mozambique. He ordered 76 to be released.
On 5 November, at a public rally in Maputo, President Machel condemned what he described as violations of the constitution and the law by members of the defence and security forces. He announced a series of measures to make the police and security forces more accountable to the public and criticized the use of prolonged detention without trial. He stated also that corporal punishment, beatings and torture of prisoners were illegal and would not be tolerated by the government
The death penalty was imposed on at least 11 people accused of politically motivated offences and all were subsequently executed In February four alleged members of Africa Livre were sentenced to death by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal at Quelimane after being convicted of armed rebellion and terrorism. Amnesty International appealed for clemency before they were executed Two more people were executed in July. Enoch Cau, an alleged South African spy, and Alberto Seane, convicted of armed rebellion, were shot. They had been sentenced to death in June by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal. Like all defendants before this court they had been tried in camera and without defence representation. Further executions were reported in early October when five alleged members of the RNM were shot. They had been convicted in September of armed rebeUion, terrorism, and belonging to a clandestine organization, by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal sitting at Chimoio.
