Guatemala
Amnesty International's paramount concern was that people who opposed or were thought to oppose the government were systematically seized without warrant, tortured and murdered
Successive governments blamed clandestine paramilitary death squads for the killings, torture and "disappearances", or stated that victims died in clashes between extremist groups of the left and the right which the authorities were unable to control. In February 1981 Amnesty International published a report on Guatemala in which it stated that it had found no evidence that the death squads operated independently of the regular security services. The report concluded that the torture and murder were part of a deliberate and long-standing program of the Guatemalan Government The report was released with a list of the names of 615 people who had "disappeared" after arrest by security forces since President Romeo Lucas Garcia took oflTice in July 1978.
The Guatemalan Government rejected the report's conclusion and accused Amnesty International of interfering in its internal affairs. However, when questioned by the press about Amnesty International's findings, the former Vice-President, Dr Francisco Villagrán Kramer, who had left the country for exile in 1980, stated that he had learned about the system while in government, and did not doubt that most killings were decided upon in the presidential palace. The former
140
head of the National Police Detective Corps, Colonel Manuel de Jesús Valiente Téllez, who was dismissed in late 1980, also confirmed the role of the security forces in killings attributed to "death squads". He declared that as head of the detective corps he had himself been involved in similar murder and "disappearance" operations ordered by higher authorities.
Throughout 1981 members of sectors identified in Amnesty International's report as major targets of repression in Guatemala in recent years continued to " disappear" and be killed. Victims included trade unionists, staff and students of the University of San Carlos (USAC) and Indian peasant farmers. The mutilated bodies of some of those abducted and killed were found at roadsides or uncovered at secret burial sites. Other corpses were unidentifiable. Amnesty International listed a minimum of 642 people killed between 1 January and 30 June 1981, including 476 peasant farmers, 33 teachers and university staff and 36 students. Between 1 July and 31 December 1981 Amnesty International recorded at least 2,569 more people killed in extra-legal executions. Only 217 could be identified
The repression of the Roman Catholic church intensified during 1981. Lay workers, priests and foreign missionaries, and specific religious orders were defamed in government and anonymous propaganda. So was the Justice and Peace Committee, a human rights monitoring organization founded in 1978. Many of the committee's staff and a number of foreign priests were forced to leave the country after receiving death threats. The government withdrew the visas of some religious workers while they were abroad. Others who remained in the country or returned despite death threats were murdered or "disappeared". On 23 July Amnesty International publicly appealed to the government to protect clergy and church workers. The appeal followed the murder of Italian-born Franciscan Father Marco Tulio Maruzzo, machine-gunned on 1 July 1981 in Quirigua, Izabal. He was the eighth priest to be killed or abducted in Guatemala in 15 months. The authorities attributed his death to unknown assailants, but his associates believed the official security forces were responsible. On 28 July Father Stan Rother, a 46-year-old Maryknoll priest from Oklahoma, USA, was murdered in Santiago Atitlán. Colleagues and relatives stated that he had been killed because he had witnessed the abduction on 3 January 1981 of an Indian catechist, Diego Quic, and had written to a friend in the USA that 17 townspeople had been kidnapped, tortured and slain by Guatemalan soldiers that month. After protests in the USA at Father Rother's murder the Guatemalan authorities took three men into custody in connection with the crime; reportedly they did not match the description of the killers given by eye-witnesses.
141
Government explanations of the deaths of two foreign lay workers on 26 July were also challenged abroad Eight days after the killing, when the bodies had already been buried as unidentified a government statement declared that two Jesuits — Spaniard Angel Martinez Rodrigo and Canadian Raoul Joseph Leger — had died fighting alongside Cuban guerrillas during a shoot-out with the security forces in Guatemala City. Jesuit spokesmen stated that neither of the dead men were Jesuits and the religious orders for which the two had worked as well as family and friends abroad discounted the possibility that either would have taken up arms. Witnesses in Guatemala City stated that Angel Martinez Rodrigo had been kidnapped from his home some 17 kilometres from where his bullet-ridden body was found
Jesuit priest Luis Pellecer was violently abducted in the presence of witnesses in the capital on 9 June. Father Pellecer was missing for 113 days. The government repeatedly denied that he was in custody in response to inquiries from his family, religious associations and international organizations. During tiiis period several of his associates and friends were also abducted and remained unaccounted for, including a secretary at the Archbishopric in Guatemala City. Father Pellecer became one of the few Guatemalans to be located after having "disappeared" when Guatemalan officials presented him to a gathering of the press, foreign diplomats and church officials on 30 September. In this, and in subsequent appearances under official Guatemalan escort in other countries, including El Salvador, Father Pellecer "confessed" to having arranged his own "self-kidnapping" in order to break away from involvement with the guerrillas. His statement accused the Roman Catholic church of actively encouraging communist subversion throughout Central America; charges which were rejected by his immediate superiors and conferences of the Society of Jesus in various countries. Friends and associates who viewed the televised statement were convinced that Father Pellecer appeared to be under severe psychological stress and that his statement was totally out of character. His close relatives were not allowed to meet or speak to him, despite official claims that he was not detained but had chosen to remain in protective custody. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for Father Pellecer to be examined by independent experts, including physicians and psychiatrists. Doubts about official statements and fears for Father Pellecer's mental and physical integrity increased when another man escaped from custody and stated that he had been forced to cooperate with the authorities through physical torture and severe psychological pressure. He was Indian leader Emeterio Toj Medrano, founder member of the Comité de Unidad Campesina (CUC), Committee
142
of Peasant Unity, who was abducted in Chimaltenango on 4 July. The government denied that Toj Medrano was in official custody, but in late August Guatemalan officials presented him to a visiting US Congressional delegation. He told the delegation that the CUC had been infiltrated by communists. On 22 October he too told a conference arranged by officials for the press and foreign diplomats that he had organized his own kidnapping and planned to leave the "subversive" CUC andjoin the Guatemalan army. He escaped on 26 November during a guerrilla attack on the military barracks where he was held
In August Spanish priest Carlos Alonso Pérez, chaplain at the military hospital in Guatemala, was abducted as he finished mass. His whereabouts were unknown. In November two US Dominican nuns, a priest and a Guatemalan seminarian were abducted as they returned from a church meeting in Sololá. Following international action on their behalf, they were released and left the country.
As armed clashes between government and opposition forces increased during the year Amnesty International noted a rise in the number of medical staff who were killed or "disappeared". Staff who treated the wounded regardless of how they were injured and whether they were government agents were apparently abducted and killed in retaliation, and in order to deter others from doing so. Dr Eduardo Schlessinger Umitia, Dr Guillermo Muñíz, Dr José Pratdesava Barillas, and Dr Arnoldo Mérida Zúñiga were still missing at the end of the year. Other doctors for whom Amnesty International had appealed were later found dead. These included Dr Filberto Sánchez Castillo and Salvadorian Dr Juan José Amilcar Hidalgo Salguero. Among those shot and killed outright were Dr José Alvaro Ramírez Ruano on 16 October and Dr Carlos Enrique de Paz Ramirez on 9 November. On a number of occasions Amnesty International called on the government to protect wounded people being treated in hospitals. Well-verified reports of the abduction and killmg of wounded people in hospitals were received during the year even in cases where the patients were ostensibly under armed guard
The growing conflict between government forces and opposition groups led to an increasing number of reports of massacres of non-combatant civilians in the countryside, apparently as part of a government counter-insurgency operation. On 25 August Amnesty International protested at the reported "disappearance" of hundreds of peasants and the killing of 50 people by the security forces in and around the small agricultural cooperative village of El Arbolito, Petéa Survivors who fled to Mexico said that they had been beaten and kicked, burnt with cigarettes, subjected to mock executions and near-garotting, and hooded with rubber hoods impregnated with chemicals
143
by kaibiles (special counter-insurgency troops). They were interrogated about support they might have given to guerrillas. Rubber "gloves" were placed over the hands, testicles, throats and breasts of some of the captives, and set alight, burning down to the bone in some cases before they eventually burnt themselves out Amnesty International called attention to previous massacres in which the army was implicated, including the attack on 9 April in Chuabajito, Chimal-tenango, when 23 were murdered
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to Mexican officials not to return Guatemalan refugees fleeing such counter-insurgency operations to Guatemala, where Amnesty International beheved their lives to be in danger. However, several thousand were sent back during 1981, and at least one person was known to have been killed after his forced return to Guatemala Large-scale killings of peasants by the Guatemalan army continued to be reported throu¿iout the year, particularly in areas near the Mexican border.
In October Amnesty International appealed to lawyers to protest against the killings and "disappearances" of members of the legal profession in Guatemala. It listed 58 members ofthe legal profession, including judges, lawyers and court officials, who had been killed between January 1980 and June 1981. It noted that lawyers who worked on behalf of trade unionists or peasant organizations were particularly at risk, as were those connected with the University of San Carlos (USAC), which was repeatedly attacked in official statements as a centre of oppositioa USAC staff and students killed or "disappeared" during the year included Dr Jorge Romero Imeri, acting Dean of the Faculty of Law, and law professors Guillermo Alfonso Monzón Paz, Jorge Palacios Motta, José Aníbal Moreno who were killed on 27 February, 3 March and 4 March respectively. Three more law professors were shot and killed on 7 May.
In the latter part of the year many politicians lost their lives or "disappeared". Amnesty International knew of 66 politicians killed between January 1980 and December 1981. The Frente Unido Revolucionario (FUR), United Front of the Revolution, which had called on its supporters to participate in the elections scheduled for early 1982, was particularly affected ; 17 of its leaders were killed in 1980 and 1981 and others forced abroad Amnesty International recorded the names of 19 members and leaders of the Christian Democrats who were killed or"disappeared" between May 1980 and December 1981. There were also a number of attacks on the party's leader, Vinicio Cerezo.
In March 1981 Amnesty International launched a campaign calling for an end to the repression of trade unionists in Guatemala. It aimed to inform international trade union confederations and inter-
144
national companies of human rights abuses in Guatemala. Amnesty International appealed to companies to protect their employees in Guatemala from human rights abuses and to investigate cases where workers were killed or "disappeared". Amnesty International continued to press for information on a number of trade unionists missing since they were detained at the headquarters of the Central Nacional de Trabajadores (CNT), Guatemalan Workers' Congress, on 21 June
1980.	Unconfirmed reports indicated that some of their bodies were found during 1981. There were also unconfirmed and conflicting reports from official and unofficial sources that the body of journalist Alaide Foppa Solorzano had been found in December 1981. She had "disappeared" in December 1980. In 1981 other journalists "disappeared", including Argentinian Valentin Serrât, who was visiting Guatemala from exile in Mexico and "disappeared" in early December
1981,	anáEl Gr4/?co journalist Zonia Calderón de Martell, who was detained by the security forces on 23 July and remained unaccounted for. The body of her husband, a photographer with the information office of USAC, was found on 17 September submerged in his car in a canal in the department of Santa Rosa. In December 1981 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights noted that the Guatemalan Government had so far dechned to set a date for it to visit the country and investigate the human rights situation. This had been originally requested by the commission on 3 November 1973 and agreed to in principle by the government on 29 January 1980. A report by the commission concluded that "an alarming climate of violence" had prevailed in Guatemala in recent years, either instigated or tolerated by the government
In March 1981 the Commission on Human Rights of the United Nations expressed concern at the deterioration of human rights in Guatemala and requested the Secretary-General of the United Nations to establish direct contact with the Government of Guatemala on the human rights situation there, and to collect information from all relevant sources. In the context of this resolution, in October Amnesty International's Secretary General presented UN Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim with a memorandum outlining Amnesty International's concerns in Guatemala. Amnesty International noted that it had in no instance received satisfactory replies to the many calls it had made to the Guatemalan authorities over a period of years for investigations into the "disappearance" and murder of thousands of people.
	
	r-^-" *-A
	
f '	
	< J
	M *
