Poland
Amnesty International's concerns in Poland in 1981 were dominated by the widespread internment and imprisonment of members and supporters of the independent trade union Solidarity after the imposition of martial law on 13 December. Although Solidarity was legally registered in November 1980, in the months that followed there were recurrent conflicts between the union and the authorities. Confrontation arose over the implementation by the authorities of an agreement reached with the union in Gdansk in August 1980, on matters such as not working on Saturdays, access to the official media, freedom of expression and also over price rises and labour legislatioa Some compromises were reached by the authorities and
281
the union, but social and political tensions persisted, aggravated by serious economic difficulties.
During this period Amnesty International worked on behalf of adopted prisoners of conscience Leszek Moczulski, Tadeusz Stanski, Romuald Szeremietiew and Tadeusz Jandziszak. They were members of an unofficial political party, the Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN). Together with three other KPN members they were arrested between 24 September 1980 and 24 January 1981 on charges of "anti-state activity" under articles of the criminal code which prescribe severe penalties, including the death penalty {sQQ Amnesty International Report 1981). By 5 June 1981 all seven had been released from preliminary detention. The trial of the four named above began on 15 June 1981 before the Warsaw Provincial Court Amnesty International sent an observer to the initial stages of the trial.
At the outset the defence stated that the indictment was vague: it did not always specify what actions by the accused constituted "a threat to the state system" or what information disseminated by the accused "harmed the interests of the Polish state". The defence argued that it needed to know exactly what the defendants were accused of and asked for the indictment to be revised to clarify the charges. The presiding judge refused this request, reportedly stating that there would be ample opportunity to clarify the indictment during the trial. On 9 July the Supreme Court ruled ihat the accused had defied a court order to refrain from political activity during the trial by participating in public meetings and ordered their rearrest, with the exception of Tadeusz Jandziszak, who was ill. On22 December, after martial law had been imposed, it was announced on television that the Warsaw Provincial Court had transferred the case to a military court in conformity with a State Council decree of 12 December. It was also officially reported that Tadeusz Jandziszak had been rearrested. By the end of the year Amnesty International had received no further information on these cases.
In the period before martial law censorship was considerably relaxed. Nevertheless a number of people, mostly members of the independent trade union Solidarity, were arrested, detained for up to 48 hours and charged with printing and distributing uncensored bulletins, posters and leaflets containing "slanderous and offensive allegations about the authorities and about Poland's Soviet allies". In August 1981 the Procurator General's office announced that criminal proceedings had been started in about 80 such cases. In September Amnesty International urged that charges be dropped against two Solidarity members, Chrystoforosz Tulasz, from Jelenia Gora, and Dr Komel Morawiecki, from Wroclaw. They were indicted for
282
"disseminating false information" and for "publishing and disseminating material and appeals directed against the allied unity of Poland and the Soviet Union" respectively. To Amnesty International's knowledge their cases had not been tried by December.
On 18 October General Wojciech Jaruzelski, who had been appointed Prime Minister in February, replaced Stanislaw Kania as First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party. On 28 October Solidarity held an hour's protest strike against arrests of union activists, calling for access to the official media and the creation of a "social council for the economy" to deal with the economic crisis. At a meeting on 4 November of representatives of the government. Solidarity and the church, no agreement was reached on a proposal to create a joint body to seek a solution to the country's problems. At the end of the month General Jaruzelski spoke of a draft law to be put to parliament that would grant the government emergency powers. In early December the Polish Primate, Archbishop Glemp, urged parliament not to pass such legislation and called for moderation on all sides. On 11 and 12 December Solidarity's National Commission met in Gdansk to discuss a number of resolutions including a proposal to call a referendum assessing public confidence in the government and the possibility of free elections to parliament and local peoples' councils.
On the night of 12/13 December members of Solidarity's National Commission, then meeting in Gdansk, were arrested and interned. Solidarity's leader. Lech Walesa, was placed under house arrest Many other Solidarity members, officials, advisers and supporters were arrested throughout Poland Members of the KPN and other people officially regarded as opponents of the government were also detained Early on the morning of 13 December General Jaruzelski informed the nation that the State Council had proclaimed a " state of war" (martial law). He announced that a 21-member Military Council for National Salvation, which he would chair, would administer the country for the duration of martial law. Referring to "strikes, strike alerts and protests" General Jaruzelski claimed that law and order had broken down. He stated that martial law had been declared to avert national catastrophe and that the only task of the Military Council for National Salvation would be to "protect legal order in the country, to guarantee the restoration of order and discipline". He spoke of the internment of "a group of people who represent a threat to the safety of the country . . . the extremists of Solidarity are included in this group as well as activists of illegal anti-state organizations". He also stated that a number of former political leaders, including former First Secretary of the Polish United Workers' Party Edward Gierek, had been interned for their
283
responsibility in "pushing the country into the crisis during the 1970s and abusing their posts for personal profit".
A series of decrees dated 12 December suspended or restricted rights guaranteed by the constitution and by international human rights covenants to which Poland is party. The independent trade union Solidarity, which had been officially registered on 10 November 1980, was suspended. So were other independent trade unions and student organizations and the Association of Polish Journalists. Strikes, demonstrations and factory occupations were banned and the right of assembly was suspended except for religious services. Communication lines within Poland and abroad were severed and strict censorship of the news media enforced
Other decrees were announced concerning internment and summary trial procedures. An amnesty was granted to cover a number of offences, including certain political ones: it applied to cases where legal proceedings had not been started before 13 December. In cases where legal proceedings had already been instituted but a final court decision had not been pronounced, a pardon was granted only if the accused "voluntarily pledged in writing that he would observe legal order and respect the principles of social co-existence". By the end of the year Amnesty International had not received any information about the effect of this amnesty on people against whom criminal proceedings had been instituted for non-violent political offences before 13 December.
An official news blackout meant that little information was immediately available about internees. Official sources stated that some 5,000 people had been interned. Unofficial estimates were much higher. By the end of 1981 Amnesty International had compiled on the basis of official and unofficial sources a list of over 650 named individuals who were reported to have been interned Among them were Anna Walentynowicz, a crane-driver from the Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk and one of Solidarity's founder members and leaders; Solidarity chairmen from Radom and Bydgoszcz, Andrzej Sobieraj and Jan Rulewski; Tadeusz Mazowiecki, editor-in-chief of Solidarity's newspaper Solidarnosc; advisers to Solidarity including Krzysztof Sliwinski, a biochemist, and Bronislaw Geremek, a historian; and Jacek Kuron, Adam Michnik and Jan Litynski, former members of the Committee for Social Self-Defence (KSS KOR), an unofficial human rights group founded in 1976 and disbanded on 23 September 1981. It also included many prominent intellectuals who had supported Solidarity and the reform movement that had emerged in Poland at the end of August 1980.
According to unofficial reports received by Amnesty International many internees were initially held in harsh, cold and overcrowded
284
conditions. Internment centres were set up in evacuated prisons, in barracks, and in holiday homes for workers and military personnel. The internment centres most frequently mentioned were Bialoleka prison, Strzebielinek and Jaworzno. Women internees were reported to be held in Olszynka and Fordon prisons. Prevailing temperatures were sub-zero. Reports received by Amnesty International said that many internees were held in unheated cells without warm clothing. Most reports agreed that conditions in internment centres varied greatly and that well-known intellectuals were held in better conditions than workers.
By the end of 1981 Amnesty International had learned of the release of several internees. Some were reportedly asked, as a condition of release, to sign a statement that they would not undertake any "anti-state activity". A network of relief for internees and their families was organized by local churches.
The imposition of martial law provoked protest in many parts of the country. Despite the ban on strikes and marches, demonstrations and factory occupations took place in Gdansk, Warsaw, Szczecin, Wroclaw, Katowice and other towns, and in the Wujek, Piast and Ziemowit collieries in Silesia On 16 December it was reported that seven people had been killed and 41 members of the militia and 39 civilians injured during the supression of a strike by miners at Wujek colliery by security forces. Unofficial reports claimed that 14 people were killed at Wujek. Over 300 people were officially reported to have been injured, and one killed, in clashes in Gdansk on 17 December.
Between 15 and 31 December Warsaw radio reported the cases of at least 90 people who were arrested for organizing strikes and distributing leaflets. Nine of them were sentenced to imprisonment by summary procedure. In its appeals to the Polish authorities Amnesty International noted that the information available indicated that none of these people had used or advocated violence. It urged that if this were so tiiey should be released. Among those convicted were Jerzy Kropiwnicki and Andrzej Slowik, Solidarity leaders from the Lodz region. According to Warsaw radio they had on 14 December"used a public address system to assemble a considerable crowd of people" near Solidarity premises in Lodz. This violated Article 46 of a martial law decree prohibiting the organization of strikes or protest actions. On 30 December they were reported to have been sentenced to four-and-a-half years' imprisonment each, Jan Filipek, chairman of a Solidarity works commission in Boleslawiec, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for having proclaimed a protest strike on 14 December. Solidarity member Andrzej Pawlik was reportedly sentenced by a court in Silesia to five years' imprisonment for "disseminating leaflets with false information liable to cause public unrest".
285
Amnesty International first wrote to the Polish authorities on 16 December. On 22 December it wrote again detailing its concerns about internment and the arrest of people for the non-violent exercise of human rights.
Amnesty International noted that according to official statements internees were not accused or suspected of any criminal offence; they were detained because their "past behaviour gives rise to justified suspicion that should they remain at liberty they would not observe the law or would indulge in activities which threaten the interests of the security of the state". Amnesty International expressed particular concern that under martial law people could be held for an indefinite period without charge and that the courts had no powers over internment, which fell under the jurisdiction of the civic militia. It appealed for the release of all those interned solely for the norvviolent exercise of human rights, whom it regarded as prisoners of conscience. It urged that internment itself be revoked. Amnesty International also expressed fears for the health and safety of internees and pointed out that many were reported to be held in harsh, cold and overcrowded conditions.
Under martial law, summary trial procedures were applicable to over a third of the offences in the criminal code, including a number of non-violent political offences, as well as to violations of martial law. Amnesty International did not have full details of these procedures but it expressed concern that, according to official statements, people tried by summary procedure had no right of appeal and might face the death penalty. It urged the authorities to review the martial law provisions relating to arrest, investigation and trial, to ensure compliance with internationally recognized standards. It called for full legal safeguards and fair open trials for anyone accused of crimes and reiterated its opposition to the death penalty in all cases.
Amnesty International did not learn of any death sentences passed or executed in 1981. However the death penalty remained in force. Under martial law its scope was extended to cover offences tried by summary procedure for which the previous maximum sentence had been eight years or more.
286
