Bolivia
The Bolivian armed forces seized power in July 1980 and placed the entire country under military jurisdiction. Amnesty International received numerous reports of arbitrary arrests, detention without trial, torture and pohtical killings by security forces.
Amnesty International's work was based largely on international appeals to seek official confirmation of specific arrests and to protect prisoners from physical harm.
Although many members of trade unions suspended after the coup or students linked to left-wing political parties were arrested in 1981,
	
	
	
\ ^	
	A *
114
they were rarely held for longer than a few months. Most were then sent abroad into exile (an estimated 1,500 Bolivians were exiled as a result of the coup) or freed but placed under surveillance. Many former prisoners had to register daily with the authorities. Others were sent into internal exile (residenciado) often to inhospitable areas where living conditions were extremely harsh.
Political prisoners were usually held incommunicado during the interrogation stage of their detention. This lasted from a few days to several weeks. During this stage their families were often not informed of their place of detention. Detainees were not formally charged and often no reason was given for their arrest. In 1981 Amnesty International campaigned on behalf of 145 prisoners of conscience, most of whom were subsequently released
In February 1981 Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the President, General Luis Garda Meza, condemning arrests without warrant and the torture of political prisoners. The memorandum pointed out that these abuses were facilitated by the apparent total disregard shown by the government for the constitution and for its international obhgations. Amnesty International expressed particular concern about the failure of the authorities to enforce formal procedures for arrest and detentioa The organization was concerned about the role of the Servicio Especial de Seguridad{SES), Special Security Unit, which was under the control of the Ministry of the Interior. According to reliable reports prisoners in the custody of the SES were subjected to torture and to ill-treatment and humiliations such as being forced to sleep on wet floors, or to eat food from plates onto which guards had urinated One of the most serious charges against SES agents concerned the torture and death of nine young leaders of the Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR), Movement of the Revolutionary Left, in La Paz on 15 January 1981 (see Amnesty InternationaUReport 1981). Amnesty International appealed to the government on 22 January to investigate the circumstances of their death but no investigation was carried out
In July 1981 Amnesty International sent two representatives to La Paz to intercede with the authorities on behalf of the wounded trade union leader, Genaro Flores. He had been arrested in La Paz on 19 June 1981 but his detention was not officially acknowledged for several days. On 3 July 1981 one of Amnesty International's representatives, Dr Alain Bernard, was allowed to examine Genaro Flores at the Copacabana Police Clinic. Present were an official of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the French Ambassador, the President of the Bolivian Red Cross and members of the clinic's medical staff. DrBemard, who returned to France on6 July, stressed in his report that the conditions of Genaro Flores' detention were not
115
adequate for the surgical and medical requirements of the case and recommended his urgent transfer to a neurosurgical unit. The specialist Foch Hospital in Paris was ready to receive Genaro Flores and the French Government had already granted him permission to enter France. Despite this, the Bolivian Government delayed taking a decision on the case for two weeks. Finally, on 16 July, Genaro Flores was allowed to leave Bolivia for the United States of America for treatment
On 4 September 1981, after General Luis Garda Meza was forced to resign following a revolt by army officers, General Celso Torrelio Villa was named President of Bolivia.
On 14 October 1981 Amnesty International cabled the new President urging him to halt human rights abuses by government security forces and to investigate persistent reports of arbitrary arrests, killings and torture. Amnesty Internadonal cited detailed reports it had received on the recent killings of three men and on arrests and torture of students and trade unionists. Humberto Victoria, a former official of the miners' union, was said by witnesses to have been beaten to death on 12 September on the orders of the army commander in Quechisla, in the department of Potosí. Amnesty International also expressed concern that although President Torrelio had promised to disband the SES- the unitmost frequently named in torture allegations - it continued to be active. A student arrested by SES agents on 23 September in La Paz was beaten so badly that his right ear was damaged and he suffered cerebral contusions; a young girl detained on 6 September was tortured on a metal table with electric shocks and sexually molested.
On 13 November 1981 the Minister of the Interior, Colonel Rómulo Mercado Garnica, rejected Amnesty International's allegations and accused the organization of allowing itself to be used by " the extreme left". This was reported in the Bolivian newspaper, Presencia.
On 30 October 1981, following a fact-finding visit to Bolivia by the Special Envoy of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, the Minister of the Interior announced to the Bolivian press that the SES was to be disbanded and replaced by the Departamento de Inteligencia del Estado (DIE), State Intelligence Department The Minister stated that the new unit would have completely new technical personnel and would not have repressive functions. However, according to information Amnesty International subsequently received, many former SES agents continued to work for the DIE.
On 18 November the government sent troops to the mining area of Huanuni after declaring a strike by the miners there illegal. The miners had gone on strike to call for the restoration of human rights, a wage increase and an amnesty for political prisoners. Some reports
116
indicated that as many as 200 miners had been arrested On 24 November Amnesty International urged President Torrelio to release all the detained miners. All were freed after a month following mediation by the Roman Catholic church.
During December about 1,000 people went on hunger-strike to demand a full amnesty, the release of all political prisoners and the right of political exiles to return to Bolivia.
International concern about violations of human rights in Bolivia was such that in 1980 the situation became the subject of study and investigation by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States and the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Amnesty International submitted information on human rights violations in Bolivia to both these bodies during 1981.
