China
The main concerns of Amnesty International were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the detention without trial of political prisoners and the use of the death penalty. Throughout 1981 detention without trial was used to curb dissent in China. In April many editors of unofficial magazines were arrested. In November, in Shanghai, a number of Roman Catholic priests, who had only been released from long periods of detention shortly before, were again detained for their beliefs. In June the National People's Congress removed the requirement that death sentences be reviewed by the Supreme Court
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience more than 20 people who had edited or contributed to unofficial magazines, who were arrested in April 1981. Unofficial magazines began to be published in late 1978 following a period when wall posters had flourished, but since March 1979 the authorities had periodically issued warnings that unofficial publications would not be allowed to continue. In 1979 and 1980 a number of activists in the "democracy movement" were arrested, including Wei Jingsheng and Liu Qing. They and others were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
In response to these arrests and bans representatives from some 21
191
unofficial magazines and groups met in Guangzhou (Canton City) in October 1980 to set up the "National Association of Democratic Journals". They hoped in this way to meet the authorities' requirement that every publication should have a recognized organization responsible for it The organization was never itself recognized by the authorities and many of the representatives were among those arrested in April 1981. Also arrested in April were 11 signatories of a petition sent on 31 August 1980 to the government calling for the release of Liu Qing.
Amongst those arrested in early April 1981 in Peking was Fu Shenqi. Fu Shenqi, aged 28, went to work in a Shanghai generator factory when he graduated from middle school. A member of the Communist Youth League, in 1978 he became active in the "democracy movement" in Shanghai and organized a reform group. The following year he helped found the unofficial magazine Voice of Democracy in Shanghai. In May 1980 Fu Shenqi was a candidate in the election of the local People's Representative at his factory in Shanghai City South District Factory officials allegedly threatened that workers who voted for him would not receive a wage rise. Fu Shenqi was replaced as a candidate by a npminee of the party committee.
When the "National Association of Democratic Journals" was formed in October 1980 it established its own magazine. Responsibility. From issue number three, Fu Shenqi became its chief editor. He had also signed the petition on behalf of Liu Qing. He was arrested in April 1981 in Peking where he had gone to ask the authorities to allow unofficial magazines to continue publication. He was still detained without charge or trial by the end of the year.
Also arrested in April 1981 was Wang Xizhe. Wang Xizhe, in his late 30s, was a high school student when the Cultural Revolution began in 1966. Like many young people at that time, he joined a Red Guard group. However, in 1968 the authorities put an end to the Cultural Revolution and many young Red Guards were arrested Wang Xizhe was arrested in late 1968. A year later he was released from detention and sent to work in the countryside in Yingde county (in the north of Guangdong province). However he was eventually allowed to return to Guangzhou (Canton City) and found a job in a factory. In November 1974 he joined two other young men, Li Zhengtian and Chen Yiyang, putting up a 67-page wall poster in Guangzhou. Entitled "On Socialist Democracy and the Legal System", it was signed Li Yizhe, a pseudonym made up from their names. It protested against the arbitrary actions which followed the Cultural Revolution and demanded a form of socialism based on a legal code. This wall poster was criticized by the authorities and in
192
late 1974 the three were sent to work "under supervision" in the countryside. In Marchl977 they were charged with being "counterrevolutionaries" and sent to labour reform camps. They were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Wang Xizhe was released on 1 January 1979 just as the "democracy movement" was beginning in China. He was later associated with one of the earliest unofficial magazines, April Fifth Forum, in Peking, and became the editor of the magazine Learners' Bulletin in Guangdong (Canton province). Wang Xizhe was among a number of associates of unofficial magazines who in May 1980 condemned the arrest of Liu Qing, a former editor of April Fifth Forum. He was arrested on 20 April 1981 at his place of work in Guangzhou. Some 350 documents and possessions were seized by the Public Security forces, according to a Hong Kong student delegation who appealed for his release a month later. The delegation reported that he had not been charged and was "not allowed to meet any family members or friends".
In November 1981 five Roman Catholic priests were arrested in Shanghai. According to Roman Catholic sources in Hong Kong, they were detained for maintaining links with the Vatican and for opposition to the government-sponsored Chinese Patriotic Cathohc Association. All of them had previously spent up to 20 years in detention, having been arrested on similar charges in the mid-1950s. They had been released in 1978 and 1979, during a period of liberalization of religious activities. After these arrests the authorities warned Catholics in China against contact with the Vatican. At a meeting of religious leaders and others on 13 December 1981 Zhang Zhiyi, deputy head of the United Front Work Department of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, stated that it was correct to attack "counter-revolutionaries hidden in religious circles, who have followed the wishes of the Curia Romana, engaged in criminal activities against China and the Chinese people and tried to undermine the independence of the Chinese churches". The five priests were believed to have been detained solely for the exercise of their right to freedom of religion. Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
Among them was Father Vincent Zhu Hongsheng, aged 66. Father Vincent, a member of the Society of Jesus, was first arrested in 1955. He was tried in 1960 and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment, reportedly because of his opposition to the Patriotic Catholic Association. He was released in 1979 after 24 years' detention and, with the permission of the authorities, moved to his brother's house in Shanghai. Also arrested in November was Father Stanislas Shen Baishun, aged 79, a member of the Society of Jesus. Father Shen had
193
spent 20 years in detention because of his beliefs. Released in 1979, he was rearrested on 6 May 1980 and sent back to the Beimaolin labour camp in Anhui province. He was allowed to return to Shanghai for health reasons shortly after, then rearrested on 19 November 1981.
Amnesty International was concerned that the authorities continued to use "re-education-through-labour" as a form of detention without trial. This penalty was provided by the Decision of the State Council Relating to Problems of Rehabilitation through Labour of 1957. The validity of this legislation was reaffirmed by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (China's parliament) in November 1979. Most of the activists in the "democracy movement" arrested since 1979 were believed to have been detained under this legislation. They were sent for terms of up to three years' detention (which may be extended to a maximum of four years) without trial or any reference to a judicial body.
Among those detained under this legislation was Liu Qing. Liu Qing, a machine technician aged about 34, was Qdiior oï April Fifth Forum, one of the most prominent unofficial journals. On 11 November 1979 he was among those selling unofficial transcripts of the trial of Wei Jingsheng in front of the "Democracy Wall" in Peking. The police intervened to stop the sale and arrested some of the sellers, most of whom were released after a few days. That evening Liu Qing went to Peking police headquarters to ask about those arrested and was himself detained The following day, he was served with a 15-day detention order for "disturbing public order". He remained in detention and seven months later was sent to a "re-education" camp in Lianhuasi near Huaxian in Shaanxi province to complete a three-year detention order, which was backdated to begin on 12 November 1979. He smuggled an open letter out of his detention camp written in January 1981. In it he called on the authorities to give him an open trial or to release him. He also complained that he had been ill-treated and beaten during interrogation.
In November Li Shuang, a 25-year-old scenery painter for the Youth Theatre in Peking, was sent for two years' "re-education-through-labour" without charge or trial. Li Shuang, the fiancée of a French diplomat, Emmanuel Bellefroid, was detained on 9 September 1981 when she came out of the diplomatic residential area in Peking to meet her sister. No formal charges against Li Shuang were made public. However Chinese press statements accused her of being "involved in hooligan activities on a big scale". This was probably a reference to an unofficial art exhibition held in Peking in 1980. The Chinese press also accused her of" crimes against public decency", a reference to her staying at the flat of her fiancé. Amnesty International
194
called on the government to make public the charges against her and either bring her to trial or release her unconditionally.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of the death penalty for a wide range of criminal and "counterrevolutionary" offences. Amnesty International appealed for the death sentences on Jiang Qing, the widow of Mao Zedong, and Zhang Chunqiao to be commuted Their sentences were announced on 25 January 1981, after the trial of 10 members of the former "ultra-leftist" administration. The sentences were passed with a two-year stay of execution, which meant that execution depended on the prisoner's behaviour during that period In a news release on 25 January 1981 Amnesty International declared that the trial of the 10 had failed to meet internationally accepted standards, and urged that the death sentences on Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao be commuted.
Amnesty International was particularly disturbed at a marked increase in the number of executions reported after a decision of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress on 10 June 1981. The decision stipulated that for a two-year period the Supreme Court would not automatically review all death sentences. According to press reports at least 87 people were executed between 10 June and 25 August 1981. In a letter of 11 September 1981 to Marshal Ye Jianying, Chairperson of the National People's Congress, Amnesty International urged the standing committee to reconsider its decision and commute all death sentences.
