Gambia
The trial of six members of a political group called the Movement for Justice in Africa (MOJA), which opened in November 1980, continued through the first six months of 1981. They were charged with "managing an unlawful society" and "possessing firearms and ammunition". All had been arrested on 31 October 1980, some 48 hours after the authorities had declared MOJA and the Gambia Socialist Revolutionary Party (GSRP) to be"unlawful societies". This followed the killing of the Deputy Commander of the Field Forces, the Gambia's army, and official announcements that Libyan agents had been involved in an attempt to overthrow the government On 4 April 1981 the Magistrate's Court ruled that four of the accused had no case to answer and should be released. The court continued proceedings against the two remaining defendants — Koro Tijan Sallah and Fakebba Juwara — and on 10 July 1981 found them guilty of "managing an unlawful society". After paying a fine they were released. An appeal was lodged
Amnesty International expressed concern that the charges against the six accused might relate to their activities as members of MOJA
38
before it was banned, activities which were then lawful. An Amnesty International observer attended the trial in late December 1980 and early January 1981. He concluded that the trial had been conducted fairly. However, the magistrate's ruling of 10 July was not available in 1981. Without it, it was not possible to determine whether the charge had been applied retroactively.
On 30 July 1981, while President Jawara was out of the country, an armed rebellion took place and most of the capital was seized by insurgents. A new 12-person government, calling itself the National Revolutionary Council, was formed under Kukli Samba Sanyang. He announced that a "dictatorship of the proletariat" would be created in the Gambia. President Jawara declared that a "foreign power" was behind the rebellion and called upon neighbouring Senegal to intervene. Senegalese troops were dispatched to the Gambia and quickly encircled Banjul and the rebel headquarters in Bakau. In response, the rebels threatened to kill 34 hostages, including President Jawara's wife and children and several government ministers. The rebels also freed a large number of prisoners, perhaps as many as 100, held in Banjul's Mile Two prison and provided them with arms. There was widespread looting in Banjul, and the rebels and former prisoners were reported to have shot and killed large numbers of people, perhaps as many as several hundred. By 5 August the remaining pockets of resistance were overwhelmed by the Senegalese troops and all of the hostages freed. Kukli Samba Sanyang and nine other rebels were reported to have fled to Guinea Bissau. The final death toll, from killings during the rebellion and the military action to suppress it, was estimated at between 500- and 2,000.
A state of emergency was declared. Wide powers of search, arrest and detention of individuals " suspected of having participated, aided or abetted in the rebellion" were given to the police and to the Senegalese forces. A curfew was imposed and all meetings and processions banned. One week after the end ofthe rebellion 8 3 people had been arrested. This figure increased to 814 by mid-September 1981 and to over 1,000 by the end of the year. Most of the detainees were held at the Field Force depot and primary school in Bakau, although about 100 were moved to Mile Two prison in Banjul in September 1981. Amongst those arrested were some 100 soldiers of the Gambian Field Forces, several hundred people arrested for looting and other criminal offences, and members of both the official and the banned opposition. Several senior members of the National Congress Party (NCP), including its leader Sherrif Dibba, were arrested, as were reported sympathizers with the MOJA. A tribunal of preliminary investigation, known as the Review Tribunal, was established in mid-August 1981 consisting of a chairperson and five
39
members, appointed by the government According to official sources its function was to "make recommendations to the President as to who should continue to be detained and who should not . . and all individuals appearing before it would be " free to exercise their right to legal counsel of their choice . . According to the Gambia's 1970 Constitution, detainees arrested during a state of emergency should be brought before " an independent and impartial tribunal" within one month of being detained, and thereafter at six-monthly intervals. Reports received by Amnesty International indicated that a large number of those who appeared before the Review Tribunal did so without defence counsel. There appeared to have been too few defence lawyers available to handle the large number of cases and, in the absence of government-sponsored legal aid, many detainees might have been unable to afford lawyers' fees. By the end of the year the tribunal had reportedly investigated the cases of some 400 individuals.
In late August 1981 Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about reports that a number of detainees arrested at the time of the rebellion, probably between 10 and 20, had died of suffocation earlier that month in Banjul's police station, which did not fall to the rebels. Among those reported dead were Femi Djeng, a well-known journalist with Radio Gambia, and Nyanga Sallah, brother of Koro Tijan Sallah. Concern was also expressed at reports that detainees in Bakau were being refused visits from families, and that some had no defence counsel at their hearing before the Review Tribunal. The authorities replied that there was no substance to these reports, and gave assurances that all detainees were being"treated in accordance with the law and established principles of human rights".
On 25 September 1981 it was announced that five courts would be created, as a special division of the Supreme Court, to try those detainees whom the authorities wished to prosecute. The government also announced that the judges and prosecuting attorneys for these courts were to be recruited from four Commonwealth countries (Sierra Leone, Ghana, Nigeria and Sri Lanka) to ensure the "objectivity" of the proceedings. The first of these courts began its hearings on 18 November 1981. On 21 December 1981 Tapha Camara, Mbemba Camara, Simon Talibo Saneh, Mamadou Banda, Aliou Salla, Mamadou Sonko and Mass Corr were convicted of high treason and conspiracy and were sentenced to death. Mbemba Camara was also convicted of murder. The accused were assisted by defence lawyers during the trial. They all lodged appeals against their convictions and sentences which had not begun by the end of 1981.
Amnesty International was concerned by reports that conditions of imprisonment, particularly at the Field Force depot in Bakau, were harsh. Detainees were reported to be held in overcrowded rooms, with
40
poor sanitation and hygiene; food was inadequate. Although many detainees were reportedly beaten and ill-treated during August, these practices were apparently stopped Visits by relatives and friends were allowed at die Field Force depot, although with occasional restrictions. Some detainees, including NCP leader Sherrif Dibba, were reportedly being held in total isolation in Mile Two prison.
On 30 September 1981 Mustapha Danso was executed by firing-squad In December 1980 he had been convicted of murdering the Deputy Commander of the Field Force, and sentenced to death. Although he was granted the right to appeal, no proceedings had taken place before the July 1981 rebellion, during which he was released from Mile Two prison by the rebels. It was reported that Mustapha Danso murdered several people in the days following his release. The 30 September execution was the first reported in the Gambia since independence in 1965.
