Afghanistan
Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, trials of political prisoners that fell short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial, torture and the death penalty.
Widespread fighting continued in Afghanistan between government troops reinforced by Soviet forces and various armed opposition groups controlling parts of the country's territory. It was accompanied by allegations of human rights violations on both sides. There were frequent reports that civilians suspected of sympathizing with one side or the other had been tortured and imprisoned without trial
The continuation of hostilities and difficulties in obtaining reliable information inhibited research into human rights violations. Amnesty International was not in a pos ition to estimate the number of political prisoners held The government did not publish any statistics on the number of political prisoners arrested or imprisoned, and international humanitarian organizations were not allowed to visit political prisoners during 1981. However, Amnesty International estimated that between three and four thousand political prisoners were held in Kabul's Pule Charchi prisoa
Amnesty International was concerned about reports that many hundreds of political prisoners were arrested during the year, particularly after August. In August 1981 reports stated that 275 members of the pro-Chinese group Shu'la-i Jawed, including its leader Osman Landi, and other left-wing groups, had been arrested since July. Reports also stated that a number of people belonging to what the government described as "anti-national forces" were arrested in Kabul between 11 and 15 August and identified them as members of another pro-Chinese group, the Sama, By October the number arrested had reportedly risen to 500. No details of the charges against these prisoners or their place of detention were made public by the government Amnesty International wrote to President Karmal on 31 December expressing its concern about reported political arrests and asked the government to review the cases of all political prisoners.
182
Amnesty International stated that it appeared that some of those imprisoned had been arrested solely because of their beliefs, and that they had not used or advocated violence. It urged the release of all such prisoners.
Amnesty International received reports that political prisoners were being held in Kabul, Herat, Kandahar and Jalalabad, and also in the provinces: Aikbak Jail (Samangar province), in Helmand, Kun-duz, Parwan, Baghlan, and Balkh provinces and in Sheberghan prison in Jowzjan province. Most prisoners were officially reported to have been arrested for "being deceived by counter-revolutionaries" or "disrupting the peace". During 1981 the government announced the release of at least 1,772 political prisoners. Amnesty International welcomed reports of releases on 27 April 1981 and asked for details of the categories of political prisoners released, the place of their detention and the names of the released prisoners.
Many of those arrested were held without trial for questioning for several weeks or months and then reportedly released. During 1981 Amnesty International received a few reports from released prisoners that they had been beaten and given electric shocks during interrogation in 1980. Other reports received by Amnesty International, which did not name individual prisoners, alleged that such practices continued throughout 1981.
On 8 February 1981 Kabul radio announced that a Special Revolutionary Court had tried an undisclosed number of people on charges including "terrorism and robbery". Some were released, others sentenced to "varying terms of imprisonment, including life imprisonment". It stated that four men — Rahmatollah, Bahram, Khanzada and Akhtar Mohammad — alleged members of the armed opposition group, the Hezbi Islami, had been sentenced to death for various offences under the criminal code, including "exploding government property" and "robbery, murder and trespass". Kabul radio stated that they had been executed. No details about their trial, defence arrangements, or whether there had been an appeal to a court of law were disclosed. In a cable of 12 February 1981 Amnesty International expressed its concern about the executions.
Kabul radio announced on 3 May 1981 that two men from Parwan province — Bahadur Ghani Khan and Tajawol Sarim — described as "traitors and foreign agents", had been sentenced to death by an unknown court and executed for killings and looting. No details of the charges or trial were revealed. Similarly, the government did not disclose details of the trial of an unknown number of people executed for being " terrorists found guilty of frightening people and kidnapping youth", according to a Kabul radio report of 18 July. Allah Mohammed, Payanda Ahangar and Hassan were reportedly among
183
those executed On 6 August Kabul radio announced the execution of six more men, school teachers and civil servants, sentenced to death by a revolutionary tribunal for "terrorist activities". Kabul radio said that they were " staunch enemies of the revolution". Seventeen others were sentenced to prison terms of between one and 16 years. The report indicated they had been involved in the 21 and 22 February 1980 demonstrations (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Reports in the international press slated that the six executed were supporters ofthe left-wing guerrilla leader Abdul Majid Khalakhani, who was executed '\ri\9^0 {see Amnesty International Report 1981).
On each occasion Amnesty International cabled the President expressing its concern about the executions. It wrote to the President on 31 December stating that its concern was aggravated by the absence of evidence that the minimum legal safeguards for a fair and open trial with an appeal to an independent tribunal — specified in Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights — had been applied. Amnesty International said that it was equally concerned about "executions" by groups fighting the government It asked the government to verify a report in the international press of 30 September that an Afghan woman, Shaista, and an alleged accomplice, Bas Khan, had been "sentenced to death by an Islamic court" for "passing secret information about Muslim groups" by an Islamic revolutionary group, the harkat-e-inqilabi Referring to the continuing violence in the country Amnesty International explained that this could never justify the killing of peaceful demonstrators or the death penalty, whether by the government or by armed groups opposing it It urged the President to take steps to prevent further executions of political prisoners in Afghanistan. In late December Amnesty International received reports that leaders of the guerrilla group the Hezbilslami, which had captured three Soviet soldiers, had stated that the three would probably be tried under Islamic law and executed In the absence of direct channels of communication to the group. Amnesty International conveyed its concerns to the United Nations with a request that it bring these to the attention of the group.
Throughout 1981 Amnesty International continued to receive inquiries about the 12,000 or more people arrested under the previous government who subsequently "disappeared" and whose fate remained uncertain. Among them were 450 individuals details of whose cases were given to the Home Ministry by the Amnesty International delegation visiting Kabul in February 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1981). In its 31 December letter Amnesty International again asked the government about former Prime Minister Mohammed Moosa Shafiq, believed to have been arrested on 27 April 1978 and taken to an undisclosed prison. It reiterated the
184
government's obligations under international law to do everything possible to trace the "disappeared" people and expressed grave concern that no steps appeared to have been taken by the government to investigate these cases.
