Mauritania
The main concerns of Amnesty International were detention and banishment without charge or trial, unfair trials of alleged opponents of ihe government, judicial amputations and floggings, and the death penalty.
Throughout 1981 Amnesty International appealed for the release of senior officials of the deposed government of former President Moktar Ould Daddah. They were held under house arrest or banished to rural areas without charge or trial. Former ministers Ahmed Ould Daddah and Hamdi Ould Mouknass were arrested in late 1979, and remained under house arrest ever since, although Hamdi Ould Mouknass was allowed to travel overseas for medical treatment In April 1980 former ministers Mohameden Ould Babbah, Abdoulaye Baro and Abdallah Ould Ismael were arrested and placed under house arrest or banished to rural areas. None was charged or tried. Amnesty International continued to investigate the case of Sidi Cheikh Ould Abdellahi, also a former minister, arrested in May 1980.
In late December 1980 Ahmed Baba Miske, former Ambassador to the United Nations, and at least four others were arrested after the authorities claimed to have uncovered a "pro-Libyan" plot to overthrow the government. Ahmed Baba Miske and Mohammed El-Wafi were placed under house arrest in Akjoujt, while the others were
60
believed to have been imprisoned. Charges against them were dismissed by a civil court in late February 1981 and all were released
On 16 March 1981 former senior officers of the Mauritanian army staged an armed attempt to overthrow the ruling Comité militaire de salut national (CMSN), the Military Committee for National Salvation in Nouakchott ( see Amnesty International Report 1981). The attack was repulsed by forces loyal to the CMSN and at least nine rebels and 50 alleged sympathizers were arrested Lieutenant-Colonel Ahmed Salem Ould Sidi, former Vice-President of the CMSN, Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Ba Ould Abdel Kader, former Minister of Education and member of the CMSN, and Lieutenants Moustapha Niang and Mohammed Doudou Seek were convicted of" high treason, desertion, murder and conspiracy with the enemy" and sentenced to death by the Special Military Tribunal. Five others received sentences of life imprisonment with hard labour. Despite appeals for clemency from Amnesty International and other organizations, the four men sentenced to death were executed in late March 1981. About 20 alleged sympathizers were freed in late March, but in April 1981 the Supreme Military Tribunal imposed death sentences in absentia on three alleged participants in the coup attempt. The authorities were reported in July 1981 to have ordered the release of all the individuals who had been detained following the coup attempt, but it was not known whether this order also applied to those who were tried and sentenced to imprisonment in March 1981. Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Ba Ould Abdel Kader and Mous-'apha Niang had previously been sentenced to death in absentia by the Special Military Tribunal in November 1980 and February 1981 respectively. Both were convicted of desertion and treason. Amnesty International was concerned that these trials were held in the absence of the accused, in camera, and without defence representation.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the cruel penalties imposed by the Shari'a, Islamic law, court established in July
1980.	The first sentences imposed by this court were publicly carried out in 1980 and included two executions by firing-squad, three amputations of the right hand, and nine public floggings. In late May
1981,	29 individuals convicted of theft by the Shari'a court were publicly whipped, and on 12 June 1981 another individual had his right hand amputated by a doctor, also after conviction for theft Amnesty International called for an end to these penalties and appealed to medical personnel not to participate in amputations.
61
