Togo
Amnesty International's main concerns were the detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government, the ill-treatment of detainees, and the imprisonment of alleged government opponents after a trial in August 1979 which fell short of internationally recognized standards.
The authorities continued to detain without charge or trial individuals suspected of political opposition. In May and October 1981 Amnesty International asked the authorities for information about individuals arrested and detained reportedly for political reasons. Among these were Takpati Gilbert, a government
87
administrator at Lama Kara arrested in early 1981, Fini Koffi Louis and Elizabeth Mensah, both arrested in March 1981, and journalist Placca Akouete, arrested in February 1981. In December 1981 the government replied that Takpati Gilbert had been released in August 1981, after being held for "professional misconduct" and the "publication of subversive documents". The other three were among six individuals held for printing or distributing"subversive documents", and were apparently being held without trial. Three other people about whom information was requested were apparently being held for embezzlement Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to end detention without trial for political reasons, and to ensure respect for the right to freedom of conscience and expression in Togo.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza, Kouao Stéphan Sanvee, Kwassi Jean Savi de Tove, Kouassivi Alphonse de Souza and Abalo de Souza, who were convicted in August 1979 by the State Security Court of conspiracy to overthrow the government Death sentences on the first two were commuted to life imprisonment and the others received prison sentences of between five and 10 years. The trial failed to establish adequately the guilt of the accused (see Amnesty International Report 1980). There were procedural irregularities, particularly with regard to the right to defence counsel at all stages of the judicial process. In early January 1982 President Ey adema pardoned and released Kouassivi Alphonse de Souza and Abalo de Souza.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of harsh conditions of detention at the gendarmerie (police) headquarters in the capital, Lome, and repeatedly called for improvements. Detainees were held in dark, overcrowded cells, with little ventilation, poor sanitation and no exercise. Visits were very restricted and prisoners were reported to be beaten by guards. Conditions at the Central Prison in Lome were believed to be harsh for political detainees, who were rarely allowed out of their cells and received poor food.
