Federal Republic of Germany
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about prison conditions for people suspected or convicted of politically motivated crimes, despite the willingness expressed by the authorities to make improvements. Amnesty International found that the prolonged isolation imposed on such prisoners (whether in solitary confinement or small groups) had seriously affected their health (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981). This finding was never disputed by the authorities. It was corroborated by medical reports received by Amnesty International in 1981 on Use Schwipper, an alleged member of the "2 June Movement" awaiting trial on a charge of murder in complicity with others. Professor Dr Detlef Cabanis, a specialist in neurology and psychiatry, was appointed by the Landgericht {ttpomA. court) of Berlin to assess her fitness for trial. He found symptoms which fully accorded with the conclusions which Amnesty International had drawn in other cases in 1979 (see Amnesty International Memorandum on Prison Conditions ofPersons Suspected or Convicted of Politically Motivated Crimes in the Federal Republic of Germany). These included low blood pressure, circulatory problems, lack of concentration and in this case, above all, severe depressioa A prison doctor also concluded that Ilse Schwipper suffered from a severe and "exhausting" depression "which raises serious doubts about her fitness to be incarcerated".
265
Since her arrest in 1974 Use Schwipper had been held in varying prison conditions including a period of about four years in small-group isolation. In his report Dr Cabanis linked her symptoms to the prison conditions combined with the "almost seven-year long period of pretrial detention . .
Amnesty International continued to raise this issue with the authorities. They replied at some length in a letter dated 23 December 1981 from the Chairperson of the Standing Conference of Ministers and Senators of Justice of the Länder {sidXts), the Minister of Justice for Niedersachsea The letter acknowledged that prisoners were detained either in small groups in maximum security wings, or alone. It stressed however that even those held alone were offered a certain amount of contact with other prisoners — although under strict control, which was necessary for security. Some prisoners rejected contact with other prisoners in these circumstances. These conditions could not be called isolatioa Finally the Minister of Justice said that he "was not aware" of any damage to the health of prisoners caused by their prison conditions.
Another concern of Amnesty International in 1981 was the increasing number of people prosecuted for expressing opinions which the authorities regarded as constituting "support for a criminal association" in the sense of Article 129a of thé criminal code (see Amnesty International Report 1981). The Oberlandesgericht {OLG), state supreme court, of Stuttgart took a decision on 6 February 1981, which, although it did not lead to imprisonment, in Amnesty International's view set a precedent for an excessively wide interpretation of the law. The defendants were supporters of demands made by hunger-striking prisoners. They had displayed a banner calling "for the grouping together and self-determination of prisoners from the Red Army Fraction" (RAF), bearing a red five-pointed star. The court deduced an "ultimate", "real" aim of support for the terrorist organization, even though the opinions they expressed related only to the direct demands of the hunger-strikers. In other words a conviction was based not on what the demonstrators actually expressed, but on an " ultimate aim" perceived in their expressions by the court. Charged under Article 129a of the criminal code with support of a terrorist association, which carries a maximum sentence of five years' imprisonment, the defendants were fined DM600 (£150) each. Amnesty International believed that the reasoning of the Stuttgart court contradicted a statement made in April 1981 to Amnesty International by the Federal Minister of Justice. He had stated "that a criminal prosecution solely because of support of the hunger-strike and the demands connected with it should be out of the question" (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Amnesty
266
International was following the cases of some 50 defendants in several trials similarly charged with "support for a criminal association". Most were still pending by the end of 1981.
Amnesty International followed the case of 10 people accused of spray-painting slogans on motorway signs on the night of 4-5 April
1981	in support of the hunger-striking prisoners. They were charged not only with damaging the signs but also with " supporting a criminal association" on the basis of the slogans. The accused were detained for several weeks and then released until their trial which had not taken place by the end of 1981.
Conscientious objectors to military service whose applications for conscientious objector status were rejected by the various examination boards (Prüfungsausschüsse) continued to be imprisoned. Amnesty International considered them to be prisoners of conscience. Horst-Dieter Mrass was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment by the Schößengericht {Xoy assessors' court) of Oldenburg on 16 September 1981. The 63 days he had already spent under military arrest were deducted from the sentence. Thomas Hansen, whose rejected application for conscientious objector status was based on moral and political considerations, was given a two-month suspended prison sentence by the Schöffengericht of Oldenburg on 24 August 1981. The judge stated that he should be released from any further obligation of serving in the army. However he was called up a second time. When he again refused to serve he was sentenced by the same court to a six-month prison sentence on 7 October 1981. The result of Thomas Hansen's appeal was not available, but it was learned he had been called up a third time and again charged with refusal to carry out military service. Bernhard Willeke, a pacifist, was awaiting trial in
1982	on a charge of desertion and refusal to obey. His application for conscientious objector status was turned down by an examination board before which he appeared on 14 May 1979. He then stated that he would not submit to further examination of his conscience.
267
