Yugoslavia
Amnesty International noted a marked increase in political trials in 1981. In April a decision was announced at a meeting of public prosecutors to prosecute political offences more vigorously. This was reflected in the harsh sentences imposed under federal law from July to September on over 300 ethnic Albanians in the predominantly Albanian-inhabited Autonomous Province of Kosovo. The majority were convicted for their part in nationalist demonstrations which broke out in the towns of Pristina and Prizren in March and spread to many other towns in Kosovo in the first days of April. A number of ethnic Albanians were also convicted of political offences in Macedonia, Montenegro and Bosnia-Hercegovina
In other parts of Yugoslavia, too, there were political trials, often involving people convicted for the expression of nationalist sentiments. In Croatia tiiree former prisoners of conscience — Dr Franjo Tudjman, Vlado Gotovac and Marko Veselica — were sentenced to imprisonment, as was Dobroslav Paraga, a 20-year-old student(see Amnesty International Report 1981). Dr Tudjman, aged 60, a historian, veteran partisan and former army general, and the writer Vlado Gotovac, aged 51, were convicted in separate trials of "hostile propaganda" because of interviews they had given to foreign journalists between 1977 and 1980. Dr Tudjman, whose trial was observed by an Amnesty International delegate, was sentenced in February to three years' imprisonment and a five-year ban on public expressioa Vlado Gotovac was sentenced in June to two years' imprisonment and a four-year ban on public expression. Their sentences were confirmed on appeal by the Supreme Court of Croatia. In September Dr Marko Veselica, aged 45, an economist and former senior party official arrested in April, was sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment and a four-year ban on public expression for "hostile propaganda" and "participation in hostile activity". None of these men had used or advocated violence; they were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
In September the poet Gojko Djogo, aged 41, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment by the district court of Belgrade for "hostile propaganda". The charges were based on six poems from a collection of his poetry which was published in April but immediately banned by the authorities and destroyed At his trial, which began in July, Gojko Djogo was accused of having insulted the memory of President Tito in
308
his poems and of having "depicted the socio-political situation in Yugoslavia maliciously and untruthfully". The poems in question were allegorical; excerpts cited in the indictment contained no explicit references to President Tito or to events in Yugoslavia. Gojko Djogo denied the charges; he spoke of the "inherent ambiguity" of poetry and said that the prosecutor had taken his verses out of context and misinterpreted them. Following his arrest in May he was released into provisional liberty in July, and remained at liberty pending appeal.
From April onwards Amnesty International repeatedly asked the authorities for details of the charges against people detained in Kosovo after nationalist demonstrations in March and April. It urged full legal safeguards for detainees and appealed for the release of all those who had not used or advocated violence. The authorities did not respond The chief demand of the demonstrators — who included university and high school students, workers and peasants — was that Kosovo should cease to be part of the republic of Serbia and be given its own republic status. Some were also said to have called for Kosovo's union with neighbouring Albania. The demonstrations ended in violent clashes with security forces. Conflicting official statements asserted that nine or 11 people had died and some 260 had been injured Unofficial sources have alleged far higher casualties. A state of emergency was declared and the security forces reinforced Army units were brought in. At least 2,000 people were arrested. In June the authorities announced that 506 people who had taken part in the demonstrations had been summarily sentenced to up to 60 days' imprisonment or fines. On 21 July the first in a series of trials of people accused of organizing nationalist demonstrations or of other nationalist activities took place in Kosovo. Bislim Bajrami was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment and Ismail Makiqi and Jakup Rexhepi were sentenced to six years' imprisonment each. They were charged with having founded an illegal group called the People's Liberation Movement of Kosovo, whose alleged aim was to destroy Yugoslavia's constitutional order and social and political system and to forcibly annexe Kosovo to Albania. Most of the defendants in subsequent trials in Kosovo were convicted, like these three, under the broadly formulated Article 114 of the criminal code dealing with "counterrevolutionary endangering of the social order". Some were accused of acts of violence such as firing guns at security forces, and one group of having hijacked a police vehicle carrying arms. However many of the charges appeared unrelated to the use or advocacy of violence. Among many convicted of organizing demonstrations were the students Remzi Lushi, Halil Ismaili, Sabli Lushi, Bislim Ahmeti and Milaim Dervisholi, aged between 18 and 21. On 8 August they were sentenced by the district court of Pristina to prison sentences of
309
between seven and eight years for having organized and led demonstrations on 21 May in Lipljan, during which demonstrators allegedly shouted "We want a republic" and "Release our comrades from prison". Daut Rashani, an 18-year-old high school student, was jailed for six years on 29 July for having written pamphlets of a "hostile content" before and after the demonstrations in Pristina and for having taken part in the demonstrations.
According to a Belgrade newspaper report of 6 September, by 31 August some 245 people in Kosovo had been sentenced under federal law to prison terms of up to 15 years. The trials of some further 60 people were reported in the press in September. The average sentence imposed on approximately 200 named defendants, whose trials were reported in the Yugoslav press between21 July and9 September, was severirand-a-half years' imprisonment To Amnesty International's knowledge none of the trials resulted in acquittal. Public access to these trials was severely restricted. Press access was limited to correspondents of the official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug. Their published reports provided little information about the charges but stated simply that they had been proved There were, however, several references in the Yugoslav press to public concern at the lack of information about the conduct,of investigation proceedings and trials, and about the long sentences imposed on young people. Certain statements by political leaders appeared to indicate that some sentences might be reduced on appeal, but by the end of 1981 Amnesty International had not learned the results of any appeal hearing. In November the foreign press reported that over 100 students from Belgrade, Zagreb and Ljubljana had signed a petition to the authorities asking for a review of judicial policy on these trials. The Yugoslav press reported in November that criminal proceedings had been started against a further 92 ethnic Albanians from the Prizren area in Kosovo. They were apparently charged with painting nationalist slogans on walls and distributing nationalist pamphlets.
A number of clergy of the Roman C atholic, Serbian Orthodox and Muslim faiths — mainly in Bosnia-Hercegovina — were also charged with political offences and tried The official press carried frequent criticisms of priests accused of" clerico-nationalism" and of spreading religious and national hatred. The Roman Catholic clergy were particularly criticized after six children in the parish of Medjugoije in Bosnia-Hercegovina claimed to have seen a vision of the Virgin Mary in June and the parish became a popular site of pilgrimage. In August two local Franciscan friars. Brothers Ferdo Vlasic and Jozo Zovko, were arrested In October Brother Zovko was sentenced by the district court of Mostar to three-and-a-half years' imprisonment on charges of "hostile propaganda". The charges were based on a
310
sermon he had preached in July to pilgrims in which, according to the prosecutor, he had referred to Yugoslavia's post-war history as "40 years' imprisonment". In his defence Brother Zovko pointed out that he had been preaching repentance and had used the biblical metaphor in which the state of sin is likened to imprisonment The court rejected his request that theological experts be called as witnesses and also refused to hear the testimony of parishioners who had been present at the sermon. In November Brother Ferdo Vlasic and another Franciscan, Brother Jozo Krizic, were sentenced by the district court of Mostar to eight and five-and-a-half years' imprisonment respectively. They were charged under Article 131 deaUng with "participation in hostile activity" with having maintained contacts with extremist emigres. An Amnesty International observer was refused entry to the courtroom. In none of these cases were the defendants accused of having used or advocated violence and they were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned about breaches of pre-trial and trial procedures. In some cases these have seriously undermined legal safeguards for the accused, contravening both national law and international standards. An example is the case of the 20-year-old student Dobroslav	International Report 1981).
He was arrested without warrant on 21 November 1980 by the state security police, after he had collected signatures on a petition calUng for an amnesty for political prisoners. Under Yugoslav law he should have been brought before an investigating judge within three days. However, this happened only on 25 November 1980, when he made a self-incriminating statement which was to form the basis of the indictment against him. On 30 December 1980 he retracted this statement, declaring that he had made it under pressure from the state security police who had denied him food for six days, interrogated him for long periods, intimidated him and threatened to kill him. This retraction was not entered into the court dossier until 6 January 1981, nor was it mentioned in the indictment against him ofl6 March. His trial opened on 13 May and the general public was refused access. Only members of the accused's family and a small number of people with official passes were allowed entry. Two Amnesty International observers were not allowed access until the second day. The court refused all the defence proposals for presenting evidence and caUing defence witnesses, with the exception of a short statement by the accused's father. The prosecution, on the other hand, was allowed to produce evidence which had not been included in the dossier, even though this is not permitted by the rules of procedure. Dobroslav Paraga was found guilty of "hostile propaganda" and "participation in hostile activity" and sentenced to three years' imprisonment Amnesty International's
311
trial observers were of the view that the court could not have reasonably concluded that the evidence produced had proved the charges against him. Amnesty International believed that the charges were brought as a result of his non-violent exercise of his right to freedom of expression. In September his sentence was raised on appeal to five years' imprisonment and he was sent to the island prison of Goli Otok.
Amnesty International learned of three death sentences passed in 1981. Three other people were executed after their death sentences had been confirmed by a higher court Vojislav Rajcic on 18 April for war crimes committed during the Second World War, Dragisa Ristic on 23 January for murder, and Gemshit Braha on 22 October, also for murder.
