United States of America
In October Amnesty International published a Proposal for a commission of inquiry into the effect of domestic intelligence activities on criminal trials in the United States of America. The report documented misconduct by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) which may have affected the trials of some members of groups targeted for FBI Intelligence work. Practices referred to included the production of false evidence, mis-statements about FBI action, harassment, infiltration of defence teams by informants, and failure to make available information which the defence might have used. Two cases were dealt with at length: those of a Black Panther leader, Elmer "Geronimo" Pratt, convicted of murder in California in 1972, and of Richard Marshall, a member of the American Indian Movement, convicted of murder in South Dakota in 1976. Both men were still in prison at the end of 1981. The report stated that Amnesty International had reached no conclusions on guilt or innocence. It was concerned that there should be an inquiry to determine whether the basis of a fair trial had been undermined and whether misconduct which judges might have treated as isolated irregularities formed part of a pattern.
The proposal had been sent to US Attorney General William French Smith on 1 September. The US Government was urged to establish an independent commission of inquiry to consider inter alia "whether the political views of any citizens, or the FBI's attitude towards those views, have been a factor in prosecutions or the preparation of cases against them and, if so, seek ways of preventing this from occurring in future". No response had been received by the end of 1981.
No prisoners were adopted as prisoners of conscience during 1981, but Amnesty International investigated many cases of prisoners who maintained that although convicted on criminal charges, the real reason for their imprisonment was political. Amnesty International continued to urge the authorities to grant Gary Tyler a new trial or to release him (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981).
Johnny Larry Spain remained in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1981). His lawyer filed a petition oî habeas corpus on his behalf, after a petition for a hearing by the California Supreme
170
Court had been denied Amnesty International wrote to the lawyer urging him to bring its views to the attention of the Federal Court considering Johnny Larry Spain's case. It reaffirmed the content of its letter to Chief Justice Bird of the California Supreme Court which referred in particular to the shackling of Johnny Spain throughout the trial and a juror's conversations with the trial judge. In November the Federal Court dismissed the case on technical grounds, without prejudice to its being refiled A new hearing in the Federal Court was scheduled for March 1982.
Amnesty International made several inquiries of state and federal authorities about allegations that prisoners were being ill-treated. On 12 August it wrote to Warden Frank Blackburn of Louisiana State Penitentiary about allegations that prisoners in Camp J had been ill-treated over a long period Prisoners had allegedly been beaten, kicked and sprayed in the face with mace. Warden Blackburn replied on 8 September that the specific complaints were "without merit and have been thoroughly investigated both by my staff and our headquarters' staff' and that investigations by the FBI at Camp J "could find nothing to substantiate mistreatment".
On 21 August Amnesty International wrote to Governor Edward J. King of Massachusetts about allegations that prisoners in the Massachusetts Correctional Institution at Walpole had been ill-treated over a period of several years. On 6 March prisoners were allegedly clubbed, beaten, kicked and tear-gassed at close range. In his reply of 18 September Governor King stated that: " any allegation of wrongdoing, in any state correctional facility, is immediately investigated by the Commissioner of Corrections". Regarding the incident at Walpole he stated: " full reports and video tapes have been forwarded to the Attorney General and District Attorney. Should they discover any wrongdoings, appropriate remedial action will be taken. To date, no discovery or opinion has come forth."
On 31 July Amnesty International wrote to the US Attorney General to express concern about the treatment of Salvadorians seeking refuge in the USA because they feared persecution in El Salvador. Amnesty International referred to first-hand testimony and reports by lawyers in California and Texas that Salvadorians were subjected to intense pressure to leave the USA and were often not informed of their right to petition for asylum or to legal counsel. " United States' practices may have the effect of contravening national and international laws regarding the non-refoulement [forcible repatriation] of political refugees."
During 1981 Amnesty International remained concerned about the position of Haitians who sought political asylum in the USA. It had sent a telegram to the US authorities expressing concern about
171
the internment of Haitian refugees in Fort Allen, Puerto Rico. In a letter dated 18 November 1980 the US Department of Justice responded that the purpose of the stay at Fort Allen was "to accomplish processing for resettlement purposes", that the refugees would have "full access to lawyers and others" who could assist them with appUcations for political asylum, and that "unless they were criminals or otherwise pose a danger to the larger community" they would not be scheduled for exclusion or deportation hearings.
However, towards the end of 1981, some 2,700 Haitians seeking asylum in the USA were reported to be held in nine camps around the country and in Fort Allen, Puerto Rico, awaiting deportation hearings. Amnesty International was concerned about allegations that the camps were overcrowded, putting pressure on the refugees to return to Haiti, and that legal advice was inadequate. In addition US coastguards started to intercept boats on the high seas believed to be carrying Haitian asylum-seekers. It was alleged that Haitians were taken on board the coastguard vessels. Without access to counsel and in the presence of Haitian Government officials they were given exclusion orders by US immigration officials who also adjudicated any asylum claims.
Work for the abolition of the death penalty and against impending executions continued throughout 1981. On 20 December there were 924 prisoners under sentence ofdeath in the USA, of whom 383 or 41 per cent were black. Thirty-eight states had legislation allowing the death penalty and people were under sentence of death in 28.
Twice during the year Amnesty International appealed against imminent executions. Thomas Sonny Hays was scheduled to be executed in Oklahoma on 14 September by lethal injection, the first such execution proposed in the USA. Amnesty International appealed to the Oklahoma Medical Association not to take part and asserted that participation by doctors in executions would violate medical ethics. On 8 September 1981 a federal judge granted a stay of execution. Colin Clark was scheduled to be executed by electrocution in Louisiana on 5 November, but was granted an indefinite reprieve on 1 November by a Court of Appeal.
On 9 June the US Senate Judiciary Committee voted 13 to 5 in favour of a bill (No. S.l 14 — see Amnesty International Report 1981) which would re-enact the death penalty for certain federal offences such as treason, first-degree murder, espionage and attempting to kill the President. At the end of 1981 the bill was awaiting a vote by the full US Senate.
During a meeting with the US Ambassador to the United Nations, Amnesty IntemationaPs Secretary General urged the US Government to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
172
