Bulgaria
Amnesty International wrote in April 1981 to Todor Zhikov, head of state and Secretary General of the Bulgarian Communist Party, appealing for an amnesty for all prisoners of conscience to mark the 1,300th anniversary of the founding of the Bulgarian state. On 7 July 1981 the Eighth National Assembly passed an amnesty bill. This granted an amnesty for premeditated crimes for which the maximum penalty was three years' imprisonment and for crimes of negligence for which the maximum penalty was five years, provided that the offender had not been previously sentenced to prison for "crimes of a general character". It also appHed to Bulgarian citizens who had left the country illegally if they returned voluntarily by 31 December 1983. In moving the bill it was stated that the amnesty covered only
259
minor crimes. Since the maximum penaUy for almost all political offences is well over three years most people convicted of such offences would not have been affected by the amnesty. To Amnesty International's knowledge no prisoner of conscience benefited from it. The Minister of Justice was reported to have told the National Assembly on this occasion that "in this country there is no political criminality against the social system". This statement was contradicted by information available to Amnesty International.
As in past years, Amnesty International learned of people imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of constitutionally guaranteed human rights. One example was Stefan Cholarov, aged 37, a teache'r at a technical school in the town of Vratsa. He was reportedly arrested after telling his pupils about news reports he had heard on a foreign radio station about workers' strikes in Poland. He had also apparently written to the authorities about political and economic conditions in Bulgaria. On 16 July 1981 he was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment under Article 108 of the criminal code deahng with "anti-state agitation and propaganda" and Article 113 which penalizes political offences against "another workers' state or against armed forces allied with the Bulgarian army".
Halil Uzunoghu, a Turkish citizen, was also, reportedly charged with "anti-state agitation or propaganda". He was arrested in September 1981 while visiting relatives in Bulgaria, after the police found emigre publications in his luggage. At the end of 1981 he was believed to be still detained in Sofia central prison awaiting trial.
Amnesty International continued to work on the cases of three Pomaks — ethnic Bulgarians of the Muslim faith. It had adopted Bajram Gaitov as a prisoner of conscience and was investigating the cases of Jumer Ilanski and Mr Bunzev. They were sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment in 1973 after protesting against an official policy of forced assimilation which meant that Pomaks were required to change their Muslim names for Bulgarian ones.
Amnesty International was concerned by reports that political prisoners had been subjected to severe psychological and sometimes physical pressure while detained for preliminary investigation in the Razvigor Street State Security Centre in Sofia. Preliminary investigation may last for up to six months and the accused has the right of access to defence counsel only with the permission of the Procurator. The information available to Amnesty International indicated that many political prisoners had no access to defence counsel until the investigation had been completed. Most political trials were held in camera. There were also complaints that the accused and defence counsel were unable to prepare an adequate defence because they had been allowed only a few days to study the dossier.
260
Most adopted prisoners of conscience served their sentences in the maximum security prison of Stara Zagora. Former prisoners of conscience stated that out of a total prison population of 1,000 to 1,400 about 250 were political prisoners. It was also claimed that about 15 per cent of all prisoners in Stara Zagora were serving sentences for having attempted to cross the border without official authorization. This offence is pimishable under Article 279 of the criminal code with up to five years' imprisonment and a fine. Prisoners complained of overcrowding in Stara Zagora prison and of inadequate foc^ and medical care. They also complained repeatedly about the noise of constant radio broadcasts and alleged that the loudspeakers in their cells concealed listening equipment. Minor breaches of prison rules were punished by solitary coiifinement with greatly reduced food rations in an unhealed cell, without toilet or washing facilities. Prisoners complained of this punishment being prolonged beyond the maximum two weeks allowed.
On release, some prisoners of conscience had severe restrictions placed on their freedom of movement by local militia authorities. In certain cases this amounted to banishment or assigned residence, although reportedly no formal orders to this effect were served on them.
The criminal code retains the death penalty for 29 crimes. In June 1981 the Bulgarian press reported that Nikola Georgiev had appealed against the death sentence. Together with his two sons he had set fire to an apartment and caused a woman's death. Marin and Ivan Rashkov Metodiev were executed in June 1981 for a "particularly cruel" murder and an attempted murder. In November 1981 Zhivko Hristov Dimitrov was executed after the Military Section of the Supreme Court had confirmed his death sentence for the murder of several people between 1975 and 1981. On 23 November 1981 the Supreme Court confirmed death sentences passed on Georgi Semer-dzhiev and Lyudmila Ravnyashka for murder. In December 1981 Hristo Bogdanov Georgiev was executed for the robbery, rape and murder of several women.
