Morocco and
Western Sahara
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners, "disappearances", and the conditions of detention and reported deaths in detention of a number of military prisoners. It was also concerned about long-term incommunicado detention and irregularities in trial procedures. Amnesty International remained concerned about reports of human rights violations committed by the Polisario Front
In early 1981 unrest led to a number of arrests among students and members of the major left-wing opposition party, the Union socialiste des forces populaires (USFP), Socialist Union of Popular Forces. After the government had announced large price rises for basic foodstuffs, a strike called by the Confédération démocratique du travail (CDT), Democratic Confederation of Labour, for 20 June 1981 was widely supported in a number of cities. The strike led to clashes between demonstrators and the police and army, to widespread arrests, and many deaths. Officials stated that 66 demonstrators had been killed by security forces; opposition sources and several foreign observers cited more than 600 deaths. More than 100 trials were reported after these events, primarily affecting members of the USFP administrative committee and political bureau, CDT officials, and militants of both organizations; tfie two USFP newspapers, Libération and Al Mouharrir, were suspended in June and not allowed to publish.
In October 1981, 14 USFP members of parliament were placed under house arrest after they had withdrawn from parliament claiming that despite a referendum that had extended parliament's term from four to six years, they had been elected to serve only until 1981 and
338
would serve no longer. They were released after a short period when they agreed to rejoin parliament
December 1981 saw fresh arrests, particularly of students. Several trials and convictions followed, and government militia were installed on several university campuses.
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of more than 230 individual prisoners and learned of the release of 13. Among them were approximately 110 members of various Marxist-Leninist movements and of the Union nationale des forces populaires (UNFP), National Union of Popular Forces, tried and sentenced in 1977 or earlier, and 15 peasants from Beni-Mellal arrested in December 1979 and sentenced to up to three years in prisoa Amnesty International was investigating the cases of almost 100 inhabitants of southern Moroccan towns, such as Goulimine and Tan-Tan, who were reportedly taken into custody by the security forces as long ago as 1975, but whose detention and whereabouts were never officially acknowledged. Amnesty International feared that the number of such "disappearances" might be several hundred.
During 1981 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience three USFP leaders. USFP Secretary General Abderrahim Bouabid, member of parliament Mohamed Ly azghi (also the director of the banned newspaper Al Mouharrir), and Mohamed Lahbabi, Professor of Political Economy and member of the USFP political bureau, were sentenced in September 1981 to one year in prisoa They were convicted of producing and disseminating a USFP declaration criticizing the Moroccan Government's agreement to proposals from the Organization of African Unity (OA U) regarding the Western Sahara
Amnesty International also monitored the trial before the Criminal Chamber Appeals Court of Casablanca of Mustapha Karchaoui, editor-in-chief of Al Mouharrir, and five co-defendants including Mohamed Karam, member of the USFP Central Committee, and Noubir Amaoui, Secretary General of the CDT. The defendants, who were charged with complicity in crimes allegedly committed by demonstrators during the strikes of 20 June 1981, faced prison terms of five years or more. At the end of 1981 their trial had not been completed
Despite a number of royal pardons granted during the year, none were granted to political prisoners. On 23 March 1981 Amnesty International informed the Prime Minister and Minister of Justice, Maati Bouabid, of its disappointment that no prisoners of conscience had been granted pardons on 3 March 1981, the 20th anniversary of King Hassan IFs accession to the throne.
In July 1981 Amnesty International sent a delegate to Rabat to
339
observe the trial of 82 people charged with a number of offences against public order related to the events of June 1981. The charges included violations of the Da^/r (decree) of 29 June 1935 concerning demonstrations affecting public order and the decree of 15 November 1958 on public freedoms and gatherings. The verdict was announced on 30 July 1981: 20 defendants were acquitted; 22 were given sentences of one year without remission; 39 received sentences of six months or less; andAbderrahmanBenAmeur, former president ofthe Lawyers' Association of Rabat and former president of the Corporation of Lawyers received a three-year suspended sentence.
Amnesty International was concerned that the Rabat trial fell short of the standards necessary for a fair trial in a number of respects. Several of the defendants were held incommunicado under garde d vue for more than 96 hours without written authorization from the public prosecutor (procureur du roi), contrary to the provisions of Moroccan law. The proceedings dispensed with a separate pre-trial investigation, although the appropriate legal situation for this did not apply in these cases. At the trial itself all requests for the hearing of defence witnesses were rejected by the court and the convictions were based on tenuous evidence.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of ill-treatment during the period of garde a vue, when detainees were held in police custody for interrogation and were allowed no visits from lawyer, family, or independent doctors. Allegations of ill-treatment in police custody were made in the cases of several USFP activists arrested in Tiznit in January 1981. The court rejected their request for medical examinations to verify their claims. Taieb Sessy, President of the Bar Association of Agadir, member of the administrative committee of the USFP, and member of the administrative committee of
Association marocaine des droits de I'homme (AMDH), Moroccan Association of Human Rights, was reportedly badly beaten after being taken into custody on 11 July 1981. He was later convicted of violating provisions of the decree of 29 June 1935 and given a four-month suspended sentence. Similar allegations of ill-treatment reached Amnesty International concerning a number of those arrested for involvement in the events of June 1981. Reports reached Amnesty International from various sources that approximately 30 people had died from asphyxiation in a makeshift detention centre after their arrest on 20 June 1981. Amnesty International was not able to verify these reports.
Amnesty International continued to receive occasional reports of harsh conditions and inadequate medical care in prisons such as Laalou and the Prison civile (civil prison) of Marrakech. In November 1981 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of two hunger-
340
strikers, Bouri Najem and Ahmed Ould Sidiya Daya, who had gone on hunger-strike in the Prison civile of Marrakech to protest against conditions.
On at least two occasions representatives of international nongovernmental organizations who had been sent to Morocco to inquire about the human rights situation or to observe trials were summarily expelled from the country.
In February 1981 Amnesty International sent a mission to Morocco and the organization's three delegates met officials from the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Interior, the prison administration, the judiciary, and with Prime Minister and Minister of Justice Maati Bouabid In December 1981 Amnesty International submitted a memorandum of its conclusions based on those meetings, its continuing analysis of testimony received relating to its concerns in Morocco, and its assessment of events subsequent to the mission.
Amnesty International's concerns included the procedures and practices relating to garde à vue whereby political prisoners have been held for months and sometimes years in the exclusive custody of the police; repeated and consistent allegations of ill-treatment; the continuing imprisonment of more than 100 prisoners of conscience; inadequate medical care for prisoners; reported "disappearances"; the situation of 15 military prisoners whose sentences for involvement in attempts to assassinate King Hassan II had expired but who had not been released; the whereabouts and conditions of detention of approximately 100 military prisoners convicted of participation in these attempts, whose whereabouts had not been made public since 1973 and whose conditions of detention were reported to be extremely harsh and to have led to a number of deaths. During Amnesty International's discussions with Moroccan officials the officials agreed to seek and provide Amnesty International with further information on a number of these topics. After the mission no further information was received
In its memorandum to the Moroccan Government Amnesty International concluded:
"1) that in a number of crucial respects the legal and administrative procedures currently applied in Morocco do not provide sufficient protection against ill-treatment for people in custody; 2) that legally responsible individuals are frequently not carrying out the laws or are interpreting their legal responsibilities in such a fashion as to enhance the likelihood that the fundamental rights of persons in custody will be violated; 3) that legislation has been and is currently being applied in a way that has led to the arrest and conviction of numerous 'prisoners of conscience'; 4) that a number of blatantly illegal
341
practices, contravening both Moroccan law and the international covenants on human rights which Morocco ratified on 3 August 1979, have led to serious human rights violations involving the 'disappearance' of large numbers of people and the deaths in custody of others."
Amnesty International concluded that the Moroccan authorities were violating provisions of a number of international human rights instruments, including several articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Morocco is a State Party, the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, and the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture and Other Cruel. Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Pimishment
Amnesty International ended its memorandum to the Moroccan Government with a series of recommendations. These included recommendations that
"the Government of Morocco institute a public and impartial commission of inquiry to: 1) examine legislation and practice relating to arrest garde à vue with a view to: a) enforcing existing legislation which requires arrest warrants to be shown; b) informing the family and lawyer of the place of detention of every arrested person, immediately upon arrest and at every stage of detention; c) establishing clear time limits and a reasonable maximum period for garde à vue and enforcing the procureur's legal obligations during and upon extension of garde à vue, d) providing arrested individuals with access to family, lawyer, and medical care promptly after arrest and at brief, regular intervals thereafter; e) providing arrested individuals with direct legal appeal mechanisms against wrongful arrest;
2)	examine ways of enforcing and improving existing legislation which stipulates that preventive detention should be an exceptional measure and that cases of 'atteinte à la sûreté de l'Etat' (threats to the security of the state) should be judged quickly;
3)	examine legislation and practice designed to control abuses of authority committed by officials, with a view to establishing ways to monitor the behaviour of the police during^ari/e à vue, and enforce the legal obligation of the juge d'instruction (investigating judge) to call for a medical examination in cases where allegations of torture and ill-treatment are made by detainees;
4)	examine the nature and quality of medical care in prisons and detention centres."
342
Amnesty International also urged:
" 1) that details ofthe arrest, detention and current whereabouts of the more than 100' disappeared' persons named in this report be made public and that all those unlawfully held be released; 2) that details of the fate of all prisoners currently held for involvement in the 1971 and 1972 coup attempts be made public . . . [and that] the Moroccan Government immediately release all among those prisoners who have served their full sentence."
Finally, Amnesty International urged "King Hassan 11 to release from prison the more than 100 individuals believed by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience, as well as all those tried during 1981 who have been convicted for the non-violent expression of their political beliefs"; and called for a redress of specific irregularities in trials which took place after the events of June 1981. In October 1981 the Human Rights Committee set up under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights considered the Moroccan Government's report, which was submitted in conformity with Morocco's obligations as a State Party to the covenant A number of questions relevant to Amnesty International's concerns were put to the representative of Morocco by members of the committee: in how many cases had public officials been prosecuted for brutality or ill-treatment; were the authorities required to notify the detainee's family of the place of detention; how long was the delay between arrest and presentation before the investigating judge; were there any grounds for believing that people had "disappeared"; to what extent preventive detention, or remand in custody, was employed when, according to the Moroccan Code of Criminal Procedure, it was to be an exceptional measure; what measures had been taken to investigate and repair irregularities reported to have taken place in trials occurring in July 1981.
In response Morocco's representative said that torture and ill-treatment were prohibited under Moroccan law. He outlined the Umits on pohce custody, asserting that the initial period of 96 hours " could be extended for a single period of 48 hours", all periods being doubled in cases of threats against the security of the state. He stated that preventive detention was an exceptional measure, but gave no details about its use. He referred to aspects ofMoroccan criminal and trial procedures but did not respond to the specific questions regarding the trials held in July 1981. He did not respond to those questions posed by members ofthe committee concerning "disappearances"; notification of arrest and place of detention to relatives; or prosecutions
343
of officials for having inflicted torture or ill-treatment He concluded by stating that the authorities had not observed any difficulties in applying the covenant since its ratificatioa
Amnesty International remained concerned about serious allegations of human rights violations committed by the Polisario Front which was engaged in a war with Morocco for control of the Western Sahara. On 10 February 1981 Amnesty International issued a public statement which said:
"According to the allegations reaching Amnesty International, hundreds of Polisario members have been arrested since 1975 for criticizing the movement's internal policies... The present whereabouts of most of the alleged prisoners are not known... These reports say political prisoners were made to do hard labour and were ill-treated . .
In a number of subsequent meetings between representatives of Amnesty International and Polisario Front officials, the officials did not furnish any details to allay Amnesty International's concern.
Morocco retains the death penalty for a number of crimes but executed no one during 1981. According to official statements there were two people under sentence of death as of November 1981.
