Namibia
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial and administrative restriction, allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees, and the death penalty.
South Africa continued to exercise power in Namibia despite United Nations' calls for the withdrawal of its administration. There was continued fighting between South African military forces and nationalist guerrillas belonging to the South West Africa People's Organization ( SWAPO)
63
during 1981. South African troops carried out a series of cross-border raids into southern Angola, one of which resulted in the killing of several hundred Angolan civilians and the capture of more than 100 civilians and soldiers, who were taken back to Namibia and imprisoned
SWAPO guerrillas remained active in northern Namibia. A number of civilians, police officers and others were reportedly killed by SWAPO guerrillas for allegedly collaborating with the South African administration. Civilians in the north were also said to have been killed by South African soldiers and members of locally-recruited paramilitary forces, such as the Home Guard in Ovam-boland, because they were thought to support or sympathize with SWAPO.
International negotiations to find a constitutional settlement for Namibia continued after the failure of the Geneva settlement conference in January 1981. They had not succeeded by the end of the year. However, within Namibia, the internal administration dominated by the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA), headed by the Republican Party leader. Dirk Mudge, was given a larger role in government In September the South African Government transferred certain executive powers to the Council of Ministers; these included responsibility for the courts, the prison service and the police. However, the security police remained directly responsible to the South African Government in Pretoria.
In November the Council of Ministers introduced the Combating of Terrorism Bill in the National Assembly. It replaced a number of security laws and abolished the death penalty for political offences, replacing it with a maximum 20-year sentence. Under the bill, the Terrorism Act of 1967 was to be withdrawn together with other South African security laws applicable in Namibia, notably the Internal Security Amendment Act of 1976. The Terrorism Act had in the past formed the basis for the prosecution and imprisonment of Namibian political prisoners, some 50 of whom remained imprisoned on Robben Island in South Africa. Section 6 of the Terrorism Act was also frequently used as the legal basis for indefinite incommunicado detention without trial for interrogation until 1979. It was then largely superseded by Proclamation AG.9 of 1977, which was amended in May 1979 to include similar detention provisions. Neither Proclamation AG.9 of 1977 nor Proclamation AG.26 of 1978, which provides for indefinite administrative detention, were among the laws to be replaced by the Combating of Terrorism Act On the contrary. Proclamation AG.9 was amended and further strengthened by the end of 1981 by the Second Security Districts Amendment Act This permits any member of the security forces to interrogate detainees held under AG.9.
64
The Prohibition and Notification of Meetings Act was also approved by the National Assembly late in the year. This prohibits meetings of more than 20 people of any organization in any way involved in violent opposition to the administration. It prescribes a sentence of up to three years' imprisonment and a fine.
Detention without trial continued to be used extensively, particularly in Ovamboland, Kavango, and other parts of the north. However, it was difficult to obtain information about individual detainees or their places of detention and impossible to estimate the number of people detained during the year. The South African authorities rarely disclosed information about detainees and fi^quently did not notify detainees' families of their arrest Most detainees were held incommunicado under Proclamation AG.9 of 1977, which effectively empowers the security police to detain them without charge or trial for interrogation for an unlimited period This proclamation has effect in areas designated as "security districts". These cover most of the northern half of the country, from the capital, Windhoek, to the border with Angola. Detainees held under the proclamation may be held anywhere in the country.
Amnesty International learned in August of the detention of Pastor Juuso Shikongo, a Lutheran priest held in Ovamboland since April 1981. No reasons were given for his arrest and he was held uncharged under Proclamation AG.9. Amnesty International appealed on his behalf to Danie Hough, the South African Administrator-General, but received no response. Pastor Shikongo was later reported to have been released uncharged Detentions were also reported in the Windhoek area and in Tsumeb in August and September after members of the legal, internal wing of SWAPO organized a party rally to mark the annual "Namibia Day" declared by the United Nations. Immanuel Ngatjizeko, a SWAPO official, was released uncharged a few days later but at least six others remained in detention under Proclamation AG.9. It was not known whether they had been freed by the end of 1981.
In November it was reported that an action due to be heard in the Windhoek Supreme Court in early 1982 concerned the alleged murder by security police of a political detainee arrested in August 1980. Johannes Kakuva, a peasant farmer, was alleged to have been tortured and ill-treated when he and 24 others were detained in Ovamboland and accused of feeding and sheltering SWAPO guerrillas, and then to have "disappeared". The security police denied that he was either tortured or murdered in detention. They claimed that he was abducted and taken into Angola by SWAPO guerrillas whom he had agreed to lure into a security police ambush. The security police acknowledged, however, that Johannes Kakuva was permanently
65
blindfolded during his interrogation by security police officers, apparently so that he would not be able to identify, or be identified by, others detained at the same police station.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the detention without trial of more than 100 Namibian refugees forcibly abducted in May 1978 during a South African military raid on Kassinga in Angola They had been held virtually incommunicado under Proclamation AG.9 since their abduction and were alleged to have been tortured when first in custody. The South African authorities did not disclose the names of the detainees and their relatives were not known to have been informed or to have been permitted to visit them in detention at Mariental, southeast of Windhoek. In July Amnesty International submitted information about this group of detainees to the Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Southern Africa of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.
Strict official secrecy surrounded the position of SWAPO guerrillas captured by South African security forces. They were not formally recognized as prisoners of war but nor were they prosecuted for political offences. They appeared to be detained indefinitely without trial but it was not known under which legal provision. In September the South African army announced that eight SWAPO guerrillas had been captured during a raid into Angola and the South African Minister of Police told Pariiament in Cape Town that 23 SWAPO guerrillas had been taken prisoner in Ovamboland between 1 July and 7 September. However, no overall figure for captured SWAPO guerrillas was disclosed and their status remained unclear.
At least 20 prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International remained restricted under so-called "release warrants" throughout 1981. They were restricted upon being released from indefinite administrative detention without trial, mostly in 1979 and 1980. Their release warrants restricted them to particular districts, prohibited them from attending gatherings of five or more people and required them to report regularly to the police. They were also commonly held under house arrest during the hours of darkness and prohibited from receiving visitors at home without advance authorization from the police. Release warrants are imposed on an indefinite basis. Contravention of any of their restrictions may lead to rearrest and detention under Proclamation AG.26 or AG.9.
Three prisoners whose cases had been investigated by Amnesty International were released in late 1981 after completing eight-year sentences on Robben Island Jeremiah Ekandjo, Martin Kapawasha and Jacob Nghidinua, all members of the SWAPO Youth League, had been convicted under the so-called" Sabotage Act" in 1973. Like other convicted political prisoners they were permitted no remission
66
of sentence and served the full eight-year terms imposed by the Supreme Court.
At least five people were known to have been sentenced to death for murder in 1981 and at least one execution was carried out at Windhoek prison. In July, however, the South African Appeal Court in Bloemfontein upheld an appeal by Markus Kateka, a farmworker who had been sentenced to death by the Windhoek Supreme Court in October 1980. He had been convicted under the Terrorism Act for assisting SWAPO guerrillas who attacked his employer's farm. He had initially been refused leave to appeal by the trial judge but this decision was overruled by the Chief Justice of South Africa As a result of the appeal his sentence was reduced to 17 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International had earlier appealed for clemency.
The death penalty was withdrawn for political offences at the end of 1981 with the introduction of the Combating of Terrorism Act It remained in force for murder and a number of other violent criminal offences.
