Congo
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without charge or trial of more than 35 political prisoners, and the use of the death penalty.
Throughout 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the government to either bring to trial or release former head of state Joachim Yhombi-Opango, who was ousted in February 1979, and three of his associates. They had been detained without charge since March 1979.
In July 1981 Amnesty International renewed its appeals on behalf of more than 30 Angolan refugees detained without charge or trial since the beginning of 1977. The detainees had all come from Angola's Cabinda province and sought refuge in Congo. In January 1977 guerrillas belonging to the Frente de Libertaçào do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), Cabinda Enclave Liberation Front, had attacked a railway linking Dolisie and Pointe-Noire, some 30 kilometres from Congo's border with Cabinda. More than 100 Cabindans were subsequently interned in Congo. They were not believed to include the guerrillas responsible for the attack.
In May 1981 about 34 of these detainees were reported to be still
29
held at an air force base near Pointe-Noire. Others had been released earlier and five had reportedly died in detention. Those still detained included Francisco Pezo Bambi, who arrived in Congo in 1971 and subsequently became a teacher at the "Trois Glorieuses" lycée in Pointe-Noire. Like the other detainees he had not been charged with any criminal offence. From July onwards Amnesty International sent a series of appeals to the Congolese authorities, but no reply had been received by the end of 1981.
In October 1981 Amnesty International appealed to President Sassou-Nguesso to commute the death sentences on six people whose appeals had been rejected by the Supreme Court. All six were believed to have been convicted of murder. Amnesty International did not leam whether the death sentences were commuted or whether any of the prisoners were executed. In November 1981 it was reported that the Congolese authorities had agreed to extradite a Zairian who had been condemned to death in Kinshasa in January 1980. He had escaped from prison in Zaire to Congo shortly before he was scheduled to be executed in March 1981. It was not known whether he was executed upon being returned to Zaire.
