United Kingdom
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about a prolonged protest in the Maze Prison, Northern Ireland, which began in 1976 and culminated in 1980 and 1981 in a series of hunger-strikes as a result of which 10 prisoners died Before this Amnesty International had on several occasions expressed its concern to the British Government that the cumulative effects of the disciplinary measures imposed on the protesting prisoners might, in their totality, amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment (see Amnesty International Report 1979 to 1981). In January 1981 Amnesty International's statutory concerns abated, but the organization intervened on humanitarian grounds in an effort to save lives when the hunger- strikes were resumed in March 1981.
The protesting prisoners demanded changes in prison conditions for prisoners convicted of, or awaiting trial for, politically motivated crimes. For a long time their demands included special "status" for political prisoners. The prisoners refused to wear prison uniform, dressing only in blankets, and refused to do prison work. They also staged a so-called "dirty protest" during which they smeared excreta on the walls of their cells. The government's response to the protest was the subject of a complaint to the European Commission of Human Rights. Amnesty International, in accordance with its usual policy, did not support the prisoners' demand for special political status. Nonetheless it urged the authorities to be flexible, pointing to remarks made by the European Commission in their decision on the complaint in 1980. (See Amnesty International Report 1981 for details of the protest and of the commission's report) Amnesty International's statutory concerns abated as a result of government relaxations in the prison regime towards the end of 1980, and were further allayed with the end of the "dirty protest" in March 1981. However, the hunger-strikes, which started again on 1 March 1981, intensified the deadlock. Amnesty International continued to intervene on humanitarian grounds in an effort to save lives.
A number of other bodies did attempt to mediate, including the European Commission of Human Rights, the Irish Commission for Justice and Peace (ICJP), a body of the Roman Catholic Church of Ireland, and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In early July 1981, on the basis of carefully worded proposals made by the ICJP, the prisoners dropped their demand for special treatment
305
This opened the way for a solution based on specific aspects of the prison regime without involving questions of principle. In spite of this the ICJP's intervention failed to resolve the dispute. On 16 July 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland saying:
"Amnesty International notes with grave concern that, in spite of the constructive efforts of the IC JP, a solution to the situation in The Maze Prison has still not been found, that six prisoners have died and that more deaths are imminent Although its concerns about the regime of punishments have abated, it carmot fail to take a serious view of a situation, extraordinary even from Amnesty International's experience around the world, of a hunger-strike in the course of which prisoners die in such numbers in such a short space of time. Amnesty International must recall the government's obligation under international law 'to safeguard the health and well-being of all prisoners, including those engaged in protest, insofar as that may be possible in the circumstances'. With this principle in mind, and again stressing that the ICJP's proposals are within the government's own stated policy principles, Amnesty International, on humanitarian grounds, urges your government to implement such proposals in order to avoid further loss of life."
The government made it clear that it would not act while the hunger-strike continued A growing number of hunger-striking prisoners were given medical treatment at the request of their relatives, thus saving their lives. On 20 August 1981 Michael Devine became the last hunger-striker to die. The hunger-strike ended on 3 October 1981 when the last four hunger-strikers called off their protest after being told that their relatives would intervene to prevent their deaths.
On 6 October 1981 the government outiined changes in the prison regime. Prisoners would be allowed to wear their own clothes at all times — this was one of the most important demands made by the prisoners. Remission of sentence which had been forfeited could be restored with good behaviour. Association with other prisoners would be increased The protesting prisoners still refused to do prison work, but some prospect of resolving this stalemate remained The government gave the prisoners 28 days to decide whether to accept prison work. However, the punishments for those refusing to work were substantially less than before. They consisted of partial loss of remission, partial loss of association and fewer visits. Even prisoners who continued to protest by refusing to work could wear their own clothes in the prison and during exercise periods, associate with other prisoners half of the time, and make use of prison facilities. These
306
conditions were imposed on protesting prisoners from 3 November 1981. With the issuing of civilian clothes the "blanket" protest came to an end.
Amnesty International continued to study the special courts in Northern Ireland, collecting information on individual cases and on the law in general. The cases which Amnesty International followed illustrated contentious aspects of the criminal justice system as applied to cases with a political background. These included: detention without charge of up to seven days; police interrogation practices; changes in the rules of evidence relating to the admissibility of confessions; and the operation of the special Diplock Courts, nonjury courts in which most convictions were based solely on confessions made by the accused in poUce custody. One such case was that of Michael Culbert, asocial worker from Belfast, who was arrested on 6 May 1978 and taken to Castlereagh police station. He remained there until 10 May 1978 when he was charged with the murder of a policemaa At Castlereagh he was interrogated for long periods, but not physically ill-treated. He was alleged to have made a verbal confession, which formed the only evidence against him. Michael Culbert denied having made such a confessioa He maintained that at the time of the alleged confession he was completely disorientated as a result of continuous interrogation, lack of sleep and being made to stand for long periods during interrogation. (The police denied that he had been forced to stand) He was tried by a special court some 18 months later in October 1979. The only issue in the trial was the admissibility of his alleged verbal confession. The court held that the confession was admissible, convicted him of murder and membership of the Irish Republican Army, and sentenced him to life imprisonment Amnesty International, beheving the case to raise fundamental issues of principle, sent an observer to the appeal hearing which was due to take place on 4 and 7 December 1981. However, the hearing was postponed until January 1982.
307
