Czechoslovakia
261
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about legislation limiting the exercise of human rights; the imprisonment of people expressing views disapproved of by the authorities; prison conditions and the ill-treatment of dissenters. To underline its concerns, in June 1981 Amnesty International published a second edition of the Amnesty International Briefing: Czechoslovakia (first published in 1977). Amnesty International urged the Czechoslovak President to bring the penal code into line with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Czechoslovakia ratified in 1975.
Most people adopted as prisoners of conscience during 1981 were members or supporters of the unofficial human rights groups. Charter 77 and the Committee for the Defence of the Unjustly Persecuted (VONS), and religious believers.
Early in May 1981 some 30 dissenters were arrested in Prague, Brno and Bratislava. The action was officially linked to the detention of two French nationals on 27 April 1981 at the Austrian border. In their van they had been carrying hidden books and journals, a duplicator and money, allegedly for subversive activities against Czechoslovakia. Eight intellectuals — Jirina Siklova, Karel Kyncl, Jiri Ruml, Jan Ruml, Eva Kanturkova, Milan Simecka, Jan Mlynarik and Jaromir Horec — were remanded in custody. Together with six others who were released they were accused of participating in the production of anti-state writings, of sending them for publication abroad, of smuggling them back into the country and of distributing them in Czechoslovakia. Charged with "subversion in collusion with foreign powers on a large scale" the 14 faced prison sentences of up to 10 years. One of those released was Jiri Hajek, a former foreign minister. On 20 May 1981 Amnesty International announced that it had adopted the eight in pre-trial detention as prisoners of conscience and issued an urgent appeal on their behalf. Jaromir Horec was released in October 1981 but criminal proceedings against him continued. Jiri Muller, a former student leader and prisoner of conscience, was being prosecuted for a similar offence in a separate case.
Also adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience was Jiri Gruntorad, an industrial worker. He was sentenced on 9 July 1981 by the Prague city court to four years' imprisonment in the second (stricter) prison category and three years' "protective
262
surveillance" by the police for editing, reproducing and distributing unofficial materials, for listening to foreign broadcasts and for participating in VONS.
The Prague city court sentenced sociologist Rudolf Battek to seven-and-a-half years' imprisonment in the second prison category and three years' "protective surveillance" for "subversion in collusion with a foreign power on a large scale" and for "causing bodily harm" (see Amnesty International Report 1980). The trial was held on 27 and 28 July 1981 and was closed to the generaf public; an Amnesty International observer was refused entry. The main elements in the charge were his activities in VONS and letters he had sent in 1978 to leaders of the Socialist International. On 3 August 1981 Amnesty International called on the Czechoslovak President to pardon him and order his release. In a separate letter to the Procurator General of Czechoslovakia it protested that its representative had been excluded from the trial. On 8 October 1981 the Supreme Court of Czechoslovakia reduced the prison sentence to five-and-a-half years on appeal.
Another prisoner of conscience imprisoned for his activities in VONS was Jan Litomisky, an agronomist and an active Protestant. He was sentenced in a closed trial on 25 September 1981 by the regional court in Ceske Budejovice to three years' imprisonment and two years' "protective surveillance".
In December 1981 Amnesty International was investigating the case of five people prosecuted for unofficial cultural activities. On 10 November 1981 the police in North Bohemia interrogated a number of people and searched their homes in connection with the publication and distribution of the unofficial journal Vokno (Window). Five were charged with "breach of the peace" and faced prison sentences of up to three years. They included the art historian Ivan Jirous who already had three convictions for "breach of the peace".
People engaged in unofficial religious activities continued to be arrested and imprisoned throughout the year. On 29 September the district court in Olomouc, Moravia, convicted six Roman Catholics, including two priests and two Charter 77 signatories, on charges of producing and distributing unofficial reli^ous literature "for personal gain". The trial lasted only two days and was closed to the general public. Jan Krumpholc, Rudolf Smahel, Josef Adamek, Frantisek Lizna, Josef Vlcek and Jan Odstrcil were convicted of "illicit trading" and sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from 10 months to three years. Rudolf Smahel was also convicted of contravening foreign currency regulations. In September 1979 the first five were arrested during nationwide raids on Roman Catholics (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Amnesty International believed
263
that they had been prosecuted solely because of their religious beliefs and adopted them as prisoners of conscience. After being held for four months they were released and were only brought to trial on 28 September 1981. In an appeal hearing on 24 November 1981 the regional court in Ostrava upheld the sentences of four defendants, reduced Josef Adamek's sentence from 20 to 14 months and referred the case of Jan Odstrcil to the court of first instance.
Anton Zlatohlavy, a Roman Catholic priest, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on 23 April 1981 by the city court in Kosice, Slovakia He had constructed a church building with the help of his parishioners and had celebrated mass at harvest time without state per-missioa Gunther Matej Rompf, an industrial worker, was sentenced on 25 September 1981 by the city court in Bratislava to two years' imprisonment for trying to convert young gypsies and underprivileged young people to religion. Both men were convicted of "obstructing the state supervision of the churches". Both were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
On 14 June 1981 Jan Hrabina, a labourer and Charter 77 signatory, was sentenced by the military court in Prague to two-and-a-half years' imprisonment for refusing to do military service on grounds of conscience. He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
At the end of December 1981 Amnesty International was working on behalf of 36 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigating one further case. It believed that the number of prisoners of conscience about whom it did not have definite information was substantially higher.
Amnesty International was c<»icemed by reports about conditions in two prisons in which prisoners of conscience were held. In Mirov prison eight political prisoners were reportedly separated from the ordinary prisoners in April 1981 and housed in two cells,one of which served as a workshop as well as a recreation room. Reports stated that the prisoners filed bakelite objects in an airless and noisy atmosphere containing asbestos dust without adequate protective aids. In Minko-vice prison inadequate diet, unhygienic conditions and unattainable work targets have reportedly contributed to fights between prisoners.
Amnesty International received reports throughout 1981 that dissenters had been physically ill-treated by the police. For example, Karel Soukup, a member of the collective of Charter 77 spokespeople and a former prisoner of conscience, was allegedly beaten before interrogation for four hours after being detained in Nachod, Eastern Bohemia, on 18 September 1981. He was said to have been kicked, his hands and feet trodden on and his hair, beard and ears pulled. He was released from police custody after 32 hours. On 20 September the police reportedly entered his flat in Prague and beat him when he
264
refused to answer questions about his activities and contacts. They forced him to make a written statement that he wished to emigrate. On 3 October 1981 the'police entered the flat of Zdena Freundova, a member of the Charter 77 spokespeople collective and a VONS member. According to reports received by Amnesty International the police blindfolded her, beat her, kicked her ând banged her head against the wall. One threatened to kill her. They stepped on her bare feet, cut off some of her hair, ripped off her nightshirt and threatened to rape her. She was later reported to be ill from shock and concussion. Her husband, Karel Freund, had reportedly been beaten during interrogation after the police broke up a meeting of VONS members on 10 September 1981.
