Equatorial Guinea
Amnesty International was concerned about detention without charge, unfair conduct of political trials, and the death penalty.
In April 1981 the head of state, Lieutenant-Colonel Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, announced that a conspiracy to overthrow the government had been discovered. More than 150 people were arrested including several former government ministers. The government alleged that the conspiracy had been led by Andrés Moisés Mba Ada, a businessman who had left the country shortly before.
In early May, following reports that the detainees were held incommunicado and had not been charged, Amnesty International asked the government for information. It later requested an assurance that they were being well treated. In mid-May the authorities announced that many detainees had already been released, but that about 15 accused of conspiracy against the government would be put on trial.
However, when the trial opened on 8 June, a total of some 70 people, civilians as well as soldiers, appeared before a military court in Malabo charged with offences against the security of the state. The President of the military court was Commander Eulogio Oyo Riqueza, the country's Second Vice-President. The hearings lasted five days. At the end of the trial 30 defendants were acquitted and released: those set free were reported to include former government ministers Pedro Ekong Andeme and Angel Masie Ntutumu.
The military court convicted 42 people. Damián Owono Mituy, a soldier, was condemned to death for serving as a channel to bribe military officials and civil servants. He was executed by firing-squad soon after the trial, without the opportunity to appeal. Eleven others were convicted on charges of corruption and endangering national
31
reconstruction and were sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment. Andrés Moi sés Mba Ada was convicted in his absence of embezzling public funds and of destabilizing the state: he was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. Twenty-nine others were convicted of complicity in the plot to overthrow the government and sentenced to six mondis' imprisonment. Much of the evidence produced at the trial to prove that tíiere had been a conspiracy to overthrow the government was insubstantial. Opposition sources subsequently claimed that the alleged conspiracy had been invented by the government as a pretext to arrest its opponents.
Before the trial began Amnesty International made several unsuccessful attempts to obtain from the government the names of the accused and the details of the charges against them. The government responded by inviting an Amnesty International representative to the tri¿, but, in spite of repeated requests, failed to inform Amnesty International of the names of the defendants and the charges against them. As a result Amnesty International did not send an observer to the trial. After learning that one of the defendants had been sentenced to death and executed, Amnesty International appealed to the head of state to commute any further death sentences that might be imposed.
In August 1981 the head of state announced a partial amnesty for convicted political, prisoners to mark the second anniversary of his accession to power. The 29 prisoners who had been given six-month sentences in June 1981 were all released. Also freed were two former senior officials and two soldiers who had been convicted in September 1979 of crimes including murder and burning villages.
In September 1981 the formation of a new opposition party was announced in Paris by Daniel Oyono Mba, a former minister under President Masie Nguema. The hew party was called the Bloque Unico de las Fuerzas Democráticas Guiñearías, Single Block of Guinean Democratic Forces. Within a few days about 20 people were arrested in Malabo and accused of conspiring against the security of the state, on account of their links with the new party. The government later claimed that the detainees had all been released within a few days, except for Luis Oyono, the brother of the leader of the new party.
32
