South Africa
Amnesty International was concerned by the imprisonment, banning or banishment of prisoners of conscience, the use of detention without trial, allegations of torture and harsh prison conditions, and the death penalty. The conduct of a number of political trials also gave cause for concern.
The ruling National Party and Prime Minister P.W. Botha were returned to office in a general election at the end of April. At the beginning of the year new constitutional arrangements came into force when a 61 -member advisory body, the President's Council, took office in Cape Town. Headed by a Vice State President, it included government-appointed representatives of the white, "coloured", Indian and Chinese population groups. However, representation was not on a proportional basis and representatives of the majority African population were excluded.
Soon after the election, official celebrations were held to mark the 20th anniversary of the Republic. Black and white students and others mounted a concerted boycott campaign and held "anti-Republic Day" demonstrations. There was also intensified activity by African National Congress (ANC) guerrillas who committed acts of sabotage throughout the country. After demonstrators burnt the national flag while protesting against the government's apartheid policies, a new law was introduced making it an offence punishable by five years' imprisonment to violate the flag or injure the reputation of the State President or Vice State President
A number of student leaders, black trade unionists and others were
76
detained in May and June at the time of the anti-Republic Day protests. They included Andrew Boraine, President of the white National Union of South African Students (NUSAS) and son of a Progressive Federal Party (PFP) member of parliament; Firoz Cachalia, Chairman of the Black Students' Society at Johannesburg's Univereity of the Witwatersrand; and Wantu Zenzile, President of the black Congress of South African Students (COSAS). Leading black trade unionists such as Joe Mavi, President of the Black Municipal Workers' Union, and Sisa Njikelana, Vice-President of the South African Allied Workers' Union (SAAWU), were also among those arrested. AH were first held incommunicado for 14 days under Section 22 of the General Law Amendment Act, No. 62 of 1966. They were then transferred to indefinite detention without charge or trial under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act, which authorizes unlimited incommunicado detention for interrogation, or under Section 10 of the Internal Security Act, which provides for indefinite administrative detention. Most of the detainees were released uncharged after a few weeks. However, some, including Andrew Boraine and Firoz Cachalia, were restricted under five-year banning orders upon release. Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
The detentions linked to the anti-Republic Day protests in May and June were among many similar actions taken by the authorities during the year against critics and opponents of apartheid In all, more than 600 people were believed to have been detained throughout South Africa in 1981. Almost all those detained were held incommunicado and without charge for interrogation before being charged or released or placed in preventive detention. Many were young people, some less than 16 years of age. They included at least three alleged ANC members aMucted by South African security forces who carried out a raid into Mozambique in January, refugees forcibly repatriated from Botswana and Lesotho, and Dhaya Pillay, a refugee abducted from Swaziland in February and returned a few weeks later.
Some detainees were held incommunicado for prolonged periods. Zwelakhe Sisulu and Thami Mazwai, journalists detained in June, were still held uncharged at the end of the year. Relatives had no access to them and the security police would not disclose where they were held The authorities would say only that, having been held for several months for interrogation under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act, they had been transferred to detention under Section 12B of the Internal Security Act This provides for the incommunicado detention of potential witnesses for the state in political trials. Even less information was made available to relatives and lawyers about Sipho Pityana, Maxwell Madlingozi and other leading officials of the Motor
77
Assemblers' and Components Workers' Union (MAC WUSA) who were detained by Port Elizabeth security police in J une. At the end of 1981 it was known only that they were detained under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act No reasons for their arrest or any other details of their imprisonment had been released by the security police. Their cases, like that of Thami Mazwai, were being investigated by Amnesty International. Zwelakhe Sisulu was adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
Some political opponents of the government were repeatedly detained without trial. For example, Thozamile Gqweta, President of SAAWU, had already been detained four times since the beginning of 1981 when he was arrested on 10 December, yet he had not once been charged or convicted of an offence. Thabo Ndabeni, National Organizer of the Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO) was detained for almost three weeks m April, released and then rearrested in mid-June and held incommunicado under the Terrorism Act
Following the detention of a number of students and trade union activists in September and October, some of their parents and other relatives came together to form the multi-racial Detainees' Parents Support Committee. Based initially in the Johannesburg area and composed largely of relatives of white detainees, this quickly developed into an important pressure group ca;npaigning for the release of individual detainees and highlighting the wider problem of detention without trial. Its membership increased after furUier arrests in late November. Security police detained Rita Ndzanga, Emma Mashinini and other black trade unionists, white trade union activists such as Neil Aggett and Renee Roux, and Cedric Mayson, a former banned person and Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience. The committee achieved some success at the end of the year when the security police permitted a number of detainees held under the incommunicado provision of the Terrorism Act to receive short, non-contact visits from relatives.
Detention without trial was also used extensively in the Transkei and Venda" homelands", declared "independent" in 1976 and 1979 respectively, and in the Ciskei. In all three areas political dissenters were held in incommunicado detention without trial for long periods, and there were allegations of torture. At least two detainees died in security police custody: Manana Mgqweto, aged 60, died in September after two weeks' detention in the Transkei; and Isaac Tshifhiwa Muofhe died on 12 November, allegedly as a result of torture, two days after his arrest by Venda security police.
Allegations of torture were made throughout the year by former detainees and by defendants and witnesses in political trials. In most cases the allegations were impossible to verify. The victims had been
78
detained incommunicado and often held for long periods after the alleged torture occurred. However, the number and diversity of those alleging torture, and the general consistency of their claims, indicated that detainees were commonly treated brutally during interrogation by security police.
In early December Amnesty International issued an international medical appeal on behalf of Khosi Mbatha. It was alleged that she had suffered a stroke or heart attack as a result of ill-treatment under interrogation. She had been detained together with her husband, Alex, on 22 October and held incommunicado. She was moved to a hospital under a false name, and in strict security, when she became ill.
In June the Appeal Court set aside a seven-year prison sentence imposed in 1979 on Linda Mario Mogale, a Soweto student leader. It accepted that the "confession" which formed the basis for his conviction had been obtained under torture. Daniel Matthee, a security police officer who had subsequently been promoted, had pulled out two of Linda Mario Mogale's teeth with a pair of pliers, ^saulted him, and inflicted electric shocks while interrogating him in May 1978. Despite the Appeal Court judgment he was unable to obtain damages from the Minister of Police because of a provision stipulating that no civil action can be instituted if more than six months have elapsed. Linda Mario Mogale had been held incommunicado for over seven months after he was tortured The authorities declined to prosecute Daniel Matthee and it was reported that he would not be disciplined by the police.
There was a succession of political trials in 1981 some of which resulted in the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. It was common for part of the proceedings to be conducted in camera, the officially stated purpose being to safeguard state witnesses against possible reprisals. In a number of trials alleged confessions obtained by the security police from defendants and others detained as witnesses constituted the main basis for convictions. Some detainees called as state witnesses had been held incommunicado for many months before they gave evidence in court. Others refused to give evidence and were jailed for contempt of court For example, Bonisile Norushe, a trade unionist who had been detained since June 1980, was imprisoned for one year in February when he refused to be a state witness. The maximum sentence for contempt of court is five years' imprisonment.
Two trials stood out That of Oscar Mpetha, a 71-year-old trade unionist, and 18 others charged under the Terrorism Act began in Cape Town in early March amid popular demonstrations in support of the accused. It continued intermittently and for much of the time in camera until the end of the year by which time the state's case had still
79
to be completed. The other major trial was that of Bobby Tsotsobe, Johannes Shabangu and David Moise, three alleged members of the ANC who were charged with treason in April. They were alleged to have carried out a series of sabotage attacks, including one on a police station and another which caused extensive damage to an important oil-from-coal installation. In August they were convicted and sentenced to death by the Pretoria Supreme Court after a trial in which defendants and some witnesses testified that they had been tortured Amnesty International issued an appeal for clemency in August and the prisoners had not been executed by the end of 1981. Like three other alleged ANC members sentenced to death for treason in 1980, they lodged an appeal against the death sentence and were waiting for it to be heard at the end of the year.
In mid-1981 Minister of Justice H.J. Coetsee suddenly withdrew the restriction orders on some 26 banned people. Half of them had less than a year to go before their existing five-year banning orders were due to expire. However, a few, including Nohle Mohapi, widow of a political detainee who died in custody in 1976, had more than three years to complete. No reasons were given for the Hfting of these banning orders, just as no reasons had been given for their imposition. Some banning orders were also allowed to expire, notably that of Albertina Sisulu, wife of the imprisoned ANC leader Walter Sisulu, and mother of Zwelakhe Sisulu, which expired at the end ofJuly. She had been continuously restricted under banning orders for more than 16 years.
However, a number of new banning orders were imposed and several existing orders were renewed for a further term during 1981. Zwelakhe Sisulu and Marimuthu Subramoney, both journalists and respectively President and Vice-President of the Media Workers' Association of South Africa (M WAS A), had been banned at the end of 1980. Three more black journalists connected with MWASA — Phil Mtimkulu, Joe Tlholoe and Mathata Tsedu — were banned in January 1981. A fourth, Charles Nqakula, was banned in July. As banned people may not prepare material for publication or be quoted, all were effectively deprived of their livelihoods. At least four student leaders and two people who had both been banned before were banned for five years in June and July after the anti-Republic Day protests. Most had already been detained without triaL In July Dr Fatima Meer's banning order was extended without explanation for a further five-year term. Mewa Ramgobin, already banned for 15 years for his participation in the Natal Indian Congress, was served with a fourth five-year banning order in September. At the end of December Winnie Mandela's banning and banishment to Brandfort was extended for five more years.
80
Amnesty International continued to adopt banned people as prisoners of conscience and campaigned throughout the year for the unconditional withdrawal of all banning and banishment orders. Amnesty International also adopted as a prisoner of conscience Charles Yeats, a white conscientious objector who was court-martialled in May for refusing to do military service in the Defence Force. He was sentenced to one year's imprisonment in detention barracks, where he was subjected to periods of solitary confinement when he continued to protest against the army's refusal to recognize him as a conscientious objector. In December he was retried, sentenced to one year's imprisonment in a civil prison and discharged from the army. Richard Steele, another conscientious objector who had been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, was released from detention barracks in February after completing his one-year sentence.
The death penalty remained a major concern. It was used extensively against people convicted of murder and other violent criminal offences and was imposed also on three alleged ANC members convicted of treason. In March the government announced that 130 executions had been carried out in 1980 and gave the following racial breakdown: one white, one Indian, 43 "coloureds" and 85 Africans. In mid-July it was reported that the execution of six prisoners at Pretoria Prison on 10 July brought the number of hangings carried out since the beginning of the year to 69. By the end of the year a total of 96 people had been executed
