Europe
All the states of Europe, with the exception of Albania, have undertaken international human rights obligations by ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, or subscribing to the European Convention on Human Rights, or signing the Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. Yet real or perceived threats to the established order often caused such commitments to be broken.
Martial law continued to be imposed throughout Turkey, resulting in widespread arrests, prosecutions and imprisonment, not only of people who had been engaged in violence, but also of many nonviolent political activists. In Poland a year of recurrent confrontation between the government and the independent trade union Solidarity was followed by the imposition of martial law, internment and imprisonment of Solidarity members and supporters. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience or investigated the cases of some 200 prisoners in the USSR in 1981. These included would-be emigrants, religious believers and people who had tried to publicize violations of human rights in the USSR, all of whom were imprisoned in a nationwide drive to suppress all forms of dissent In a number of other Eastern European states — Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic RepubHc, Hungary, Romania, Yugoslavia, as well as Poland — Amnesty International worked for prisoners of conscience imprisoned under laws restricting freedom of speech. In several states of Western Europe — the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Switzerland and Greece — conscientious objectors to military service were imprisoned and adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
254
In a number of countries of Western Europe the anti-terrorist legislation introduced over recent years to meet the threats posed by political violence continued in force, altering the criminal justice process for those suspected of such violence. Amnesty International's concerns in this respect were threefold: first, that extensive powers of detention and interrogation, if not surrounded by proper safeguards, increased the risk of ill-treatment and torture of those detained. This applied in particular to incommunicado detention and the absence of effective independent (judicial) control — features which were conducive to ill-treatment and torture in Spain and Turkey. Second, that extended powers for the police and prosecuting authorities, together with reduced facilities for a proper defence, might combine to reduce the fairness of trials — in particular those held in special courts or under special procedures. Cases in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland illustrated the complexity of the issues which this could raise. Special powers to keep people for excessively long periods of investigative detention in Italy were retained. In Turkey political prisoners were tried by martial law tribunals. On the other hand, the Court of State Security in France, which Amnesty International had criticized, was abolished. Third, Amnesty International was concerned that the response of the state to political violence might extend beyond the perpetrators of such violence. Extraordinary powers of arrest, detention and interrogation (and sometimes special trial procedures) might be applied to people not reasonably suspected of involvement in violence, and to those regarded by the state as ideological supporters of, or "apologists" for, political violence. In Spain alleged anti-monarchist and nationalist expressions of an entirely non-violent nature gave rise to prosecutions. In Turkey membership of political parties, translation of books, journalism and trade union activities led to imprisonment in many cases, although no violence was involved. In the Federal Republic of Germany, a court based a conviction for "support of a criminal association" on an "ulterior aim" which it perceived behind a slogan innocuous in itself.
Many governments attempted to hide the violations of human rights they had committed The Soviet Union and many other Eastern European states used charges such as "slandering the state" to discourage the flow of information on such violations. Others, such as the German Democratic Republic and Turkey, specifically made it a criminal offence to pass on information "to the disadvantage of the state". The Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia also sometimes obscured the real reason for imprisoning people by falsely charging them with ordinary crimes, ostensibly unrelated to their political or religious activities. Furthermore, trials of prisoners of conscience
255
were often held in camera, the public being excluded. Amnesty International nonetheless tried to send observers to trials to express international concern and to assess issues of substance, evidence or procedure. Such trial observation missions took place in Czechoslovakia, France, Poland, Northern Ireland, Spain and Yugoslavia In Czechoslovakia the Amnesty International trial observer was not allowed access to the courtroom.
All Eastern European countries retain the death penalty. Amnesty International received reports of executions from Bulgaria, Hungary, the USSR and Yugoslavia. Amnesty International was concemed that in Poland under martial law the death penalty might be imposed in summary proceedings, but had not learned of any death sentences in the short period between the promulgation of the decree and the end of 1981. The death penalty was abolished in France in October 1981. Turkey was the only Westem European country to carry out executions during the year, otherwise the trend towards abolition of the death penalty continued, stimulated by the Parliamentary Assembly and, to some extent, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe and the European Parliament of the European Economic Community.
During 1981 Amnesty Intemational sent missions to discuss its concerns with state authorities in Turkey and Spain. Other governments, such as Czechoslovakia, accused Amnesty International of hostility towards its political system, but refused to discuss the conceras of the organization or to publish letters sent by it in response to the charges. Substantial reports were published on human rights violations in the German Democratic RepubUc and Czechoslovakia.
Information was provided to standing committees of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on torture in Turkey.
During 1981 France and Spain made the declaration under Article 25 of the European Convention on Human Rights, giving individuals the right to submit complaints to the European Commission of Human Rights regarding human rights violations.
256
