Egypt
Amnesty International's main concern was the large number of people detained for the non-violent expression of their conscientiously held beliefs. It was also concerned about torture and ill-treatment of detainees and the death penalty.
In the first week of September 1981,1,536 people were arrested by presidential decree in the largest wave of arrests under President Muhammad Anwar Sadat since he assumed power in 1970. According to presidential decree No. 493 of 1981 those arrested were accused of participating in incidents which threatened national unity or social peace. They included many alleged members of fundamentalist religious groups. Also arrested were journalists, lawyers, university lecturers, and prominent politicians of almost every political persuasion, as well as leaders and members of both the Muslim and Coptic communities who had reportedly not been involved in sectarian unrest
Detainees were held in a number of prisons: many were held in prisons at Tora, a suburb to the south of Cairo, and in Abu Zaabal Prison, the Citadel and A1 Marg, to the north of Cairo. Women detainees were held at Qanater. In October detained members of the Coptic church were moved to a prison at Wadi Natroun in the western desert, near the monastery to which the Coptic Pope Shenouda III had been restricted since being formally stripped of his position by a presidential decree issued at the time of the arrests in early September. September.
According to reports received by Amnesty International, detainees were not informed of the reason for their arrest nor allowed to see a lawyer. None had seen a lawyer until their interrogation at the office of the Socialist Prosecutor General, in some cases many weeks after arrest Many lawyers were themselves in detention, including members of the former Bar Council, dissolved by the People's Assembly following President Sadat's decision on 22 July. In addition neither the detainee nor the lawyer was usually informed in advance of the date of the questioning. Visits from relatives were not permitted for approximately three months after arrest
Amnesty International received reports that four people arrested in September 1981 had died in prison. Muhammad Kamaleddine A1 Sananiri, aged 64, a prominent member of the Muslim Brotherhood, died in early November in the reception prison at Tora. The circumstances of his death were unclear although official sources
320
stated that he had committed suicide. Amnesty International received several reports that he had been tortured. Former cabinet minister Dr Abdul Azim Abu AI Ata, aged 56, reportedly died in the annex to the agricultural prison at Tora as a result of a heart attack on 20 November. On the same day a worker from Alexandria, Gaber Breq'aa, was reported to have died in Tora penitentiary from heart disease. Reports received by Amnesty International suggested that requests for medical treatment for him had been ignored by the prison authorities. Dr Muharib, a doctor, was reported to have died in the reception prison at Tora, where necessary medical attention was reportedly not available.
In a letter dated 16 September, and in subsequent appeals to President Sadat and the Minister of Interior, Muhammad Nabawi Ismail, Amnesty International called for the immediate release of all prisoners of conscience. It asked for assurances that all those arrested would be granted access to a lawyer of their choice and to relatives. Amnesty International urged that information about the detainees, including their names, the charges against them and the place of detention, be made public.
Under the provisions of presidential decrees announced in early September those arrested were allowed to appeal against their detention within six months. However, the initial period of six months' detention could be renewed up to a maximum of five years. During this time detainees were subject to political investigation by the Socialist Prosecutor General, in accordance with provisions of Law 95 of 1980, also referred to as The Law on the Protection of Moral Values from Shameful Conduct (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
Amnesty International adopted a number of prisoners of conscience arrested in September, including Ibrahim Talaat, a member of the Wafd Party and President of the Human Rights Association in Alexandria; DrNawalAlSa'adawi,afeminist writer and doctor; Abu Al Ezz Al Hariri, a former member of the People's Assembly for the National Progressive Unionist Party; Sheikh Mustafa 'Asy, secretary for religious affairs and national unity of the National Progressive Unionist Party; and Abouna Louqa Sidarous, a Coptic priest.
President Muhammad Anwar Sadat was assassinated at a military parade on 6 October 1981. He was succeeded by Vice-President Muhammad Hosni Mubarak who was elected by the Egyptian people in a referendum on 13 October 1981.
More people were arrested after the assassination of President Sadat, bringing the number of those detained to several thousand. Many of those arrested were said to belong to five militant Islamic groups, and were alleged to have used or advocated violence.
321
However, Amnesty International believed that many others had neither been involved in nor advocated violent acts.
Work continued on behalf of other prisoners of conscience, among them Ali Said Zahran, a furniture maker from Damietta, who was serving a five-year prison sentence for membership of an illegal communist organization. He was arrested in September 1977 and tried before a military court in March 1978. Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience included the lawyer Ahmed Nabil A1 Hilaly, who was detained from March 1981 until his release in December 1981, and Farida A1 Naqqash, a woman journalist detained for the same period (see Amnesty International Report ยก981). Both were facing charges of participation in illegal political activities for the banned Egyptian Communist Party, under Law 40 of 1977, in State Security Case No. 632 of 1979. They and 28 others were put on trial before the Supreme State Security Court in Cairo. After many adjournments the trial was scheduled to resume on 2 January 1982. Additional charges of communicating with a hostile foreign country were brought against Farida A1 Naqqash in State Security Case No. 442 of 1981, but were dropped in December. Amnesty International appealed ibr the release of the poet Ahmed Fu'ad Negm, imprisoned many times after writing poems criticizing the government. He was rearrested on 29 April and initially detained in the Citadel Prison. At the end of 1981 he was believed to be held at the Isti'naf Prison in Cairo, where he was serving a sentence of one year's imprisonment (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
On 5 November Amnesty International wrote to President Mubarak outlining its concerns in Egypt over a number of years. These included mass arrests of people for their conscientiously held beliefs, the death penalty and a number of recent laws which provided for the imprisonment of individuals convicted of non-violent banned political activity. Amnesty International drew attention particularly to Law 40 of 1977 which provides for a maximum punishment of life imprisonment with hard labour for such activities as going on strike or establishing illegal political organizations.
In November 1981 President Mubarak ordered the release of 31 people who had been detained since early September. More people were released before the end of the year. However, some individuals released from prison after political investigation by the Socialist Prosecutor General's office were immediately rearrested and detained under the new State of Emergency laws, imposed for one year following the assassination of President Sadat Under this legislation detainees may be held for an initial period of six months, after which they may petition the President of the Republic for release. If the President rejects the petition or fails to respond, the detainee may be
322
held for a further period of six months, without charge or trial, a period which may be renewed as long as the State of Emergency is in force.
Four people were granted amnesties on the anniversary of the 15 May 1971 "Corrective Revolution", marking the foiled coup attempt against President Sadat. Former Vice-President Ali Sabri, Sami Sharaf, Farid Abdul Karim and Muhammad Fayeq were released on the orders of President Sadat. The first three were serving sentences of life imprisonment for high treason and complicity in the coup attempt. Muhammad Fayeq and Farid Abdul Karim were subsequently among the 1,536 people arrested in the first week of September.
Amnesty International monitored the trial of those accused of participating in the assassination of President Sadat and seven other people. The trial before the Supreme Military Court took place at a military camp under strict security. Only the first two sessions of the trial, which began on 21 November 1981, were held in pubhc. All subsequent proceedings were held in camera. In letters and telegrams addressed to Lieutenant-General Muhammad Abdul Halim Abu Ghazala, Minister of Defence, and Ahmed Samir Sami, Minister of Justice, Amnesty International expressed concern that this trial was being held in camera. It also expressed concern that the military prosecution had demanded the death penalty for all 24 defendants, especially in view of the closed nature of the trial and reports of other irregularities in the proceedings. The trial was still in progress at the end of the year.
The number of reports of torture received by Amnesty International in 1981 increased significantly over those of previous years. Reports that detainees were tortured in the Citadel Prison in the first half of 1981 were rejected in an official statement issued in June by State Security Prosecutor Raga' A1 Arabi. However, following the mass arrests which began in early September, allegations of torture and ill-treatment were both more frequent and consistent. They appeared to signify a pattern of torture of political detainees, particularly those allegedly involved with militant Islamic groups who were held at the reception prison at Tora and the Citadel. Among the methods most commonly alleged were beatings of various parts of the body and cigarette bums. Amnesty International also received consistent reports that defendants accused of participation in the assassination of President Sadat had been tortured or ill-treated. Several of them stated during their trial before the Supreme Military Court that they had been tortured.
In 1981 Amnesty International urged the commutation of eight death sentences. In January and February five people, including two women, were sentenced to death by courts in Cairo, Mansoura, Zagazig and Minia. All had been charged with murder. In June a court
323
in Alexandria sentenced two men to death for the murder of the sheikh of a mosque. In July a court in Fayoum sentenced to death an agricultural worker charged with the murder of his sister. Amnesty International appealed to President Sadat to commute all these death sentences on humanitarian grounds. It was not known whether any of these prisoners were executed.
In its letter to President Mubarak on 5 November 1981 Amnesty International drew attention to its opposition to the death penalty in all cases. Amnesty International urged the President to commute all death sentences on humanitarian grounds, and to give serious consideration to the abolition of the death penalty.
