Comoros
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of political prisoners, unfair procedures in political trials, ill-treatment of prisoners, and harsh prison conditions.
Amnesty International had repeatedly called on the government to try or release certain officials and soldiers arrested when the present government came to power in May 1978. Thirty-three were still detained without charge or trial in May 1981 when Amnesty International sent a mission to the Comoros at the invitation of the government. The delegate met President Ahmed Abdallah and members of the government and
27
security forces and discussed Amnesty International's concerns with them. Twenty-four of the 33 prisoners were released during the mission. President Ahmed Abdallah stated that the nine who remained in detention in Moroni Central Prison (including Salim Himidi, former Minister of the Interior, who had been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience) would be brought to trial by August 1981. Amnesty International's delegate pressed for them to be charged or released without further delay. The delegate expressed concern at the continued detention without charge of 11 detainees held at Voidjou Military Camp since February 1981 for alleged possession of subversive documents and video-cassettes.
The delegate was allowed to interview certain prisoners in private. He confirmed that prison conditions at Moroni Central Prison and Voidjou Military Camp were harsh. Prisoners were not allowed visits or correspondence and had no books other than the Quran. They had no beds, sleeping mats or blankets. Diet and hygiene were poor. At Moroni Central Prison some exercise had been permitted since jurisdiction over the prison had been transferred from the security forces to the army in January 1981, and some prisoners had been admitted to hospital. At Voidjou Military Camp prisoners continued to be held incommunicado in unlit cells, and were denied medical attention and exercise. Several detainees held there were in urgent need of medical treatment as a result of neglect and ill-treatment, physical traces of which the delegate observed.
The mission expressed concern at aspects of the constitution and procedures of the Special Court of Justice — established in 1979 to try cases involving political offences committed under the previous government — which were incompatible with international standards of fair trial. Amnesty International was particularly concerned that defendants had no legal representation, no right of appeal, and were not told the charges before the hearing. The delegate also called on the government to amend the recent law establishing a Stale Security Court The law brought any offence considered by the court to be politically motivated within the competence of the court. It also extended the court's jurisdiction to people as young as 14 years. The law gave defendants no right to challenge the competence of the court, no right of appeal and no guarantee of legal representation.
After the mission, in August 1981, Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government. It appealed to the government to release Salim Himidi and all prisoners of conscience immediately; to ensure that all those arrested were either charged and tried, or released; to give all prisoners a prompt and fair tri al according to international standards; and to guarantee humane treatment in detention. Amnesty International also urged the government to
28
abolish the death penalty — no judicial executions had taken place in the Comoros for several years — and to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol.
The government had not responded to the memorandum by the end of 1981. Some improvement in prison conditions was reported but Amnesty International remained concerned about continuing detention without charge or trial.
In November 1981 Mouzaoir Abdallah, a former Minister of Foreign Affairs who had been under close surveillance since December 1978, was arrested at Moroni airport on his return from a visit abroad. About 100 of his supporters were arrested at the same time, although most were later released. By the end of 1981 Mouzaoir Abdallah had not been charged, although he had been publicly accused of endangering the security of the state. Amnesty International's requests for information about the detainees, and appeals for them to be charged or released, met with no response.
