Ethiopia
Amnesty International's concerns were the detention without trial of political prisoners, the government's failure to account for "disappeared" prisoners, torture, extra-legal executions and harsh prison conditions.
Armed conflict continued in Eritrea, Tigre, the Ogaden and parts of the Oromo-populated areas in the south and west. Civilians in these regions, Eritrea in particular, suffered greatly. Others fled to other parts of Ethiopia or neighbouring countries.
Political arrests continued in Addis Ababa and other parts of the country of alleged supporters of the armed opposition movements, and others categorized as "counter-revolutionaries".
From about June 1981 members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church (EEMYC), part of the Lutheran World Federation, with some half a million members mostly of Oromo origin, were the target of harassment and persecution. In the western province of Wollega church workers were arrested, churches closed and worship restricted. The EEMYC headquarters in Addis Ababa was expropriated by the government on 16 November 1981. Many more EEMYC workers in Wollega, some of whom were allegedly killed, were arrested later in the year. Underlying this persecution, occasionally directed also at other smaller Protestant churches in the same areas, was a pattern of harassment or arrest of Oromos in different parts of Ethiopia on suspicion of supporting the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF).
The Beta Israel community of about 28,000 members in Gondar province, known also as "Falashas" or Ethiopian Jews, was also the target of persecution. From mid-1981 many members of the community were arrested as "counter-revolutionaries" for practising their religion, community schools were closed and members dismissed from local government employment. Some of those arrested were alleged to have been tortured.
The number of political prisoners arrested in previous years and still detained in 1981 was difficult to determine. The government published no information on numbers or names of political prisoners. About 150 to 200 prisoners arrested during the revolution in 1974 were still detained without trial, and some thousands of others arrested between 1975 and 1980 were believed to be still held without charge or trial in 1981. They included members of the former imperial government, members of "nationalities" or ethnic groups associated
33
with armed opposition movements, and alleged supporters of banned opposition groups such as the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP) or the All-Ethiopia Socialist Movement (Me'isone).
The Provisional Military Administrative Council (PMAC) released 549 prisoners between 5 and 14 September to mark the seventh anniversary of the 1974 revolution. Possibly a third were political detainees. Some other long-term political prisoners had been released earlier, but hopes of a more general amnesty for political prisoners were unfulfilled. This was, however, the largest and most publicized amnesty since the revolution. Amnesty International cabled the PMAC Chairman, Lieutenant Colonel Mengistu Haile Mari am, welcoming the releases and calling for a general amnesty for all political prisoners.
A government official stated that the prisoners had been released "after careful scrutiny of the charges against them", if their attitudes and behaviour were "compatible with the building of a new system undertaken by revolutionary Ethiopia". The cases of many detainees, who were mostly held without legal formality, were apparently examined by a review committee of officials of the Ministries of Justice and Public Security, the police, the prison administration and the Central Investigatory Organ (which examines the cases of all political prisoners).
Among those released were prominent members of the overthrown government of Emperor Haile Selassie, such as Berhane Meskal Wolde Selassie, Minister in the Imperial Court and Habte Selassie Tafesse, Minister of Tourism, both detained in 1974; Ermias Kebede, Administrator-General of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, and Bishop Paulos, detained in 1976; Tafarra Degueffe and Debebe Habte Yohannes, bank officials detained in 1976; Bahru Zewde, a university lecturer detained in 1976 (released in August 1981); and about 60 army and air force officers (many of them Eritreans) detained in 1975. The officers had earlier gone on hunger-strike demanding to be charged and tried or released.
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued failure of the authorities to clarify the "disappearance" in prison in 1979 of several long-term political detainees, including Haile Fida, former chairman of the central committee of the All-Ethiopia Socialist Movement {Me'isone). Their whereabouts were still unknown at the end of 1981. The fate of the Reverend Gudina Tumsa was alsc unclear. He was believed to have been abducted in July 1979 by unidentified gunmen presumed to be government security officers. However, the government claimed in 1981 that he had not been arrested and was not detained under its jurisdiction, and that he had joined the Oromo Liberation Front Amnesty International submitted
34
information on 16 cases of "disappearance" in Ethiopia to tlie United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
Prison conditions for political prisoners also gave considerable cause for concern although treatment varied considerably. Some women from the imperial family arrested in 1975 and other women prisoners were detained in a former clinic in Alem Bekagne Prison in Addis Ababa. They received food, clothing and other basic necessities from relatives, and could exchange brief censored letters with them, although they were only allowed family visits once or twice a year. Some suffered from illnesses caused or exacerbated by their conditions and prolonged detention. They usually had access to medical attention but Rebecca Asrate was reportedly denied proper treatment for a severe skin complaint. Among other prisoners held separately in Alem Bekagne Prison were three grandsons of the late Emperor and three sons of the executed Ras Asrate Kassa, as well as many political detainees arrested since 1975, including Tsehai Tolessa, wife of the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, detained in early 1980.
Members of the deposed imperial government and other former prominent officials detained in 1974 suffered harsher prison conditions. They were held in the cellars of the former Menelik Palace ("Old Guebe"), the PMAC headquarters, and were only allowed a short period in the open air each day. Among these 150 to 200 prisoners, some over 70 years old, were Germatchew Tekle Hawariat, former Crown Counsellor, Haile Mariam Workneh, Dean of Holy Trinity Cathedral, and former government ministers Seyoum Haregot, Mamo Tadesse and Ketema Yifru. Also believed to be held there, but not underground, were Zegeye Asfaw, former Minister of Justice, Abba-Biyya Abba-Jobbir, a Supreme Court judge, and Gezahegne Kassahun, a trade union leader, all detained in February 1980.
The "third police station", headquarters of the Central Revolutionary Investigation Department, was the main prison to which political prisoners were taken after arrest by the security forces or urban-dwellers' association (kebelle) defence guards. Torture during interrogation was reportedly common. Prisoners were held incommunicado, with little food, and in dirty overcrowded cells. Amnesty International received reports that some had been killed and their bodies secretly disposed of outside the prison.
The military police headquarters in Addis Ababa was reserved for "hard core" political prisoners. Prisoners were held — often for long periods — in solitary confinement and incommunicado, in small concrete cells without windows or furniture. Torture was reportedly routine.
Amnesty International intervened several times during 1981 on behalf of Ethiopian students threatened with being forcibly returned
35
to Ethiopia from a number of countries, mainly the USSR, Bulgaria, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Amnesty International believed that they risked being arrested on arrival because of their political opinions or activities against the Ethiopian Government. Amnesty International was also investigating reports that a number of refugees who had fled to Djibouti in July 1981 were returned to Ethiopia at the border by the Djibouti authorities.
