Turkey
Turkey remained under martial law throughout 1981. Amnesty International was concerned that thousands of people were imprisoned, many for non-violent political activities; torture was widely used; and the death penalty was used increasingly.
According to official figures published in the Turkish press in November 1981, 29,929 people were in prison for political offences. Of these, 3,731 were detained without charge, 24,300 were in the process of being tried and 1,898 had been convicted Many had been charged with, or convicted of, violent acts. However many others known to Amnesty International were imprisoned as a result of nonviolent political activities such as belonging to political parties or groups, translating books, journalism and trade union activities. Some lawyers in Diyarbakir were detained, apparently because of their professional activities, and some of the Kurds imprisoned were charged only with participating in Kurdish cultural events. Some of these cases were raised with the Turkish authorities during an Amnesty International mission to Turkey in April 1981 and were cited in a statement made by Amnesty International later that month to the Political Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe {sqq Amnesty International Report 1981).
In December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to General Kenan Evren, the head of state, expressing concern about all those imprisoned for non-violent political activities. Among the specific cases raised were those of Ahmet Isvan, the former mayor of Istanbul, who had been held for more than a year without trial; Yeter Goksu-Ogelman, a physicist and university teacher, charged with membership of an illegal organization; members of the executive committees of the Turkish Workers' Party (TIP) and the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Party (TIKP); and members of the Confederation of
295
Progressive Trade Unions (DISK). Amnesty International reiterated its appeal for the abolition of Articles 141 and 142 of the penal code which prohibit forming organizations or making propaganda aimed at achieving the "domination of a social class over other social classes".
In October 1981 Amnesty International learned of the re-imprisonment of Dr Ismail Besikci. He had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience in 1973 and again in 1979 when he was imprisoned because of his writings about Kurds (see Amnesty International Report 1980). He had been released from prison in April 1981, but the Turkish newspaper, Cumhuriyet, reported on 22 October 1981 that a sentence of five to 25 years' imprisonment had been demanded for him by the military prosecutor because of information that had been published abroad
Numerous allegations of torture and reports of deaths caused by torture reached Amnesty International during the year. In July 1981 tire organization made public the translations of 21 detailed torture testimonies. They described torture alleged to have been inflicted since the military coup of 12 September 1980. The documents included transcripts of court proceedings and statements addressed to General Kenan Evrea Methods of torture included electric shocks, burning with cigarettes, falaka (beating the soles of the feet) and violent assaults on all parts of the body including the sexual organs.
Amnesty International asked the authorities to investigate reports of torture on many occasions throughout 1981. In some cases it was informed that medical examinations "indicated some injuries" and that investigations had been initiated by the martial law authorities. Among such cases were those of Ahmet Akagunduz, a lawyer, and Cetin Uygur, a trade union leader. In September 1981 Amnesty International sent the authorities a list of 62 names of people alleged to have died in custody since 12 September 1980, and asked for the results of any investigations into these deaths. Amnesty International subsequently withdrew one name from the list when it learned that the person was still alive. In December 1981 Amnesty International was informed by the authorities of the results of their investigations into 21 of these cases. In two cases police officers had been convicted of causing the deaths and in another nine cases investigations or trials were in progress. In nine cases death was said to have been caused by drowning, jumping from a window, suicide or ill-health, or it was simply stated that there were no grounds for prosecution. In one case the prisoner was said to have been released after transfer to hospital. Amnesty International later learned of a further 15 people alleged to have died as a result of torture, the latest in October 1981.
In its statement to the Political Affairs Committee of the Par-Uamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in April 1981,
296
Amnesty Intemational noted the steps taken by the Turkish authorities to investigate torture allegations and deaths in custody. It pointed out however that their actions had not resulted in any apparent cessation of torture. Amnesty Intemational stressed the importance of access to lawyers and relatives throughout the period of detention. In September 1981 the time for which people might be held before being charged was reduced from 90 to 45 days. However according to information received by Amnesty International, detainees were still denied contact with their lawyers or families. Most allegations of torture related to this period of incommunicado detention.
In 1981 six men convicted of political killings were executed, bringing the total number of executions since the military coup to 10. According to official figures published in the Turkish press in November 1981 martial law tribunals passed 65 death sentences between September 1980 and September 1981. Of these 16 had been confirmed by the Military Court of Appeal. On 16 November 1981 it was announced that in future death sentences would be referred for ratification to the Consultative Assembly, which was established on 23 October 1981. Since 12 September 1980 death sentences had been subject to ratification by the National Security Council alone.
Amnesty Intemational sent appeals against individual death sentences and executions throughout 1981. On 1 October Amnesty International wrote again to General Evren deploring the frequent imposition of the death penalty in Turkey. It stated that although "Amnesty Intemational appreciates the difficulties which all recent Turkish governments have faced in dealing with violence... we do not believe that these difficulties can ever justify recourse to the use of the death penalty."
297
