Tunisia
Amnesty International' s work during the year focused on efforts to gain the release of more than 40 prisoners of conscience, and appeals for commutation of death sentences. The organization was also concerned about reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
Habib Achour, former Secretary General of the Union générale des travailleurs tunisiens (UGTT), the General Union of Tunisian Workers, and an Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience, was released from house arrest. Arrested in January 1978, he had been released from prison in August 1979. In August 1981, to mark the 78 th birthday of President Habib Bourguiba, Habib Achour was transferred to Qurbus, and subsequently to the Kerkennah Islands, his birthplace, where he remained subject to restrictions. In November he was granted an amnesty and on his return to Tunis was elected President of the UGTT. Earlier in 1981 Amnesty International
349
had expressed concern that one of his sons had also been placed under house arrest in March 1981. Amnesty International learned that restrictions on him were lifted in June.
In July 1981 approximately 60 alleged members of the Mouvement de la tendance islamique (MTI), the Islamic Tendency Movement, were arrested They included civil servants, students, engineere, teachers, lawyers and a doctor, Dr Rachid El Ayachi. On 6 August Amnesty International wrote to the Tunisian Minister of the Interior, Driss Guiga, about the arrests and asked for information on the detainees, including their place of detention, the charges against them and the date and place of their trial. More than 90 people in this case were charged with membership of an unauthorized organization (Article 30 of Law 154 of 7 November 1959), defamation of the head of state( Article 48 of the Press Code of 1975) and disseminating false information (Article 49 of the Press Code of 1975). None was charged with committing an act of violence.
On 27 August the MTI trial began in Tunis. About half the defendants were tried in their absence. One session of the trial, in which the case for the defence was presented, was reported to have continued without recess for more than 27 hours, despite protests from defence lawyers. On 4 September the court announced the verdicts which ranged from 11 years' imprisonment to suspended sentences of six months' imprisonment Two defendants were acquitted for lack of evidence. The case proceeded to the Court of Appeal on 21 September. On 3 October it announced that several sentences had been revised Some 11-year terms of imprisonment were reduced to 10 years' imprisonment, and some short-term sentences of imprisonment amended to suspended sentences. Amnesty International adopted more than 40 of them as prisoners of conscience, including the alleged leader of the MTI, Rached Ben Mohamed El Ghannouchi, a teacher of philosophy who received a sentence of 10 years' imprisonment All those sentenced were held after their trial in Bouij Er-Roumi Prison near Bizerte, on the northern coast of Tunisia.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of two members of a theatrical group, Lamine Nehdi and Mongi Laouni, arrested on 8 August 1981. They were charged with several offences related to a play performed by the group, including defamation of the head of state, incitement to public disorder and distortion of the text of the play which had reportedly been officially approved previously. The first court hearing of their case took place on 12 September and the defendants denied the charges. The trial was adjourned to January 1982 at the request of the defence. Both defendants were released pending the trial.
Amnesty International was concerned that certain laws concerning
350
freedom of expression and association, such as the Press Code promulgated in 1975, had been applied in a number of cases monitored by the organization during 1981. In the majority of cases, other than those mentioned above, the trials resulted in fines, suspended sentences or acquittals.
Amnesty International received several reports of torture and ill-treatment of individuals arrested in the MTI case. After their arrest detainees were held by the Direction de la sûreté de l'Etat, and some were reportedly tortured. During their trial a number of defendants stated that they had been tortured and defence lawyers called for medical examinations to confirm this. By the end of 1981 Amnesty International had learned of no such examinations, nor of any independent inquiry into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment Amnesty International was concerned about three death sentences passed during 1981; at least two were carried out On 30 January Kamel Ben AH Khemiri Bou Nasri was sentenced to death by Tunis Criminal Court for premeditated murder. He was hanged on 22 April. In June 1981 Sousse Criminal Court sentenced Mohamed Chahr to death, also for murder. It was not known whether he was executed. On 6 August Tunis Criminal Court sentenced to death Khemais Soulah, convicted of murdering a police officer. He was hanged on 19 August 1981 in Tunis Civil Prisoa
In a letter to President Habib Bourguiba on 19 February Amnesty International explained its unconditional opposition to the death penalty on the grounds that it is a violation of the right to life and the right not to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Amnesty International urged that any future death sentences be commuted on humanitarian grounds.
Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of)
During 1981 Amnesty International worked for the release of 30 adopted prisoners of conscience. It also investigated the cases of 10 possible prisoners of conscience. Little official information on these
351
cases or on other prisoners was made available in 1981 and, as in previous years, no responses of substance were received from the authorities to the numerous inquiries made by Amnesty International
Among the 30 adopted prisoners of conscience were 11 members or associates of the former federal government which was in power under British colonial rule until independence in 1967. Six of this group had been held without charge or trial since 1967 at al-Mansurah prison. The remaining five were sentenced in February 1968 to between 10 and 15 years' imprisonment on charges of high treason and feudalism. On 7 July 1981 the news agency Agence France Presse reported that Qahtan al-Sha'bi, the first President of the country in 1967 and an Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience, had died of heart failure. Unofficial sources reported that two other members of the group — 'Ali'Atif al-Kalidi and Nasir bin 'Abdullah al-Wahidi — had been released. Although some of the prisoners had served their full sentences, there was no confirmation that they had been released and Amnesty International believed that they were still in detention.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of 18 political prisoners detained without trial between 1970 and 1975. The whereabouts of these prisoners was not known and there were fears that they might no longer be alive. Information received by Amnesty International indicated that between 1967 and 1975 hundreds of people had "disappeared" in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY). Some "disappeared" from prisons where they had been receiving regular visits from their families, others were kidnapped from their place of work, from their homes or from the streets. For example, Bahadin Ahmad Muhammad, a mechnical engineer, "disappeared" in 1972. In 1968 and 1969, after returning from a period of study abroad, he was arrested several times for short periods and questioned about his contacts with foreigners living in Adea In March 1972 he married and a week later, between 11 and 13 March, he was at his eldest sister's house showing photographs of the wedding. He answered a knock on the door and was last seen being driven away in a jeep. Neither his family nor his friends have seen or heard from him since. Amnesty International submitted details of his case to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involimtary Disappearances.
Despite persistent inquiries the famihes of the "disappeared" were unable to find out whether they were dead or detained in a particular prison. The authorities rarely responded to inquiries; when they did they stated that these people had "left the country" or been shot as " intruders" while crossing the border into Saudi Arabia or the Yemen Arab Republic.
352
Amnesty International was concerned about conditions and the treatment of detainees in Mu'askar al-Fatah, the largest detention centre in the country. After arrest political detainees were taken there for questioning and some were held there for long periods without charge or trial. Information about conditions in Mu'askar al-Fatah was gathered mainly from first-hand reports by ex-detainees who had been there at various times between 1970 and 1976. The unhygienic conditions, inadequate medical facilities, meagre food rations and routine ill-treatment of detainees, in some cases reportedly leading to paralysis or death, fell far short of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
On 9 March 1981 Amnesty International cabled President'Ali Nasir Mohammad seeking official confirmation of a report in the Lebanese newspaperyii^S'ii/ir that Mohammad Saleh Muti', former Minister of Internal and Foreign Affairs, had been executed, and expressing its concern. No reply was received
