Chile
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of about 250 prisoners of conscience, including many who had "disappeared" since 1973, and people sent into internal exile by administrative or judicial order. In late 1981 Amnesty International launched a three-month special campaign against the imprisonment of prisoner of conscience, torture and extra-legal executions, and the government's failure to clarify the fate of "disappeared" prisoners.
The 1981 report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Chile stated that the constitution which came into force on 11 March 1981 "set(s) up as basic rules provisions that are contrary to the principles, rights and guarantees enunciated in [the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights]". In practice the new constitution provides the government with a legal framework within which systematic human rights violations can take place. For example, interim Provision 24 was invoked frequently by the Minister of the Interior "by order of the President of the Republic" to arrest political suspects, banish them for up to three months to remote parts of the country, hold them incommunicado in secret places for up to 20 days, or expel them from the country. Between January and September 1981, 427 people were arrested in Santiago under such administrative procedures.
All political parties and activities remained banned. In December there was a wave of arrests, mainly in Santiago and Antofagasta, of alleged members of the Izquierda Cristiana, Christian Left, and of the Socialist Party.
119
Amnesty International appealed repeatedly to the government on behalf of the many people detained It asked for clarification of their legal position and called for humane treatment in detention. From detailed reports received during 1981 a consistent pattern emerged: agents of the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), Chilean secret police, or other security units of the army or navy seized people in their homes or on the street and took them, usually blindfolded and lying on the floor of the vehicle, to interrogation centres in military barracks or at secret locations. Amnesty International received consistent allegations that one of these centres was located at 1470 Borgoño Street, Santiago. There, they were forced to undress, put on an overall and slippers, and taken to small cells, where they remained under surveillance, of which they were not at the time aware. Some prisoners claimed that this was to assess which torture method would be most effective. Interrogation was often reportedly accompanied for days at a time by torture, including electric shocks, severe beatings, threats and humiliations. Many of those detained were released after a few hours or days without charge.
Among a group of alleged members of the Izquierda Cristiana arrested in December 1981 were economist Sergio Patricio Aguiló Melo; Ignacio Germán Molina Valdivieso, National Secretary of the Comisión Chilena de Derechos Humanos (CCDH), Chilean Human Rights Commission; Pablo Fuenzalida Zegers, Provincial Coordinator of CCDH; Raúl Enrique Reyes Susarte; Ramón Rodolfo Piña Vargas; and lawyer Eugenio Díaz Corvalán. In a written complaint to the military courts, Sergio Patricio Aguiló Melo stated: "The day of my arrest ... I was questioned about political activities in which I was allegedly involved, together with the
application of electric shocks by means of the picana, prod____
On 5 December... I was placed naked on my back... (on) the parrilla, grill, which is a kind of metal bedstead to which one is tied by the feet and hands. A kind of tape is placed on the stomach, chest, between the testicles and legs and on the soles of the feet, through which the current is passed at times decided by the torturers, which is generally when the answers being given by the person being tortured are not deemed satisfactory." He also described being tortured on the silla eléctrica, electric chair, and by means of a "máquina", machine. During one torture session, he said, the shocks were so powerful that his heart began to fail and one of his torturers had to give external heart massage until he recovered. The torture was then resumed At one point, he said, his captors threatened to torture his wife. He was also forced to pose for a photograph holding a machine-gun and to write several self-incriminating statements.
120
Pablo Fuenzalida Zegers was similarly tortured with electric shocks. He had suffered from a neuropsychiatric illness for 17 years and needed regular treatment When he was detained on 10 December 1981 his treatment ceased On 12 December the Santiago Appeals Court authorized an independent doctor to visit him in detention but the CNI refused the doctor access to the prison. He later told a CCDH representative that his right leg was temporarily paralysed and that as a result of torture he suffered from severe headaches, found it difficult to walk and had lost coordination in his right hand and arm.
Members of human rights groups figured prominently among the victims of human rights violations including torture, death threats, arbitrary arrests, and expulsion from the country. Dr Manuel Almeyda Medina, a doctor working for the Vicaría de la Solidañdad, a Catholic Church human rights group, Dr Sergio Arroyo Pinochet and Dr Pedro Castillo Yáñez, were arrested in May 1981 and held for 20 days in secret premises. The public were told through the news media that they were accused of terrorist and criminal activities, including bank robberies. The Santiago Appeals Court eventually released Dr Almeyda and Dr Castillo unconditionally. Dr Arroyo was charged with belonging to the banned Socialist Party but released on bail. Psychiatrist Dr Mario Insunza Becker, who also worked with the Vicaría and specialized in the rehabilitation of torture victims, received death threats for several months in circumstances suggesting that the security forces were involved Amnesty International medical groups worked on behalf of the four doctors.
On 11 August 1981 four former members of parliament were arrested and expelled to Argentina. They were: Jaime Castillo, a Christian Democrat and former Minister of Justice, also President of the CCDH; Orlando Cantuarias, former Minister of Mines and a member of the banned Radical Party; Alberto Jérez, former senator and until July 1981 member of the Committee for Justice and Peace of the Chilean Episcopate; and Carlos Briones, former Minister of the Interior and member of the banned Socialist Party. According to the government, the reason for their expulsion was that they had supported a memorandum addressed to President Pinochet by the Coordinadora Nacional Sindical (CNS), an unofficial trade union confederation, calling for more trade union and political freedom. When they were arrested Amnesty International urged their immediate and unconditional release.
Lawyers working on behalf of political prisoners or victims of human rights violations in collaboration with the Vicaría were persistently harassed and sent death threats. They included Ignacio Walker Prieto, Roberto Carretón Merino, Jorge Sellan Chijani and
121
Carlos López Dawson. Pedro Barría Gutiérrez was the victim of an unsuccessful bomb attack in July 1981.
On 8 July 1981 artist Hugo Riveros Gómez and teacher Oscar Polanco Valenzuela were killed in Santiago. Hugo Riveros had been kidnapped the previous day by men who followed procedures similar to those commonly used by the security forces. Oscar Polanco, who was a member of the Socialist Party, was machine-gunned to death in the street A group calling itself Comando Gamma or Comando de Vengadores de Humberto Tapia Barraza later claimed responsibility. (Carlos Humberto Tapia Barraza was a member of the CNI who had been shot dead in the street on 6 July 1981.) There was no evidence to suggest that such groups existed independently of the security forces. Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government that these men may have been deliberately killed because of suspected political activities. It requested a judicial inquiry into these deaths and those of Lisandro Sandoval Torres in Concepción in August 1981 and Juan Soto Cerda, Jaime Cuevas Cuevas and two others in Santiago in November 1981.
The judiciary failed to clarify the fate of any more of the many political prisoners who "disappeared" in Chile between 1973 and 1977. However, new evidence emerged of the involvement of the security forces in the case of Juan Bosco Maino Canales, a member of the banned Movimiento de Acción Popular Unitario (MAPU), Movement of United Popular Action, who "disappeared" on 26 May 1976. His detention was explicitly acknowledged by the Minister of the Interior when giving evidence in the case of Carlos Montes Cisternas, another member of MAPU arrested in December 1980 and sentenced in September 1981 to 541 days' exile for "illegal association". Amnesty International adopted both of them as prisonere of conscience.
Several trade unionists were arrested or sent into internal exile. Manuel Bustos and Alamiro Guzmán, leaders of the CNS accused for the second time of" illegally representing workers", spent six months in jail before being released on bail on 31 December 1981. Four workers were banished to internal exile on 30 Octoberl981 for their participation in a strike in Talcahuano. After being pardoned on 25 November in a "gesture of good will" by President Pinochet one was rearrested on 27 November and banished again for resuming trade union activities.
Amnesty International remained concerned about persistent allegations of ill-treatment and inadequate medical treatment in prisons throughout the country, particularly at the Cárcel Pública, Public Prison, and Centro de Orientación Feminina, women's prison, in Santiago, as well as at the prisons of Peumo, Quillota, Valparaiso and
122
Victoria. Reports were received throughout the year of prisoners being beaten by guards, subjected to periods of solitary confinement, and denied visits. Several prisoners whose trials were in progress in Santiago, who had been transferred to prisons away from the capital in January 1981, were transferred yet again to other prisons (see Amnesty International Report 1981). This hampered the work of defence lawyers and made it difficult for relatives to visit In May 1981 Fernando Espinoza Espinoza was transferred from Santiago to the Penal Disciplinario, Disciplinary Prison, in Victoria, southern Chile, for one year, following an incident involving a prison guard who was alleged to have attacked him and another political prisoner. He was the first political prisoner to be sent to Victoria, where conditions were reportedly extremely harsh.
In accordance with Decrees 3627 and 3655 of 1981, a war-time military tribunal was set up to try Guillermo Rodríguez Morales for the killing of CNI member Carlos Tapia Barraza. This procedure was criticized by independent lawyers, not only because Chile was not officially at war but also because such war tribunals do not conform to internationally recognized standards for a fair trial. The war tribunal took place on 9 October. Amnesty International sent an observer to the hearing. The trial consisted of an opening statement by the most senior officer and statements by the prosecution and defence, followed by a series of questions and answers. It lasted only 45 minutes. Guillermo Rodriguez was sentenced to life imprisonment with no right of appeal The Amnesty International delegate concluded that the procedure failed to correspond to internationally recognized standards in peace time.
Amnesty International submitted information on human rights violations in Chile to the United Nations, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and other intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations.
