Spain
Amnesty International's main concern continued to be the ill-treat-ment of people detained under anti-terrorist legislation (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Amnesty International was also concerned about prosecutions which, if successful, could curtail freedom of expression, in contravention of international law.
Political violence continued during 1981. There were armed confrontations involving political groups of the left and the right, autonomists, the police and the Guardia Civil (paramilitary pohce force), especially in the Basque provinces. Official figures showed that the number of deaths fell from 126 in 1980 to 49 in 1981. In
290
March 1981 a new anti-terrorist command was formed, giving the armed forces an operational anti-terrorist role for the first time.
The application of the anti-terrorist laws and allegations of ill-treatment and torture of detainees were documented in the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Spain 3-28 October 1979, published in December 1980. Amnesty International's findings and recommendations, which were sent to the Spanish Government in September 1980, were described in the Amnesty International Report 1981. So too were changes in the law regarding arrest and detention introduced since the mission took place. These changes did not affect Amnesty International's concerns: suspects arrested under anti-terrorist legislation and detained by the police for up to 10 days without charge were still held incommunicado, without access to a lawyer. Amnesty International believed that this practice and the lack of any effective judicial supervision(in spite of legal provision for such supervision) were conducive to ill-treatment José Arregui, an alleged member of Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), Basque Homeland and Liberty, an autonomist group, died in custody after nine days' incommunicado detention in February {sqq Amnesty International Report 1981). As is usual in these cases, the sole involvement of the judge nominally responsible for his custody had been to authorize his detention; José Arregui was not allowed access to a lawyer.
Among the cases of ill-treatment reported to Amnesty International in 1981 were those ofTomás Linaza and Father Juan José Camarero Nuñez Goenaga. Tomás Linaza, the 57-year-old father of a Basque refugee in France facing extradition for alleged activities connected with ETA, was arrested on 14 May 1981 and ill-treated by the Guardia Civil in Bilbao and Madrid. After nine days' incommunicado detention he was brought before a judge who ordered his release without charge. He alleged in court that he had been beaten all over his body and on the soles of his feet; subjected to the barra, in which the victim is suspended upside down and handcuffed, with a bar pushed between the knees; hooded and threatened with shooting. A court doctor noted extensive bruising on his body. Tomás Linaza was arrested with several other men, including Father Juan José Camarero Nuñez Goenaga, who was also allegedly beaten during nine days' incommunicado detention. Father Camarero Nuñez subsequently circulated a letter among the clergy of his region describing the treatment he and others had received in police custody.
In April 1981 Amnesty International campaigned to urge the authorities to implement the recommendations in its report of its 1979 mission. It expressed concern at the continuing allegations of ill-treatment and called for the abolition of 10-day incommunicado detention; access to lawyers for suspects detained for interrogation; a
291
strengthening of judicial control over detentions; and regular medical examinations for all detainees. It pointed out that the judicial authorities had not taken any convincing action to prosecute those responsible for torture and ill-treatment, despite the numerous and well-documented complaints that had been lodged. On 23 October 1981 the Chairperson of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee met the Minister of the Interior, Sr don Juan José Rosón, and again raised these matters.
A number of people were prosecuted for publishing statements or articles criticizing the state, its representatives and institutions. Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial before the Audiencia A^ac/ona/(National Court) of Madrid on 16 December of five town councillors from the Basque town of Larrabetzu. The defendants all belonged to a legal nationalist Basque party known as Herrigintza. They were charged with publicly insulting the head of state. A statement passed by the town council and sent to the civil governor of the province of Vizcaya allegedly contained a passage saying that the King was not fit to tread on Basque soil. This was in the context of a political debate held by the town council shortly before the planned visit of the King and Queen of Spain to the Basque country. The prosecution asked for a sentence of six years' imprisonment
At the trial it was discovered that the main evidence against the defendants, the statement made by the council, contained no written reference whatever to the passage which the prosecution held to be insulting. It did express the council's opposition to the visit for political reasons. The judge therefore suspended the sitting indefinitely requesting additional informatioa The trial may be resumed or dropped. Amnesty International's observer did not criticize the conduct of the hearing but he was critical of the prosecution case. He concluded that the facts showed that the defendants did not wish to insult the King as head of state, but rather to criticize the institution of the monarchy politically. It appeared that the prosecutor was applying the penal code in such a way as to punish the councillors for having expressed a political opinion opposing the monarchy.
In July 1981 Francisco Carballo, a priest and historian from Galicia, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and a 20,000 peseta (£1,076) fine for slandering the police. The charge was based on a single passage in his recent book. History of Galicia. He referred to a "wave of terror" in Galicia in August 1975, under the government of General Franco, which culminated in the killing of Xosé Ramón Reboiras Noia, a leader of the Unión do Pobo Galego (UPG), Galician People's Union. He attributed the killing to the Spanish police.
292
On 23 April 1981a Law in Defence of the Constitution came into effect This law was introduced partly in response to increasing political violence and partly to prevent a recurrence of the attempted military coup of 23 February 1981, for which 32 army officers and members of the Guardia Civil and one civilian faced court martial {stQAmnesty International Report 1981). The law amended both the penal code and the code of military justice. It created a new offence of rebellion for attempting, or advocating, the overthrow of democracy or the suspension of the constitution, or for supporting terrorism, either actively or by advocating it This law also increased the penalties for certain existing offences.
The new law also provided penalties, which might include imprisonment depending on the gravity of the offence, for those who " conspire, propose and provoke" the above offences in public. It also punishes those who seek to excuse these offences and those who act as apologists for military rebellion or terrorism. Furthermore, it gave magistrates powers to close down temporarily a newspaper, printing works or radio station which, in the opinion of the authorities, had publicized or excused terrorism. These measures were criticized by journalists and others as limiting the freedom of the press. It was feared that the laws could be used to imprison people for tiie legitimate exercise of freedom of expression in reporting or commenting on events. Amnesty International did not learn of any prosecutions under this legislation in 1981.
On 1 July 1981 Spain made the declaration under Article 25 of the European Convention on Human Rights for a period of two years, giving individuals the right to submit complaints to the European Commission of Human Rights.
