Bangladesh
Amnesty International remained concerned about the trial before summary military courts of members of the army and civilians for alleged involvement in attempts to overthrow the government, the imprisonment of political prisoners under special legislation, reported human rights violations in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, and the application of the death penalty.
On 30 May 1981 President Ziaur Rahman was killed in Chittagong by a group of army officers in an attempted military coup. On 1 June Major General Manzur, said by the government to be the leader of the coup, was shot in circumstances which were never clarified, after being arrested with two other officers. The coup attempt collapsed. A state of emergency was proclaimed on 30 May by Vice-President Abdus Sattar. He assumed the position of Acting President until 15 November when he was elected President of Bangladesh heading a Bangladesh Nationalist Party government The state of emergency was lifted on 21 September 1981.
On 9 March 1981 the trial began ofColonel(Retired) Abdul Aziz Pasha, Colonel Didarul Alam, Colonel (Retired) Nurunnabi Choud-hury and two civilians, Kazi Munir and Mosharraf Hussain. The charges, brought under the Army Act, were that the army officers, together with "political elements" — the Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (JSD) and Sharbahava parties — had attempted to overthrow the government on 17 June 1980, and had held secret meetings to that effect They were tried by a three-member Field General Court Martial in Dacca cantonment This was the second of two courts martial held in connection with the 17 June 1980 attempted coup. In the first, in 1980, 26 members of the army were tried and 24 convicted On 17 March 1981 Amnesty International cabled President Ziaur Rahman to express its concern that two civilians were being tried before a military court In Amnesty International's experience proceedings before these courts fell far short of
185
international standards; it therefore urged that the trial be transferred to an open court with full legal safeguards. Amnesty International sent an observer who had extensive discussions about the trial with Vice-President Justice Sattar, officials in the Foreign and Home Ministries and the Deputy Attorney General (Criminal) as well as with defence lawyers. However, the chairman of the court refused him permission to attend the proceedings.
In his report, based on readings of the court record and discussions with both prosecution and defence counsel, the Amnesty International delegate concluded that a number of safeguards provided in international human rights law had been lacking. The accused were informed of the grounds for their arrest only after three months' detentioa Although the accused were permitted full legal representation during the trial, access to lawyers had not been immediate and had been granted only after the court martial had been convened. Two of the accused had been held incommunicado for at least two months. The prosecution did not contradict a statement by one of the accused that he had been threatened with death and tied and blindfolded for several days during interrogation. A court martial is not required to give reasons for its decision and there is no right of appeal. Moreover, certain rights normally available under the Army Act were denied to the accused because the trial took place before a Field General Court Martial. The prosecution case was apparently based entirely on the testimonies of two defendants who had turned state witness. The trial proceeded before the Supreme Court had decided on a petition by the civilian defendant, Mosharraf Hussain, challenging the military court's jurisdiction to try civilians. The trial judges were serving army officers and could not be regarded as independent of the executive.
On 21 May the court sentenced Colonel Didarul Alam to 10 years' imprisonment. Mosharraf Hussain, accused of having been a link between rebel officers and the JSD, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment, and Colonel Nurunnabi Khan to one year's imprisonment The two other accused had been pardoned after becoming witnesses for the prosecutioa Amnesty International cabled President Ziaur Rahman on 22 May expressing its concern at the sentence and its regret at the decision to refuse Amnesty International's observer access to the trial. It said that the trial had not met internationally recognized standards and urged the government to order a retrial before an independent court with full legal safeguards and allow an appeal to a higher independent tribunal. It also urged the government to investigate allegations that confessions had been obtained under duress. The government had not implemented Amnesty International's recommendations by the end of the year and further trials of military personnel on political charges followed.
186
On 10 July the trial of 31 officers accused of killing President Ziaur Rahman opened in Chittagong Prison before a Field General Court Martial. The accused were charged with mutiny and insubordination. On 15 July Amnesty International wrote to the Acting President expressing its concern that the trial was in camera, and urging the government to open it to the public, the press and international observers. It also urged the government to try the accused before a civilian court instead of a miUtary court On 3 August Amnesty International cabled the Acting President to express concern that the accused were still being denied meetings with their lawyers and relatives and that the trial had started before the judicial inquiry into the death of the President had published its findings.
Amnesty International received information that on 11 August the Field General Court Martial had handed down several death sentences. Amnesty International asked Acting President Abdus Sattar on 15 August 1981 whether death sentences had indeed been imposed and urged him to exercise clemency. According to press reports, 12 of the accused were sentenced to death, 12 to imprisonment two acquitted and five retired from the army. Amnesty International publicly appealed to the Acting President on 19 August to spare the lives of the condemned, especially "as their trial in camera without defence lawyers of their choice and without appeal to a court of law fell short of international human rights standards and allowed for the possibility of a miscarriage ofjustice". On 22 September the Supreme Court dismissed petitions by the condemned men, brought on the grounds that the accused had not been given time and facilities to prepare an adequate defence. The court ruled that it had no jurisdiction to interfere. The Acting President dismissed the clemency appeals and the 12 were executed on 23 September. Widespread opposition was expressed by prominent members of society, lawyers and opposition parties, and several people were arrested on 23 September, including Colonel Nuruzzaman, Chairman of the Freedom Fighters Association, who was reported to have issued a press statement about the trial. On 2 November the government stated that he had been arrested under the Special Powers Act on charges including making statements "to interfere with the administration of justice in the matter of trial of some army personnel involved in the mutiny at Chittagong". It stated that he had later been released on bail.
Amnesty International continued to seek the release of other prisoners of conscience. On 24 March it wrote to the Home Minister about six prisoners arrested under the Emergency Powers Regulations and the Special Powers Act who had been detained without trial for between seven and nine years. The Special Powers Act
187
provides for indefinite detention without trial. Mohammad Zahirul Haque and Abul Hussain had been adopted as prisoners of conscience and the cases of Sudarshan Baneijee, Habibullah Khan and Jiban Krishna Muhajan were being investigated. Habibullah Khan was an alleged leader of the Muslim Bengal Movement and the other four were members of the JSD. All five were still in detention at the end of 1981. On 28 April 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs asking for details of his statement on 22 April that 403 people were detained without trial. No reply was received.
Six leaders of the Bangladesh Bank Employees Federation were arrested after calling an indefinite strike over pay and conditions. Thousands of state bank employees went on strike on 9 September to protest against the arrests and to back their demands. On 19 September the government banned all trade union activity in state banks, dismissed more than 2,000 strikers and arrested an unspecified number. It was not disclosed whether the union leaders and others arrested were subsequently released.
On 4 August Amnesty International wrote to the Acting President to welcome reports of the release of 33 detainees on the Muslim festival of Eid-ul-Fitr, and the publication of their names. On 1 and 24 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Home Minister welcoming the amnesties of 5 October and 16 December in which at least 163 detainees were reportedly released. It asked whether any prisoners adopted or under investigation by Amnesty International were among them. However, Amnesty International did not receive a reply. It continued to be concerned at reports that members of opposition parties, including the JSD and the Awami League, were held without trial under special legislation or were serving sentences handed down by summary military courts. For example, as of July 1981, 49 members of the Awami League were known to be imprisoned, of whom 27 were serving military court sentences and 22 were untried. An estimated 1,000 prisoners had been convicted by martial law courts since 1975. Amnesty International was concerned that despite the lifting of martial law in April 1979 political prisoners continued to serve sentences handed down by such courts. Among them were approximately 195 members of the army who had been sentenced summarily, without the right of appeal and without being defended by a lawyer, to terms of imprisonment ranging from 10 to 20 years for alleged involvement in an abortive army uprising in October 1977 (see Amnesty International Report 1978). These prisoners were held in Dacca Central Jail.
Fighting between the armed forces and ethnic groups continued in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, an area in southeast Bangladesh, with
188
many deaths reported on both sides. The area is inhabited by a non-Bengali population who opposed the settlement of Bengalis from the plains, a policy encouraged by successive Bangladeshi Governments, and demanded a greater degree of autonomy. According to press reports, the security forces were responsible for numerous killings, arrests, and for torture in the area. Amnesty International was not able to verify these allegations.
In late 1980 the Disturbed Areas Bill was introduced, but had not, as far as Amnesty International was aware, become law by the end of 1981. This bill would allow security personnel to shoot to kill people on mere suspicion. On 2 February Amnesty International expressed concern at the proposals to give wide powers to security personnel to shoot" suspects" and arrest and detain people for" unlawful activity". The bill would authorize junior officers to shoot and even kill anyone engaged in "unlawful activity", broadly described as acts prejudicial to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of Bangladesh and the maintenance of public order. Punishment for such "unlawful activities" would include death and people could be detained without trial indefinitely. Redress to the ordinary courts would be denied. The Bar Council of Bangladesh issued a statement describing the powers as "draconian". The Amnesty International delegate, during his April discussions with the Acting President, expressed concern that the bill's provisions were in violation of human rights within Amnesty International's mandate, including the right to life. The Vice-President replied that Amnesty International's views" would be taken into consideration".
