Saudi Arabia
The main concern of Amnesty International was the imposition of floggings, amputations and the death penalty, which Amnesty International considers cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments and as such prohibited by international law. Amnesty International did not have sufficient information to be able to assess the extent of political imprisonment and was unable to state whether or not there were prisoners of conscience in Saudi Arabia.
Although there were no indications of widespread arbitrary arrests in Saudi Arabia, notification of arrest was not automatically given to the prisonei' s family, or, in the case of foreign nationals, to the employer or embassy. There were also long delays before prisoners were charged and tried; delays of many months and, in a number of cases, of over a year.
344
Most trials in Saudi Arabia were held in accordance with the rules of the Shari'a (Islamic Law), and were heard before a judge who decided guilt or innocence and recommended sentencing. The Minister of the Interior ultimately decides on the duration of imprisonment, and receives and acts on all requests for clemency.
Islamic law imposes amputation of the hand as the punishment for repeated thefl where there are no mitigating or extenuating circumstances. During 1981 Amnesty International learned of one such case: Salah Fariah Shukair, a North Yemeni national was convicted of stealing silverware and money and his right hand was severed by knife in Najran on 7 August 1981.
Islamic law imposes the death penalty for premeditated murder, adultery (if the convicted person is married), sodomy and rape. During 1981 Amnesty International learnedof 14 executions, 13 by beheading and one by stoning to death. The sentences were all carried out on Fridays, in public, and were reported in the Saudi and international news media
To Amnesty International's knowledge the death penalty, amputations and floggings were carried out only after judgments by three courts — the court of first instance, the court of cassation (appeal), and the Supreme Court of Justice — and after ratification by the Minister of the Interior. Judgments of the Supreme Court could not be changed by the Minister, but the court could revise its own decisions.
On 11 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to Prince Naif bin'Abd al-'Aziz, Minister of the Interior, expressing its concern about a report that two executions had taken place on 4 December 1981, one by beheading in Jeddah and the other by stoning to death in Riyadh, Amnesty International referred to the number of executions over the year and reiterated its opposition to the death penalty in all cases. It urged Prince Naif "to give consideration to the question of the death penalty in Saudi Arabia and to the possibility of restricting and eventually abolishing its use".
