Brunei
Amnesty International was concerned by the continued use of emergency legislation to detain people without trial for extraordinarily long periods.
On 10 June 1981 Amnesty International made a statement on its concerns in Brunei before the Sub-committee on Petitions, Information and Assistance of the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization. The chairperson of the sub-committee agreed to receive the names and particulars of the nine detainees known to Amnesty International. All the detainees held under emergency orders known
189
to Amnesty International were former members of the banned Partai Rakyat Brunei (PRB), Brunei People's Party. In August 1962 the PRB won all the elected seats in the Legislative Council. The then Sultan, Omar Ali Saifuddin, called in British troops to suppress a rebellion launched by the PRB after he had refused to convene the Legislative Council.
The rebellion was defeated and approximately 2,500 members of the PRB and its military wing, the Tentera Nasional Kalimantan Utara (TNKU), North Kalimantan National Army, were detained They were held under the Emergency Orders of December 1962 authorizing the Chief Minister to issue indefinitely renewable two-year detention orders. All but nine were released The remaining nine, who were adopted as prisoners of conscience, had spent between 16 and 19 years in detention without trial. Further alleged associates of the PRB were reportedly arrested under the Emergency Orders after the initial wave following the rebellioa The government refused to disclose the precise number of detainees even to members of the Legislative Council.
Amnesty International was concerned about the prison conditions for detainees. After eight prisoners escaped iji July 1973 the remaining detainees were transferred from the relatively liberal conditions of Berakas detention camp to the much stricter regime of Jerudong prisoa They were believed to be held in isolation and denied regular visits and correspondence. Amnesty International received reports that a number were in declining physical and mental health. Several were of advanced years, two being in their sixties.
