Somalia
Amnesty International's concerns were . - ^ ,	thedetentionwithouttrialofgovemment
v..,,,,—^ ■ . \	1 opponents, allegations ofill-treatment of
prisoners, harsh prison conditions, and the death penalty.
Most of the 56 prisoners adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience or under investigation as possible prisoners of conscience were detained indefinitely without charge or trial under the Preventive Detention Law of January 1970. They were arrested by the National Security Service (NSS) at various times between 1973 and 1981, without explanation or legal recourse. The names and numbers of political detainees were not disclosed by the government but they were believed to number several hundred The state of emergency decreed by President Siyad Barre on 21 October 1980 gave additional powers of detention to new regional and district revolutionary committees. Amnesty International had no information on arrests by these committees.
The prisoners of conscience detained without trial included Mohamed Abshir Musse, who was detained in June 1973, having previously been held under house arrest from October 1969 until April 1973. He was believed to have been rearrested in 1973 because of his known opposition to military rule. Abdullahi Farah Ali ("Holif), former Brigadier General of Police (1962 to 1969), and ambassador successively to Egypt, Tanzania and Sudan between 1969 and 1974, was detained in 1975 as another suspected opponent of the government Sheikh Mohamed Moallim Hassan, former Assistant Director of the Department of Religious Affairs in the Ministry of Justice and Religious Affairs, was detained in 1975 for
73
criticizing the government's Marxist-Leninist ideology as anti-Islamic. Mohamed Ibrahim Egal, Prime Minister from 1967 until the military coup of October 1969, was detained in 1976 without official explanation. He had been arrested with the whole government in 1969, and detained in a presidential villa in Afgoi; in 1975 he was summarily tried by the National Security Court and sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment for embezzlement, but was released unconditionally a year later and appointed ambassador to India. Yusuf Osman Samantar ("Barda'ad"), Secretary General of the Somali Democratic Union until all political parties were banned in October 1969, was detained in 1978.
Other political prisoners had been tried and sentenced by the National Security Court, mostly under the National Security Law of September 1970 (known as the "Law of 26 Articles"). The National Security Court, which has regional sections, is composed mainly of army and police officers, often without legal training. Legal representation is permitted but most legal safeguards for defendants in civil courts are absent Trials are generally summary and defendants have no right of appeal. Yusuf Ali Barre, who was sentenced by the National Security Court in 1977 to 10 years' imprisonment for possession of subversive documents, has been adopted as a prisoner of conscience. Amnesty International was investigating the cages of certain other prisoners sentenced by the court in recent years.
About 30 people were arrested in Mogadishu in January 1981 after a series of explosions for which the Ethiopia-based opposition Somali Salvation Front(SOSAF) claimed responsibility. Some were released during 1981, but by the end of 1981, 10 people were still detained without charge or explanation. Amnesty International believed that they were prisoners of conscience. They included three members of parliament, who were also members of the central committee of the sole permitted political party, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP): Abdullahi Warsame Nur, former Auditor General; Mohamed Ali Warsame, former Minister of Education; and Mohamed Yusuf Weirah, former Minister of Finance. They were arrested shortly after speaking out in parliament against abuses by the security forces in Mudug Region.
In November and December 1981 about 40 people were arrested and detained without charge in the northern town of Hargeisa They included doctors and veterinary surgeons, teachers, civil servants and businessmen. They had reportedly been involved in self-help community projects which the government believed were politically motivated and associated with leaflets criticizing the government Some were alleged to have been ill-treated after arrest Amnesty International asked the government about their legal status and urged
74
that they be released or charged and tried
A number of political prisoners were released during 1981. They included some prisoners arrestedin January 1981, such as Abdulaziz Nur Hersi, former Minister of Labour, Abdullahi Musse Bogor ("Kinka"), a senior civil servant; and Mohamed Farah Hassan, a trade unionist. Two prisoners whose cases Amnesty International had been investigating for some years were released in September — Ahmed Ismael Bogor, a former military attache to the Somali Embassy in Egypt, who had fled to Saudi Arabia but was detained on his return to Somalia in 1975, despite official guarantees of safe return; and Abdullahi Yusuf Haji ("Goure"), a businessman sentenced to life imprisonment in 1974 by the National Security Court. About 10 army officers detained without charge or trial since the April 1978 coup attempt were also freed in September. Two other officers had been released earlier in the year.
President Siyad Barre declared an amnesty for over 5,000 prisoners to commemorate the 12 th anniversary of his government on 21 October 1981. A few political prisoners may have benefited from it but Amnesty International could obtain no details. The President also declared an amnesty for Somali exiles abroad, but without any legal guarantee of safe return.
Most political prisoners were held in the modem maximum security prisons ofLabatan Jirow, nearBaidowa, or Lanta Bur, near Afgoi. In these prisons many prisoners were held incommunicado in long-term solitary confinement. Political prisoners were denied visits or correspondence with their families, who often had no information about their whereabouts or condition. Some prisoners were held for long periods in small cells without light, or in cells permanently lit with artificial light. Several prisoners held under these conditions were alleged to have become mentally unbalanced or to have suffered other severe medical complaints, particularly related to eyesight, hearing and blood pressure. Prison diet was poor and medical attention inadequate.
Amnesty International continued to investigate allegations of ill-treatment or torture of prisoners in Labatan Jirow prison, Lanta Bur prison and National Security Service offices. In November 1981 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 13 political prisoners believed to be seriously ill and called for proper medical care for all prisoners. Among them was SaidaBotanElmi, detained without trial since 1978. She was still seriously ill as a result of prolonged torture after her arrest, including rape, electric shocks and submersion in water, apparently in reprisal for her husband's defection to SOSAF. No replies to this appeal were received.
Conditions in the older prisons such as Mogadishu Central Prison,
75
where many army officers arrested in 1978 and the politicians arrested in January 1981 were held, were said to be overcrowded and unhygienic.
Amnesty International's information on the use of the death penalty in Somalia was fragmentary. The National Security Law (1970) provides for the death penalty for a large number of offences, including treason, sedition, going on strike, and "using religion to destroy the unity of the nation". In June 1981 four people were reported to have been executed for embezzlement of large sums of public funds.
	VV
\ ^	X ' ■ f
	cQ /
...........	
