Brazil
Amnesty International was concerned about the growing number of prosecutions of civilians by military courts on charges related to the Lei de Seguranqa Nacional (LSN), National Security Law, which carry prison sentences of six months to 30 years. The interpretation of this law was so broad that manifestations of the right to freedom of expression and association were treated as threats to national security. During the year Amnesty International followed 10 prosecutions involving trade union leaders, Roman Catholic priests and members of the Brazilian congress. A number of journalists were also charged with infringing the press laws for writing articles criticizing military or government agencies. At the end of 1981 more than 20 people faced the prospect of becoming prisoners of conscience.
On 2 September 1981, after protests by Amnesty International and others about the conduct of the trial of 11 Sao Paulo trade union leaders, the Superior Tribunal Militar (STM), Superior Military Tribunal, oxdQTQdiirQir'\SL\{SQQAmnesty International Report 1981). This took place on 19 November 1981 but the military court once again found the defendants guilty of infringing Article 36 of the LSN for their part in a strike in 1980. It sentenced them to terms of imprisonment of between two and three-and-a-half years. A further
117
appeal was lodged with the STM. The defendants had been in provisional liberty since 1980. In December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, Ibrahim Abi Ackel, stating that if the sentences were enforced the organization would consider the trade unionists prisoners of conscience.
In June 1981 a military court in Recife convicted Father Reginaldo Veloso of subversive propaganda and sentenced him to two years' imprisonment Father Veloso had written a protest song about the expulsion from Brazil in 1980 of the Italian priest Vito Miracapillo. An appeal was pending.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience two French priests: François Gouriou and Aristide Camio. They were detained in Belem, and faced possible sentences of eight to 30 years' imprisorunent or expulsion from the country if found guilty of " incitement to collective disobedience of the laws". The priests were arrested after an incident on 13 August 1981 in Sao Geraldo do Araguaia. A man, initially said to have been a farm manager but subsequently identified as a hired gunman, was killed in an ambush by a group of peasant farmers. The evidence against the priests was based on statements from the peasants who accused them of instigating the violence. Cardinal Aloisio Lx>rscheider, the Archbishop of Fortaleza, stated publicly that the peasants were coerced into making these allegations. There was evidence that some of the peasants had been tortured. Amnesty International believed that the priests were arrested because of their non-violent attempts to defend the rights of the peasants to resist eviction.
On 2 December 1981 Senator Genival Tourinho of the centrist Partido Popular, Popular Party, was given a six-month prison sentence, suspended for two years, by the Supremo Tribunal Federal, Supreme Federal Tribunal. Senator Tourinho had alleged that senior military officers were involved in organizing a campaign of terror to undermine the abertura (the government's policy of gradual liberalization).
Although the judicial death penalty for ordinary offences was abolished in 1979, Amnesty International was disturbed by reports of an upsurge in deliberate killings of arrested criminal suspects by the police. For example, in Sao Paulo 300 suspects allegedly died in armed conflicts with the police during 1981. In many cases, however, the victims appeared to have been killed after being taken into custody by the police.
In December 1981 the Archbishop of Rio de Janeiro, Cardinal Eugenio Sales, protested that common prisoners in the Ilha Grande prison had been tortured In late November, following the escape of a prisoner, dozens of prisoners were taken from their cells by the prison
118
guards and beaten and kicked. Some prisoners were allegedly burnt with candles. The prison governor and his deputy were suspended pending the outcome of an official inquiry.
On 2 December 1981 a former prisoner of conscience, Hilario Gon9alves Pinha, was awarded damages for injuries he sustained in April 1975 when he was tortured in the Departamento de Ordem Politica e Social (DOPS), the Department of Political and Social Order, in Pòrto Alegre. The federal judge ruled that the Brazilian state was responsible for the security and physical condition of its prisoners.
