German Democratic Republic
Amnesty International's main concent continued to be the imprisonment of large numbers of prisoners of conscience. The majority were imprisoned for trying to leave the country without permission or for persisting in their efforts to obtain this permission. During 1981 Amnesty International worked on behalf of around 200 prisoners of conscience or people thought likely to be prisoners of conscience.
More than 160 of these prisoners were imprisoned in connection with their efforts to exercise their right to leave their country, a right severely res^icted for citizens of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) below the age of retirement The country's borders are heavily guarded and exit visas very difficult to obtain. Those caught attempting to cross the border without an exit visa were prosecuted for "illegal crossing of the border" under Article 213 of the penal code, which carries a prison sentence of up to eight years. Those who persisted in efforts to obtain exit visas were liable to prosecution under one or more of the following articles of the penal code. Article 214, "impeding public and social activity", was applied to would-be emigrants held to have impaired the functioning of government bodies by making repeated demands to emigrate, or threatening to demonstrate in public in support of their wish to emigrate. It prescribes a maximum prison sentence of three years. Articles 99, "treasonable passing on of information", and 219, "taking up illegal contacts", were applied to would-be emigrants who sought support from abroad and whose situation was publicized in foreign news media. Contact with foreign organizations, even if undertaken via an intermediary, led in some instances to prosecution for "treasonable activity as an
271
agent" under Article 100. Articles 99, 100 and219 carry maximum prison sentences of 12, 10 and five years respectively.
A typical case was that of Gisela Mauritz, a 36-year-old research chemist She was first arrested in 1974 while trying to leave the GDR and later sentenced to four-and-a-half years' imprisonment for attempted "illegal crossing of the border". She was released in 1978 and renewed her efforts to emigrate, this time formally applying for permission to do so. Her applications were turned down and her case was publicized in the news media of the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). She was rearrested on 10 December 1980 and sentenced in June 1981 to a further term of imprisonment for "taking up illegal contacts".
Another would-be emigrant adopted during the year was Peter Steffan, 26, a car mechanic. Before his arrest he and his wife had applied repeatedly for permission to emigrate, quoting from the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (Helsinki 1975). Because of his wish to emigrate he refused to do military service. He was arrested on 6 May 1981 after faihng to respond to a number of call-ups and was sentenced later that month to two years' imprisonment for violating the Code of Mihtary Duty.
GDR law provides some alternative for those who object "for religious or similar reasons" to armed military service. In "construction units" conscripts work on the construction of military installations or other forms of work not involving weapons. There is, however, no alternative service outside the country's military and defence system. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience those imprisoned for objecting on grounds of conscience to both forms of military service. During 1981 there was widespread support among members of the Protestant churches for the idea of a "social peace service", consisting of work in hospitals or old people's homes, as an alternative to service in the army. Government authorities and officials of the SociaUst Unity Party, however, dismissed the need for such a service. One regional party secretary, in a speech reported in Neues Deutschland, the official party newspaper, described the idea as hostile to peace, socialism and the constitution.
Cases taken up during the year included a number of GDR citizens arrested for expressing sympathy with the independent Pohsh trade union Solidarity, or for advocating reforms in GDR trade unions like those developed in Poland Wilhelm Koch, a doctor, was sentenced inJanuary 1981 tofouryears' imprisonment for"treasonable activity as an agent" (Article 100 of the penal code) after he had donated 10,000 marks (£2,500) to SoUdarity. Thomas Eisenblatter, a university lecturer, was sentenced in December 1980 to 18 months' imprisonment, also for reportedly donating money to Solidarity.
Ill
Karl-Heinz Opolony, employed as a restorer by a church organization in Erfurt, was imprisoned in late 1980 after preparing leaflets expressing support for Solidarity. Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of Eckehard Hübener, a theology student, and Klaus Tessmann, a computer technician, who were arrested in August 1981 on the Polish border while returning from Poland. It was reported that they had Solidarity leaflets sewn into their trousers.
About 10 pro-Albanian Marxist-Leninisfs were arrested in March 1981. They were thought to have been charged in connection with the production and distribution of material critical of socialism as practised in the GDR, including a newspaper Qniil^ed Röter Morgen (Red Morning) and leaflets on a number of subjects including military education in schools. Two of them — Manfred Wilhelm, a 29-year-old mechanic and Andreas Bortfeld, a 27-year-old mathematician — were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Prisoners continued to be released to the FRO after serving only part of their sentence in return for sums of money paid by the FRG Government Although it welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience, Amnesty International was concerned that conditions were imposed on these releases and sought to remind the GDR Government of its obligations under international law to release prisoners of conscience without conditions.
In February 1981 Amnesty International published a revised edition of the Amnesty International Briefing: the German Democratic Republic, first published in 1977. Amnesty International campaigned for improvements in legislation and official practice to bring them into conformity with international human rights standards (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
