Gabon
Amnesty International was concerned about legislative changes introduced by the government to suppress political opposition, and about mass arrests in December 1981.
In February 1981 the government approved changes in the law introducing heavier penalties for people convicted of criticizing the head of state or senior government officials. This followed the arrest and expulsion of a teacher of Beninese nationality suspected of criticizing President Omar Bongo in an unpublished article. In March President Bongo publicly demanded new measures to prevent the circulation of leaflets and other "rumour-mongering". A new Ministry of Security was created in April 1981 which was also given responsibility for combating violent crime.
The government created a special emergency court {tribunal d'exception) at the end of May 1981 to try people charged with offences against public order. This followed violent demonstrations in Libreville, the capital, and in Port-Gentil. They were sparked off by incidents at a football match on 20 May 1981 in neighbouring Cameroon, during which members of a Gabonese team had been injured. The demonstrators attacked and injured a number of Camerocai-ian citizens living in Gabon, killing at least two. However, the number of people who were charged and tried by the special court was not known. Amnesty International sought information about the proceedings of this court to assess whether they were in accordance with internationally recognized standards.
Sami Gaston Ngosso, a Cameroonian journalist visiting Gabon, was arrested on 10 June 1981 soon after he arrived in Libreville, and detained without charge for three days. During this time he was held
36
incommunicado and not given any food to eat. He was eventually released without being told why he had been arrested and was expelled from Gabon.
In September 1981 President Bongo publicly claimed that there was not a single political prisoner in Gabon. Later in the year, however, more than 100 people were arrested for political reasons. It was reported that during November 1981 leaflets criticizing the government were circulated around the Omar Bongo University campus in Libreville. On 28 November seven officials or former officials were arrested, including Jules Mba, a former ambassador, and Jérôme Nguimbi, a former member of the National Assembly. The precise charges against them were not made public, but they were later accused by government officials of preparing leaflets which advocated new political parties and of disrupting public order. President Bongo also claimed that they had prepared a 17-page document criticizing his government which was intended for submission to the French Government. They were apparently suspected of links with an illegal opposition group, the Mouvement de redressement national (MORENA), Movement for National Recovery. This challenged the one-party state and the position of the ruling party, the Parti démocratique gabonais (PDG), Gabonese Democratic Party.
On 1 December 1981a large number of demonstrators gathered at Libreville's central bus and lorry terminal {gare routière). The demonstrators carried posters and handed out leaflets calling for the resignation of the government, the formation of a new political party in addition to the PDG, and the release of the seven arrested on 28 November. They also protested against the rising cost of living.
After the demonstration a large number of demonstrators and suspected sympathizers were arrested. Unofficial reports suggested that more than 200 people had been arrested although a government minister later claimed that only about 10 people were in custody. Among those detained were teachers, government officials and professionals, including employees of the state airline, Air Gabon. They also included the Rector of the Omar Bongo University, Jean-Pierre Nzoghe Nguema. He was later accused of writing a critical letter to President Bongo and of promoting tribalism by appointing members of his own ethnic group, the Fang, to positions in the university.
Soon after the arrests Anmesty International inquired about the reasons and sought assurances that the detainees were being treated in accordance with internationally recognized standards. They were reported to be held incommunicado at various detention centres controlled by the security services, such as the Presidential Guard; the Centre de documentation (CEDOC), Documentation Centre; the
37
Direction de contre-ingérence et de la sécurité militaire (DCISM), Directorate for Counter Intelligence and Military Security; and the Brigade de recherches (Research Brigade), part of the National Gendarmerie. In past years political detainees held by these units were reported to have been tortured.
Several weeks after the arrests more than 20 detainees were still being held without their cases being referred to the courts, contrary to the code of penal procedure. Amnesty International expressed its concern to President Bongo and called for the detainees to be charged or released without delay. It also urged the President to ensure that detainees had access to relatives and lawyers. However, at the end of 1981 Amnesty International received reports that the detainees were still being held incommunicado and that some had been badly beaten. For example, Victor Nguimbi, an Air Gabon employee who had carried a banner at the demonstration on 1 December 1981, was said to be seriously ill after being repeatedly beaten.
