Jordan
Martial law, which was first proclaimed in 1967, continued to be in force during 1981. Its provisions suspend a broad range of constitutional guarantees and invest the Prime Minister, in his capacity as Martial Law Governor, with wide powers of arrest and detention. Amnesty International's concerns continued to be the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, long-term detention without trial of political prisoners, the lack of legal safeguards in trials before the military court, and the use of the death penalty.
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of three adopted prisoners of conscience sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for alleged membership of the Communist Party, prohibited under the Anti-Communist Law of 1953.
In December 1981 Amnesty International was informed by the
334
Minister of Health, Dr Zuheir Malhas, that Wajih Jiryis Al-Nahhas had been released during the year under a pardon by King Hussein. He was serving a three-year sentence "for participating in an organization to make a revolution in Jordan" and Amnesty International was investigating his case.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the prolonged detention without trial of political prisoners. In a letter to the Minister ofthe Interior, Ali al-Bashir, on 13 April 1981 it reiterated this concern and referred to assurances given to an Amnesty International delegation to Jordan in March 1978 that all prisoners were brought to trial within a reasonable time. In its letter Amnesty International submitted the names of 131 untried detainees at Al-Mahatta Central Intelligence Prison in Amman. It asked the Minister to investigate the status of these cases and to give details of any planned trial procedures. The Jordanian authorities later informed Amnesty International that 20 of those listed had been tried and were serving prison sentences at Al-Mahatta prison, and that others had been tried and acquitted. Amnesty International was seeking further details of individual cases.
The death penalty is retained under both the penal code and martial law regulations. During the past few years death sentences were passed in absentia for the sale of property in territory now occupied by Israel For example, in September 1980 two Arabs, Halwa Khalil Hammudeh and Ahmad Hassan, were sentenced to death in absentia for selling their property in Jerusalem to Israelis. However, the Jordanian authorities assured Amnesty International that "no executions for the offence of the sale of land to the enemy have been — or will be — carried out since the 1967 war".
In October 1981 Amnesty International cabled King Hussein expressing concern over press reports that two people were executed for murder in Amman on 24 September 1981. Amnesty International asked for confirmation of these reports but by the end of 1981 had received no reply.
335
