India
Amnesty International's concerns in India were the use of preventive detention to detain critics of the government, reports of police brutality, torture and deaths in custody, and continued killings in various Indian states of political activists in "encounters" with the police. Amnesty International was also concerned about the application of the death penalty.
On 20 December the Home Ministry stated that as of 31 October 1981, 400 people were detained without trial under the National Security Act(NSA). Under the NSA people may be detained without trial for up to 12 months on widely defined grounds to prevent them from "acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the state" (see Amnesty International Report 1981). The Home Ministry
195
stated on 20 December that 1,588 people had been detained under the NSA since it came into force on 23 September 1980,1,108 of whom had subsequently been released Official statistics showed that the NSA was being used throughout India: detainees were held in Uttar Pradesh (142), Manipur (56), Maharashtra (39), Madhya Pradesh (38), Andhra Pradesh (27), Bihar (27), Rajasthan (20) and Tamil Nadu (16), {Times of India, 21 December 1981). Amnesty International received reports that the NSA was also used in other Indian states, notably Gujarat, Punjab and Assam.
On 31 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi reiterating its concern about the use of preventive detention laws in India and observing that "despite assurances given by the central government, several states appear to be using or intending to use the provisions of the National Security Act to detain peaceful critics of the government". It gave examples of prisoners of conscience of various political persuasions reportedly arrested under the NSA: these included reports of the arrests of thousands of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), and Con-gress-I workers by the Tamil Nadu government; the detention of Shamim Ahmed Khan, President of the Uttar Pradesh state unit of the Indian Union Muslim League, whose release was ordered by the Allahabad High Court on 2 February 1981; the arrest of two newspaper editors in Manipur on 26 October 1981 — M. Mithai and Salem Bharat Bhushan — who were reportedly arrested without reasons being given, and the arrest of student leaders in connection with civil disobedience movements in the state of Assam. On 17 December 1981 three local Assamese leaders were arrested after calling for demonstrations outside government offices. In Kashmir20 members of the opposition parties' Action Committee were detained for several months in mid-1980 under the state's Public Safety Act (whose provisions are similar to those of the NSA) in connection with demands for hill district status of a town in Kashmir valley. Many of those detained under the NSA were released within a few weeks or months of their arrest
Amnesty International pointed out that some prisoners whose release had been ordered by the High Court had been rearrested For example, when the Bombay High Court ordered the release of trade union leader Dr Datta Samant on 28 July 1981, ruling that the "grounds for his detention were irrelevant", he was immediately rearrested, again under the NSA.
In its letter of 31 December Amnesty International appealed to the Prime Minister to review the cases of the 400 people detained under the NSA. Amnesty International believed that the majority were held solely for holding dissenting views or expressing their political
196
opinions and were prisoners of conscience; it called for their release. It drew attention to a judgment of India's Supreme Court on 28 December 1981 which, although it upheld the validity of the NSA under the Indian Constitution, warned that when " construing laws of preventive detention like NSA, care must be taken to restrict their application to as few situations as possible".
Amnesty International also expressed concern in its letter about the broad powers enacted under the 18 September 1981 Essential Services Maintenance Act (replacing an earlier ordinance of July of the same name), which mi^it allow the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. Under the act the central government can dismiss strikers in a wide range of sectors declared to be "essential services". The term " strike" is broadly defined and workers joining strikes which the government has declared "illegal", instigating others to join such strikes, or giving financial support can be arrested without warrant and sentenced to up to one year's imprisonment after summary trials with no appeal. By the end of the year Amnesty International knew of only one instance of government action under the Essential Services Maintenance Act this was in the state of Assam, where strikes were banned on 18 November 1981 in many public and private services. In view of the potential misuse of the act Amnesty International appealed to the government to consider its early repeal.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of two political prisoners in Andhra Pradesh: Ch. Venkati and G. Venkatayya, detained without trial for three and four years respectively.
Reports of police brutality and torture continued to reach Amnesty International, some of the most serious cases resulting in death in police custody. Most reports concerned criminal suspects, but suspected Naxalites (members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist)), were also reportedly tortured
Arrested prisoners were alleged to have been subjected to various forms of torture in police stations to extract" confessions". They were allegedly beaten, stripped naked, hung upside down and beaten, and given electric shocks. The Indian newspaper Sunday (8 November 1981) carried reports that 13 young men had been tortured in a police station in Chhatarpur, Madhya Pradesh, by being hung by their ankles from the ceiling, beaten with sticks, given electric shocks and made to sit on a sharpened bamboo and pressed down by police constables. The allegations concerned the period between March and August 1981. Amnesty International wrote to the Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister on 3 December 1981 asking the government to establish an independent inquiry into these allegations, open to public scrutiny.
Amnesty International received allegations that other suspected
197
Naxalites were tortured in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. On 9 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu expressing concern that the state government had not yet responded to the affidavit filed by Balappa Gounder that his son, Natarajan, was killed by the police in April 1981 after being tortured. It asked the state government also to investigate reports that Mani, alias Muttukara Mani, alleged to be a Naxalite, was beaten by the Tamil Nadu police, that a horseshoe was nailed to his feet, a roller applied to his legs and the nerves of his legs cut Amnesty International asked whether an investigation had been ordered into these allegations.
In 1981 Amnesty International received reports that 21 prisoners had died as a result of torture in police custody. These reports were compiled from the Indian press and Amnesty International believed that not all cases were publicly reported The largest number were reported from Madhya Pradesh (6) and Haryana (3), but deaths in custody, allegedly as a result of torture, were also reported from the following states: Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Delhi, Kamataka, West Bengal, Bihar, Punjab. Of the 21 deaths reported Amnesty International knows of only six cases in which magisterial inquiries were instituted; in one (concerning the death of a lawyer in the Punjab) a judicial inquiry was ordered, and in another a police inquiry was reportedly instituted In several cases police gave the cause of death as "run over by a truck" or "suicide". Post mortem reports in many instances revealed multiple injuries. In most cases relatives alleged that the prisoner had been beaten-to death by the police.
Amnesty International wrote to the Federal Home Minister on 19 March 1981 following reports in the Hindustan Times of 12 February 1981 that the Lieutenant Governor of New Delhi had asked the Home Minister to order immediate investigations into the death of three people who had allegedly died in the custody of the Delhi police (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Amnesty International asked for the outcome of investigations to be made public but did not receive a reply.
On 9 November 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of State for Home Affairs of Madhya Pradesh expressing concern that deaths in police custody had been most frequently reported from the state of Madhya Pradesh. It asked for the outcome of the magisterial inquiry reported to have been ordered into the death of a young Haryan (untouchable) called Subhash, who the police said had died of heart failure. It also asked about other prisoners who had died in custody in poHce stations in the state. No reply was received
In July and August the Supreme Court heard four petitions from Naxalite prisoners held in the state of Tamil Nadu who complained
198
that they had not received adequate medical treatment, and had been refused the remission of sentence normally given to non-political prisoners. The petitions also questioned the use of solitary confinement and complained of torture and ill-treatment resulting in bones in the hands and legs of prisoners being broken. Some of these allegations dated from 1972. A Supreme Court order of August directed that proper medical treatment be given to all four prisoners and that during meetings with relatives "no policemen should be allowed to remain present to overhear the conversation" {Indian Express, 29 August 1981).
On 22 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Federal Home Minister, Zail Singh, to express its concern at continuing reports that political activists had been killed in various Indian states. Although the police stated that they had died in " encounters" with the police there was evidence that they had in fact been killed by the police after arrest, in many instances after being tortured. During the last 10 years Amnesty International received reports of such killings from almost every Indian state: Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Amnesty International was not aware of any cases where criminal proceedings against individual police officers involved had been instituted and completed. In its letter it mentioned several instances reported in the Indian press where police officers identified in "encounter" killings had in fact been financially rewarded
On 9 December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu urging the establishment of judicial inquiries to investigate reports that 13 alleged Naxalites had died in "encounters" in the state between August and December 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1981). On 16 December Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh to inquire about reports in the Indian press that since late 1980 there had been a recurrence of killings of alleged Naxalites in Andhra Pradesh. It asked specifically about 11 such "encounter" killings which had occurred in the state between September 1980 and July 1981. In several cases there were witnesses to the arrests. To Amnesty International's knowledge, a magisterial inquiry had only been ordered in one instance. The outcome was not known.
Amnesty International asked the central government to review legislation in force in various Indian states which allows police to fire upon suspects in areas declared by the government to be Disturbed Areas. It named the Andhra Pradesh (Suppression of Disturbances) Act specifically. It said that it believed such legislation facilitated the killing of suspected political activists by the police after arrest. Such
199
legislation therefore allowed the arbitrary deprivation of life in contravention of the principles laid down in Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which India ratified in 1979.
Amnesty International continued to appeal on behalf of prisoners facing execution throughout 1981. On 17 June Amnesty International wrote to President Neelam Sanjiva Reddy about Maqbool Ahmed Butt, a journalist and former President of the Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation Front, who was found guilty of the murder of an Indian intelligence officer in 1968 and sentenced to death in 1976 under the 1948 Enemy Agents Ordinance. It expressed concern that there was apparently no appeal against sentence for people convicted under the ordinance and appealed to the President for clemency.
On 7 November 1981 the Supreme Court stayed all executions in India pending judgment on a petition brought by two men condemned to death for murden Ranga Kuljit Singh and Bill a Jasbir Singh. The petition argued that the President, who had earlier rejected their mercy petition, had to exercise his powers of clemency fairly and reasonably and should state the reasons for rejecting clemency petitions. Lawyers argued that the President's powers of clemency under Article 72 of the constitution should be subject to rules and standards equally applicable to all. Following the Supreme Court's decision Amnesty International wrote to the President welcoming the decision of the Supreme Court to stay executions and urging him to grant clemency to all prisoners whose mercy petitions had been rejected It urged the government to take steps to abolish the death penalty.
