^ ...	J Grenada
- /	Co,'	Amnesty International continued to
' ' ^—«	"	monitor the trial of former members
of the People's Revolutionary Government (PRG) and the People's Revolutionary Army (PRA), charged with the murder of former Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and others in 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984 to 1986). Fourteen of the 18 defendants were sentenced to death on 4 December. Amnesty International appealed for clemency and raised certain concerns about the fairness of the proceedings in the case.
In May Amnesty International sent an observer to part of the trial, which began in April after several adjournments. Shortly after the trial started, the defence lawyers withdrew from the case at the request of the defendants, who refused to recognize the jurisdiction of the court. In pre-trial motions the defence had challenged the legitimacy of the Grenada Supreme Court — the independent court system set up in 1979 by the PRG — by which the defendants were being tried. They argued that the reinstatement of the 1974 constitution required a return to the Eastern Caribbean judicial
166	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
system (which, among other things, provided the right of final appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom, a right abolished by the PRC). The appeals court ruled that the constitution required Grenada's eventual return to this system but upheld the legitimacy of the Grenada Supreme Court for this trial.
On 2 May Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice expressing concern about reports that the recently appointed Supreme Court Registrar, responsible for summoning jurors to the trial, had formerly been a member of the prosecution team in the case. Amnesty International also expressed concem about reports that some members of the jury pool had cheered when the judge informed the defence lawyers that they were liable to be cited for contempt of court during preliminary proceedings on 11 April and on other occasions also had shown themselves to have a less than impartial attitude towards the defendants. This had apparently not led to any juror being disqualified, although one alternate juror was later removed when it transpired that his son had been killed during the 1983 events. Amnesty Intemafional received no reply.
During the trial itself the defendants, who were unrepresented, entered pleas of not guilty to the charges, but refused to participate otherwise in the proceedings. Most of them were removed from the courtroom each day, after disrupting the proceedings by chanfing. Most of the witness testimony for the prosecution was therefore given in the absence of the accused. Summaries of this testimony were read to the defendants by the trial judge but they declined to cross-examine the witnesses. After the prosecution had given its evidence, the defendants made unsworn statements to the court in which they denied the charges against them and alleged, among other things, that some of the statements used in evidence against them had been obtained by torture.
The jury retumed its verdict on 4 December: 14 of the 18 defendants were convicted of murder and sentenced to death by hanging. They included former Deputy Prime Minister Bernard Coard, former Minister for Women's Affairs Phyllis Coard, former Army Commander Hudson Austin and former Ambassador to Cuba, Leon Comwall. Three former soldiers found guilty of having carried out the shooting of Maurice Bishop and others were convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to prison terms ranging from 30 to 45 years. A fourth defendant, Raeburn Nelson, was acquitted on the direction of the judge. Fabien Gabriel, one of the 19 originally accused, had been granted a pardon at the beginning of the trial after agreeing to tesfify for the Crown.
Amnesty International wrote to the Governor General of Grenada
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
167
on 16 December appealing for commutation of the death sentences. It noted that no executions had been carried out in Grenada for several years and said that a resumption of executions would be contrary to the spirit of international human rights standards, which encourage governments progressively to restrict the use of the death penalty with a view to its ultimate abolition. Amnesty International said it was still investigating other aspects of the case. An appeal against their convictions was pending at the end of 1986.
A total of 17 people were under sentence of death in Grenada at the end of the year.
