Ireland
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about the death penalty. The last execution took place in 1954. In 1986 the death sentence was commuted in the cases of four prisoners convicted of the murder of police officers (gardai). Thomas Eccles, Patrick McPhillips and Brian McShane were due to be hanged on 26 Febmary, but their sentences were commuted to 40 years' imprisonment without remission on 21 Febmary. They had been convicted of the murder of
300	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
a detective. The sentence on Noel Callan, convicted of murdering a police officer during a robbery, was commuted on 29 May also to 40 years' imprisonment.
In March Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister for Justice urging the govemment to abolish the death penalty for all offences. The organization pointed out that on 17 January the European Parliament had adopted a resolution requesting the Republic of Ireland to sign the sixth Protocol of the European Convention on Human Rights on the abolition of the death penalty in peacetime. Apart from the United Kingdom, Ireland was the only member of the European Community which had not signed the Protocol.
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about the excessive duration of judicial procedures in political cases, a long-standing concem of the organization. It investigated reports of torture and ill-treatment in police stations and carabinieri barracks and followed several judicial inquiries set up during 1986 to investigate allegations of torture or ill-treatment in previous years. Amnesty Intemational increased its work for the release of conscientious objectors to military service.
In August Amnesty International published a paper entitled " "1 April' Trial — Italy: Amnesty International's Concerns Regarding a Fair Trial Within a Reasonable Time". This was a summary of the main developments in the trial of 71 alleged members of the revolutionary left wing groups Potere Operaia, Workers' Power, and Autonomia Operaia, Workers' Autonomy. The first arrests were in April 1979. and the court hearing in Rome ended in 1984 (see successive Amnesty International Reports from 1980). The paper concluded that the Italian authorities had breached European and intemational standards relating to fair trial within a reasonable time, and made four main criticisms of the conduct of the proceedings.
Three of these criticisms related to the duration of the preventive detention of the defendants, 12 of whom had spent over five years in prison before judgment was given. Special public order legislation was introduced after the defendants' arrests. Amnesty Intemational
Amnesty Intemational Report 1967 Europe	301
concluded that this legislation had been applied retroactively to prolong the already excessive period of preventive detention. Secondly, it found that the legal limits of preventive detention had been evaded. New arrest warrants had been issued shortly before the legal limits were reached, so that defendants could still be kept in prison if the court wished. Thirdly, the authorities did not, in Amnesty International's view, observe the ruling laid down by the European Court of Human Rights in relation to Article 5(3) of the European Convention proclaiming the right to fair trial or release. This states that there should be "special diligence in the conduct of the prosecution" in cases in which defendants are detained. In the "7 April" trial there was a delay of over 15 months during which no judicial activities relevant to the trial took place. During this whole period the main defendants were kept in prison.
The fourth of Amnesty International's main concems was that a key witness for the prosecution had fled the country with the aid of the authorities, and therefore the court was not able to subject him to examination. Carlo Fioroni had been released from prison in 1982 after serving seven years of a 27-year prison sentence for kidnapping and murder. He gave highly incriminating evidence against the defendants in the secrecy of the trial's initial, investigative stage, after which he was helped by the authorities to leave the country before he could be questioned at the court hearing. Although the court expressed indignation that he was not available for examination it agreed to the prosecution's request for the information he had provided in the investigative stage to be accepted as evidence.
After publication of the paper. Amnesty Intemational called on the authorities to take these criticisms into account in their approach to the forthcoming appeal. Defendants were sentenced to prison terms of up to life imprisonment, totalling over 500 years, on charges which included founding or belonging to an "armed band" and "subversive association". They were released provisionally, either on health grounds or because they had been held in preventive detention for as long as the law permits. The appeal hearing was expected to take place in Rome eariy in 1987.
In January verdicts were reached by the court in the Paduan section of the "7 April" trial, in which there were 141 defendants (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In contrast to the judgment in Rome, the court in Padua concluded that Autonomia Operaia was not an armed band, and it acquitted those who had been charged solely in relation to their alleged membership of the group.
Of the 47 people who were fully acquitted in Padua, three had earlier been convicted in Rome of founding an "armed band" and "subversive association". In Padua they were charged separately by
302	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
the prosecuting judge with possession of arms. The investigating judge refused to accept the new charge because in his view it should have been heard in the earlier trial in Rome, and there was no fresh evidence to substantiate it. His decision was overturned by the Appeal Court of Venice and the three defendants were committed for trial. They were acquitted.
On 9 March 1985 one of the defendants in the Padua trial, Pietro Greco, a mathematics teacher who had earlier fled to France to escape imprisonment, was shot dead by a secret service agent in Trieste. He was not armed. Amnesty Internationa! monitored the subsequent judicial inquiry because of allegations that his killing had been deliberate, and that he had not, as police claimed, resisted arrest. On 24 October 1986 the Court of Assizes of Trieste sentenced Nunzio Maurizio Romano, an agent of the secret service (SISDE), and Maurizio Bensa, a member of the special anti-terrorist unit DIGOS, to eight months' imprisonment each for taking excessive but unpremeditated action in legitimate defence. Two other police officers were acquitted.
On 5 December Amnesty International wrote to Aldo Vezzia, Procurator General of Naples, about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police stations and carabinieri barracks. About 30 such cases had been submitted to the procurator's office by various Neapolitan lawyers who stated that they were concerned by an increase in the use of torture and ill-treatment in order to extract confessions. In its letter Amnesty Internafional described three cases. One detainee alleged that he had been beaten and had had a broom handle inserted into his anus; another that he had suffered extensive bums from cigarette ends and the third that the police had trampled on his hands with their boots.
The judicial inquiry into the death in police custody in Palermo of Salvatore Marino in August 1985 {s^q Amnesty International Report 1986) ended in October with the commital for trial in Caltani^etta of 12 police officials and four carabinieri. They were charged with taking part in involuntary homicide. The inquiry established that Salvatore Marino had died as a result of beating and ill-treatment.
During 1986 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 17 conscientious objectors to military service. Among them were 13 Jehovah's Witnesses who had gone together to a military barracks in Viterbo in September to declare their reftisal, on religious grounds, to carry out military service, although they said they were "not against the state and its institutions". The Jehovah's Witnesses were all sentenced to one year's imprisonment by a military tribunal in Rome and sent to the military prison of Forte Boccea.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe
