Bulgaria
f* r Y^	Amnesty International was con-
\ (Sci^i	cemed about large numbers of
ethnic Turks who remained detained following a campaign of enforced assimilation of the ethnic Turkish minority and believed that many of them might be prisoners of conscience. It was also concerned about reports of torture of ethnic Turks. The organization worked for the release of a number of other prisoners of conscience. It learned of one death sentence and 17 executions.
In April Amnesty Intemational published Bulgaria: Imprisonment of Ethnic Juries, a report detailing its concems about human rights abuses during the enforced assimilation of the ethnic Turkish minority. Despite strict censorship Amnesty International had obtained the names of over 250 ethnic Turks reportedly arrested between December 1984 and March 1985 when, according to the authorities, the entire minority — estimated to number 900,000 or 10 per cent of the population — "spontaneously" and "voluntarily" renounced their Islamic names for Bulgarian ones. Amnesty Intemational also received reports that ethnic Turks had been killed by the security forces.
In press reports following Amnesty Intemational's publication the Bulgarian authorities consistently denied both the existence of the minority and all allegations of human rights abuses or violence during the campaign. On 24 September Amnesty Intemational wrote to the
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	283
authorities pointing out major inconsistencies between its findings and those reported in the official Bulgarian media. On 10 October a Bulgarian Embassy official in the Federal Republic of Germany admitted to an Amnesty International delegation that during a demonstration against the campaign in Ivaylovgrad three people had been killed.
During 1986 Amnesty International worked for the release of a number of ethnic Turkish prisoners of conscience arrested during the assimilation campaign. For example, Halim Pasadzhov, from Sofia, was a journalist for the bilingual publication New Light. After the campaign began, the use of Turkish was banned and the publication was available only in Bulgarian. He was arrested in January 1985 after refusing to change his name "voluntarily", released after two months but rearrested in May 1985 for his continued opposition to the assimilation policy. He was charged with espionage after notes taken of foreign radio broadcasts were found in his home. He was allegedly subjected to torture, including/a/awge — beating on the soles of the feet — during detention.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of the imprisonment of ethnic Turks for following the Islamic custom of having their sons circumcised. For example, Kalbiye Saadettinova from Kitnitsa village near Kardzhali was reportedly arrested for having her two sons circumcised. To Amnesty International's knowledge she was still being held in detention in Sliven prison at the end of 1986.
Amnesty International investigated a large number of cases of ethnic Turks whom it believed might be prisoners of conscience. In view of reports of violent conflict between security forces and ethnic Turks during the assimilation campaign, the organization requested further details on the cases from the authorities. For example, in April Amnesty International took up for investigation the case of Omer Mustafov Kochandzhiev, a school teacher from Dolni Voden. He was arrested in 1985 with his wife, who was later released. Amnesty International received reports that Omer Mustafov Kochandzhiev was detained in Belene — a prison camp on an island in the Danube where large numbers of ethnic Turks arrested during the campaign were reportedly detained — and that his wife and two sons were banished for three years to a village in Blagoevgrad district. Amnesty International believed that they were banished under the People's Militia Law, which allows internal banishment for up to three years and other restrictions on freedom of movement to be imposed administratively, that is without trial, on certain categories of people. These restrictions, which can be indefinitely renewed, have reportedly been imposed on many ethnic Turkish families who protested at the assimilation campaign.
284	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
TTiese restrictions have also been imposed on released prisoners of conscience and in Amnesty International's view can themselves constitute a form of detention. For example, Hristo Kulichev, pastor of the First Congregational Church in Sofia, was sentenced in May
1985	to eight months' imprisonment. He had refused to stand down as pastor when a government-approved pastor was appointed despite the wishes of the congregation (see Amnesty International Report 1986). After his release in September 1985 he was banished under the People's Militia Law to Nozharevo, a village in northeast Bulgaria, for continuing his religious activities. He had to report twice daily to the authorities and his wife was allowed to visit him only once a month. These restrictions were such that Amnesty Intemational considered them a form of detention and adopted him again as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of other prisoners of conscience imprisoned for reasons unconnected with the assimilation campaign. One such prisoner of conscience was Kostadin Angelov Kalmakov who protested against the imprisonment of conscientious objectors (see Amnesty International Report 1986). He was sentenced to four years' imprisonment in 1982 for "anti-state propaganda" under Article 108 of the criminal code to which was added a further year from a previous suspended sentence imposed for complaining in the course of conversation about the food situation.
However, due to official censorship, Amnesty International believed that the cases which came to its notice during 1986 represented only a portion of the total. Former prisoners of conscience have estimated that immediately before the assimilation campaign, at the end of 1984, there were about 250 political prisoners in Stara Zagora prison, where at that time most political prisoners were held. The majority had been convicted of attempting to leave the country without permission. The constitution does not guarantee freedom of movement and only rarely are citizens who seek to emigrate permitted to do so. Those who attempt to leave the country without permission may be punished by up to five years' imprisonment under Article 279 of the criminal code, or up to six years if the offence is repeated. Amnesty Intemational believed that the numbers of such people convicted did not substantially change in 1986.
Amnesty International leamed of one death sentence and 17 executions, in each case for offences involving loss of life.
The organization submitted information about its concerns under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure"). During
1986	Bulgaria ratified the UN Convention Against Torture.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe
