Malawi
69
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been convicted after unfair trials in Malawi's traditional courts. Alleged political opponents and religious dissenters were detained without trial and Amnesty International investigated two reported deaths of detainees as a result of torture.
Detention without trial in Malawi is allowed under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, 1965, if the President deems it necessary "for the preservation of public order". Detention may be for up to 28 days on the authority of an "authorized officer"; subsequently a detainee may be held indefinitely on the orders of the President. The Public Security Regulations also make it an offence to publish anything likely "to undermine the authority of, or public confidence in the government". Under the penal code individuals may be imprisoned if they further the aims of an "unlawful society", that is, any group considered to be "dangerous to the g(x>d government of the Republic".
Three prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were released in May. Jonathan Kuntambila, Sandy Kuwale and Paul Akomenji, all journalists working for Malawi's officially controlled news media, had been detained in March 1985 for reporting a speech by the country's Official Hostess, Cecilia Tamanda Kadzamira. Addressing a conference on women and development, Cecilia Kadzamira had stated: "Man cannot do without woman". She subsequently denied saying this, although it was recorded in the official UN transcript of the speech. It appeared that the remark was deemed offensive to the unmarried Life-President Dr Hastings Kamuzu Banda. The three detained journalists had included the offending remark in their reports of the speech.
In some other cases of prisoners detained without charge or trial. Amnesty International did not have sufficient information to determine whether they were prisoners of conscience. They included Ulemu Msonthi, a farmer, who was reported to have been detained in Maula prison since 1984, possibly because his father was John Msonthi, a government minister in the 1960s who was subsequently dismissed by President Banda. Amnesty International was also investigating the case of Emberson Jonas Kantefa, detained in Maula prison since November 1985, and continued to inquire into the situation of three political detainees, Aleke Banda, Femdo Mfipa and
70	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Francis Pollock Mhango (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Hie organization received no information to indicate that they had been released by the end of 1986.
That section of the penal code directed against "unlawful societies" had in the past been used particularly against Jehovah's Witnesses, whose religious convictions prevented them from joining political groupings and who refused to buy membership cards for the Malawi Q)ngress Party (MCP), the country's sole party. In the late 1960s and early 1970s many Jehovah's Witnesses were imprisoned, dozens were killed and thousands fled the country to escape persecution. In recent years repression of Jehovah's Witnesses has eased, but in 1986 Amnesty International investigated reports of people being imprisoned for suspected membership of the sect or possession of its literature.
In November two civil servants, Khomboka Shawa and Batwell Nkhata, were reportedly convicted by a traditional court in Lilongwe of seeking to overthrow the government. They were sentenced to two years' and nine months' imprisonment respectively, both with hard labour. They had reportedly opposed the practice of making financial contributions to President Banda, and Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience. Malawi's traditional courts do not conform to internationally accepted legal norms: for example, judges are not required to have legal training and defendants do not normally have a right to legal representation. Two other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International who remained imprisoned after having received an unfair trial in a traditional court were Ortan Chirwa, leader of the exiled opposition group, the Malawi Freedom Movement (MAFREMO), and his wife Vera Chirwa (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In 1983 they had been sentenced to death by the Southern Regional Traditional Court and in 1984 their appeals had been rejected by the National Traditional Court of Appeal. President Banda commuted their death sentences to life imprisonment in 1984 and at the end of 1986 they were reportedly in Mikuyu prison.
Severe beatings of political detainees and criminal suspects were reported to be common. Amnesty International investigated the cases of two prisoner reported to have died in custody as a result of ill-treatment. Medson Chilita, a civil servant from the northern region of Malawi, was reported to have died on 4 July in Maula prison in Lilongwe, after being ill-treated and denied food for several days. He had been detained without charge or trial since his arrest in early 1985, apparently for opposition to the government. Hellings Mughogho, a Jehovah's Witness, was reported to have died in custody at Rumphi, in northern Malawi, on 2 October, as a result of
71	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
beatings. In both cases Amnesty International appealed to President Banda to investigate the deaths.
