Peru
Amnesty International's concerns included the detention of prisoners of conscience on false charges of terrorism; long delays in trials of political detainees; evidence of torture and ill-treatment; and "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions by police, military and civil defence forces. There was a massacre of more than 150 prisoners following the quelling of revolts in three Lima area prisons on 18 and 19 June; some of the survivors were tortured; and evidence emerged that up to 60 other prisoners who were alleged by authorities to have died were secretly taken into the custody of the navy.
Members of the Sendero Luminoso, Shining Path, guerrilla group continued to carry out execution-style killings of captives in the emergency zones, and, for the first time, in Puno and Cusco departments (which were not under a state of emergency). Those killed included members of mral development teams and health workers, apparently solely for having cooperated with the government. Amnesty International condemns the killing of captives whether by govemments or opposition groups.
Since 1981 all political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	197
have been charged with terrorism. Most women political prisoners were held in the Chorrillos district of Lima, and in Lima's port of Callao. Men were held in Lurigancho Prison on Lima's outskirts, and in the island prison of El Fronton. Most Shining Path supp)orters were held in El Frontón, and in Lurigancho's Industrial Pavilion. Most of the other prisoners charged with terrorism were associated with legal opposition parties, labour organizations and peasant communities affiliated to the Izquierda Unida (lU), United Left coalition, and were held in Lurigancho's Pavilion IIB.
New legislation in May — Decree 24499 — required prisoners held on terrorism charges to be moved to a new top-security prison in Lima's Canto Grande area, and then many were to be dispersed to provincial prisons.
At the time of the prison revolts Lurigancho's Industrial Pavilion held 124 political prisoners. El Fronton's Blue Pavilion between 154 and 180, and Callao Women's Prison. "Santa Barbara" 72. On 18 June in coordinated actions prisoners in the three prisons took hostages and demanded protection from what they called an armed forces' plan of "genocide": they claimed the impending transfers to Canto Grande and provincial jails were part of a plot to isolate and kill them without witnesses. The revolts were over within 36 hours.
At "Santa Barbara", forces under air force command overpowered the prisoners, killing two. At Lurigancho's Industrial Pavilion, all 124 prisoners were killed, with more than 100 shot in the head by Republican Guards, soldiers and masked officers after they had surrendered; the killings were overseen by an army general.
On El Frontón, prisoners using firearms captured from their hostages killed three marines and wounded 20, while one hostage died in unknown circumstances. In the course of a 20-hour naval assault the cell block was partially demolished and many prisoners, died. Of at least 154 prisoners present, 35 were acknowledged to have survived. The authorities said the rest were buried under the ruins of the Blue Pavilion, and that the full death toll would be made known after the rubble was cleared. Naval forces subsequently prohibited access to the site, however, and by the end of 1986 no further official information had been made public on the identity of the dead and the missing, or even their number. The bodies of four prisoners were found by relatives in a Lima cemetery but the whereabouts of the others remained unknown.
Amnesty International later found evidence that up to 90 prisoners had surrendered at the Blue Pavilion on 19 June; that some were interrogated under torture and summarily executed on the island, while between 30 and 60 others were secretly removed from the island to the Callao navy base; and that marines had demolished the
198	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
building after resistance had ceased. On 24 June Amnesty International urged the government to account for all the prisoners involved; to ensure the comprehensive investigation of any deaths; and to ensure that those responsible for the torture or murder of prisoners after surrender were prosecuted.
Government spokesmen stated that the bodies of the dead would be returned to their families, that the incidents would be investigated, and that abuses committed would be punished. However, bodies were not released to families but buried by the armed forces without notifying relatives and Decree 006-86-JUS of 19 June designated the prisons as "restricted military zones" closed to civilians. Although lower court judges sought to investigate the incidents the Supreme Court-ruled in August that investigations could be made only by the military courts.
On 24 June President Garcia denounced the "annihilation" of prisoners after surrender at Lurigancho, and pledged to arrest and try those responsible. Some 45 Republican Guards were later transferred to Canto Grande pending a military court hearing. In November the highest military court, the Consejo Supremo de Justicia Militar, Supreme Council of Military Justice, dropped charges and ordered the release of all but the senior police officers involved. Amnesty International had no information on investigations into the incidents at El Frontón and "Santa Barbara".
An Amnesty International delegate went to Peru 10 days after the revolts to initiate investigations and make arrangements for a subsequent mission. A delegation visited Peru from 9 to 23 August, pursuing the prison incidents and other Amnesty International concerns. The delegation met government officials and members of the judiciary, the Attorney General's office and the General Staff of the Armed Forces Joint Command. Although unable to visit El Frontón, the delegates visited the new Canto Grande prison and had separate, private interviews with survivors from "Santa Barbara" and El Frontón prisons. The delegation also visited the departments of Ayacucho and Puno.
Amnesty International repeatedly addressed itself to the government over the prison incidents during 1986, stressing the organization's concern over the fate of the missing El Frontón prisoners, but their fate remained unknown.
In June 1986 an estimated 900 prisoners had been charged with terrorism, with some 500 of them in Lima area prisons. By the end of the year there were about 44 in Lurigancho's Pavilion IIB, many of them believed to be prisoners of conscience, while some 70 women and 90 men were held in Canto Grande prison.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of 46 individuals it
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	199
believed to be prisoners of conscience, or probable prisoners of conscience. They included students, trade unionists, peasant fanners and human rights workers. Some were released during 1986 after more than three years' imprisonment, when charges were dismissed. They included 11 peasant farmers detained in Tayacaja, Huancaveli-ca in 1983 who were released in February 1986. Twelve others, detained in Cajabamba, Cajamarca in November 1982, were released in December 1986. Adopted prisoner of conscience José Pablo Aranda, also from Cajabamba, was among the prisoners killed in the June prison revolts.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of widespread "disappearances", torture and extrajudicial executions in areas under states of emergency and military administration. Amnesty Intemational called for inquiries into 16 cases of apparent extrajudicial execution in the Ayacucho region. Among the victims was Mamerto Huamani Chillcce, a municipal councillor in Huancapi, Victor Fajardo province. He was seized by troops on 27 April, beaten and dragged through the community behind a horse. His dumped body was found on 9 May. Victor Pariona Palomino and Alejandro Echaccaya were detained by troops from the Huancapi barracks on 28 April, and subsequently found dead, their bodies burned. Although civilian prosecutors investigated the cases, they were not empowered to question or charge military personnel, and the military apparently took no action against those responsible. Victims of "disappearance" included teachers and students at Ayacucho's university. Some of the "disappeared" whose cases were raised by Amnesty International and Ayacucho civilian authorities were released after more than two months in secret detention.
The Amnesty Intemational delegation that visited Ayacucho in August met members of the judiciary and the public prosecutor's office, as well as the head of the political-military command. In the cities of Ayacucho and Huanta Amnesty Intemational received scores of testimonies from witnesses of extrajudicial executions, torture, and arrests followed by "disappearance". Amnesty Intemational raised some recent "disappearances" — where prisoners had been seen in custody at "Los Cabitos" command headquarters — with the Minister of Justice on 16 August.
On 5 September Amnesty Intemational urged President Garcia to intervene in the Ayacucho emergency zone. The organization stressed that judges and prosecutors had said that they had no access to prisoners in military establishments; that the military routinely and falsely denied that any prisoners were in detention; that the remedy of habeas corpus did not in practice exist; and that the judiciary's role in the protection of detainees had been reduced to forwarding written
200	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
requests for information to the military command.
Amnesty International also expressed concem that in 1986 "disappearances" had been reported in new areas, with a series reported in Pasco department shortly after it was placed under a political-military command on 19 June. One victim was Teófilo Rimac Capcha, peasant community and United Left leader in the department, who was detained by an army patrol on 23 June and taken to the Carmen Chico army base near Cerro de Pasco. Several prisoners released in July testified to having seen him at the base and said he had been severely beaten. After widespread publicity an official communique acknowledged that Rimac Capcha had been in detention at Carmen Chico but said that he had "escaped". Amnesty Intemational called for an independent inquiry.
Frequent reports were received of extrajudicial executions by govemment forces in apparent reprisal for guerrilla assaults on isolated communities. In one case, described by witnesses to Amnesty International delegates visiting Puno, seven agronomists working on state-mn cooperatives were killed by Shining Path members on 18 June outside the town of Macan. On 22 June army counter-insurgency forces raided Macan. Tomás Quispe Urquizo — whose house was destroyed by troops — his wife, his children and Demetrio Ouispe "disappeared" after arrest.
Amnesty International welcomed the efforts of the civilian judiciary and public prosecutors to document and investigate reports of "disappearance". The organization received a list prepared by the Ayacucho departmental public prosecutor of 172 cases of "disappeared detainees", 92 of which were unresolved, reported between 17 January and 4 December 1986 in that department. Amnesty Intemational received information on 110 cases during 1986 which to its knowledge remained unresolved. It had received reports of approximately 1,700 unresolved "disapi>earances" since January 1983.
In several highly publicized cases in 1985 the Supreme Court awarded jurisdiction to the ordinary courts to try police and military personnel accused of mass killings (see Amnesty International Report 1986). However, rulings in 1986 supported military contentions that alleged human rights abuses could only be tried by military courts, on the grounds that they were carried out in the line of duty. In practice, to the knowledge of Amnesty intemational, military court investigations have rarely led to the trial and punishment of police and military personnel for offences related to counter-insurgency or anti-subversive measures. However, a draft law approved by the Senate on 11 December would exclude from military jurisdiction crimes "not related to service and, particularly, genocide, torture, secret arrest.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	201
forcible disappearance of persons". The draft law introduced a definition of forcible disappearance and secret arrest, to be punished by up to 25 years' imprisonment. The draft law was to be further considered in April 1987.
A National Council on Human Rights under the auspices of the Ministry of Justice was created on 6 September by presidential decree, bringing together representatives of key ministries, the Roman Catholic church and independent human rights organizations. The Peace Commission, which had been set up to review human rights observance and seek a peaceful end to political violence, was formally dissolved in September. Its members had resigned in late June after the prison incidents.
Amnesty International submitted information on its concerns in Peru to the relevant bodies of the UN and the Organization of American States.
