Chile
Amnesty International's main concems were short-term arbitrary arrests, torture and human rights violations by clandestine groups linked to the security forces. Judicial irregularities in the trials of political prisoners were reported and there was little or no progress in judicial investigations into human rights abuses. Some critics of the government were arrested and sent for trial for non-violent activities and were considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience. Students, joumalists, human rights workers, political activists, church workers and inhabitants of poblaciones (poor neighbourhoods) were the main targets of human rights abuses.
On 3 September Amnesty Intemational published a Briefing on Chile. It focused on the illegal activities of the official security forces and the "new strategy of terror" which had developed since 1983 using clandestine forces to intimidate and harass. Acting with
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	141
impunity in broad daylight and during curfew hours, clandestine forces operated from secret detention centres and had considerable financial backing, their own communications networks, vehicles and weapons. Their victims were subjected to death threats, abducted in cars and interrogated while being driven around, or in detention centres, and sometimes tortured before being abandoned. Some were killed. The report concluded that these groups were made up of members of the security forces acting under cover with civilian collaborators. To coincide with the publication, the organization launched a worldwide campaign to end human rights abuses in Chile and issued nine recommendations considered essential to restore the rights to life and to freedom from arbitrary arrest and torture.
In a public response to the report, the government accused Amnesty International of hiding "the magnitude of Marxist attacks on the Chilean Government" and said it had not cooperated with the organization because "as shown by the report. Amnesty International's internal procedures offer no guarantees of objectivity and clarity." In September Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Foreign Minister reiterating its concerns and pointing out that the government had supplied no information on the cases raised. By the end of 1986 it had received no response.
Emergency legislation remained in force throughout 1986. A state of emergency and a "state of danger to intemal peace" (provided for by interim provision 24 of the Constitution) gave the Executive broad powers of banishment and detention (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Many political detentions were carried out under these provisions but for the first year since the Constitution came into force in 1981, no one was banished under interim provision 24.
On 6 September there was an assassination attempt on President Pinochet in which five of his bodyguards died. The next day a state of siege was im|X)sed which remained in force in most regions until the end of 1986. It empowered the authorities, among other things, to authorize indefinite detention without charge, suspend publications, and restrict the right to amparo (similar to habeas corpus).
The government maintained that the state of siege and other emergency measures were needed to combat violence by armed opposition groups. Such groups were involved in armed incidents and claimed responsibility for numerous bomb attacks on public installations. Several police officers were injured or killed. In August a number of arms caches allegedly belonging to the Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez (FPMR), Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front, were found and the following month the FPMR claimed responsibility for the assassination attempt on General Pinochet. Amnesty Intemational recognizes the responsibility of governments to maintain law
142	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
and order, but in doing so they must respect international human rights standards.
Politically motivated arrests increased in 1986. When combined military and police personnel, often supported by tanks and army vehicles, raided some 40 poblaciones mainly in Santiago, 30,000 local people were rounded up for identity checks or interrogation. Many others were detained during peaceful protests, among them hundreds of students, some as young as 11, arrested during sit-ins, strikes and demonstrations. Demonstrators, and also journalists and photographers, were sometimes badly beaten while held by uniformed police. Unidentified men in civilian clothing and heavily armed military personnel participated in arrests and beatings.
Rodrigo Rojas, a 19-year-old photographer recently returned from exile, and 18-year-old student Carmen Quintana were arrested by a military patrol at the start of a national two-day stoppage on 2 July. They were beaten, doused in inflammable liquid and set on fire. They were then wrapped in blankets and driven to the outskirts of the city where they were abandoned with severe burns. Rodrigo Rojas died on 6 July. The army at first denied involvement but later said they had carried out the arrests. They maintained, however, that the fire had been started accidentally. In spite of extensive evidence that they had been deliberately burned by the military patrol, the civilian judge appointed to look into the case only charged one of the patrol with negligence - for failing to ensure the two received proper medical treatment. The charges were increased on appeal to "unnecessary violence resulting in death" by a military court but no one else in the patrol was charged. Three witnesses left the country after receiving death threats and lawyers acting for the victims were subjected to intimidation. Amnesty International called for full investigations into the incident and into the deaths of a number of other people who were killed when uniformed police, military personnel or civilian agents fired on demonstrators and bystanders.
After the declaration of a state of siege on 7 September the scale of human rights abuses increased. Clandestine forces intensified their campaign of intimidation, especially against journalists and human rights workers. Within days of the declaration of the state of siege, four members of opposition groups had been abducted and murdered, including José Carrasco, international editor of Análisis, an opposition magazine. A clandestine group claimed responsibility and said that a staff member of the Vicariat of Solidarity, the church human rights organization, would be next. Hooded civilians later tried unsuccessfully to abduct Vicariat lawyer Luis Toro. Amnesty International called for full investigations.
President Pinochet warned on 9 September that "all those involved
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	143
in human rights organizations should be expelled or locked up" and several were arrested or went into hiding after arrest warrants were issued against them. Amnesty Intemational called for the release of several student, political and community leaders who had been detained without charge in police stations, some for three months. It also appealed on behalf of three French priests, among them Father Pierre Dubois, outspoken defender of human rights in the poblaciones, who were arrested and deported.
The organization worked for the release of a number of prisoners of conscience, among them several journalists, student leaders, and 14 leaders of the National Civic Assembly who were charged under the State Security Law after calling for a two-day national stoppage in July. The assembly, made up of representatives of professional, trade union and community groups, had called for peaceful demonstrations for a return to democracy. Six people, including a 13-year-old girl, were shot dead by military, police or civilian agents and some 800 were arrested during the two days. By the end of August the leaders had been released on bail.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the increasing persecution of human rights workers. Many received death threats or suffered other acts of intimidation by clandestine groups. Some were imprisoned by the authorities. Two staff members of the Vicariat of Solidarity were arrested in May. Following these arrests Amnesty Intemational sent a delegate to Chile to look into these and other such cases. Lawyer Gustavo Villalobos and Dr Ramiro Olivares, together with three other doctors and a medical auxiliary from a clinic, were arrested in May after assisting a man with bullet wounds who had gone to the Vicariat for help. They said later that they were unaware that, according to official reports, he had taken part in an armed attack in which a police officer had died. Amnesty International was seriously concerned that they had been arrested because of their human rights work with the Vicariat and that the authorities were using the case in order to investigate and discredit the work of the Vicariat.
Amnesty International received persistent reports of the use of torture in the interrogation of political suspects held incommunicado by police or security forces. The number of victims rose sharply during the last five months of the year and Amnesty International interceded on behalf of numerous detainees. Most testimonies cited the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), state security police, as responsible for the routine use of torture, although some reports were also received of torture by members of Investigaciones, criminal investigations police, and by uniformed police. Among the methods descril^d were mock executions, the "parrot perch" (the victim is
144	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
suspended upside-down from a pole), electric shocks, the "submarine" (the victim's head is submerged in water), disorientating drugs, sexual abuse, and threats.
Attempts by some courts to protect detainees by dealing promptly with petitions for amparo were obstructed by CNI refusals to obey court orders. These refusals continued despite assurances given in October by President Pinochet, after complaints by three appeals courts, that the CNI would comply with judicial orders.
Hundreds of complaints submitted to the courts by victims of human rights abuses or their relatives made little or no progress, either because of the unwillingness of the courts to question the activities of the security forces or because the security forces themselves obstructed the investigations. The courts refused, for example, to investigate several complaints of killings of political prisoners in 1973 in spite of new evidence, citing a law passed in 1978 which amnestied those responsible for criminal acts between 1973 and 1978. In a number of cases witnesses and lawyers were subjected to acts of intimidation.
Efforts by a few judges led to significant progress in some investigations into human rights abuses, but in most cases evidence submitted by investigating judges was rejected by the higher courts. In January the Supreme Court revoked charges against a group of uniformed police in connection with the abduction and murder of Manuel Guerrero Ceballos, José Manuel Parada Maluenda and Santiago Nattino Allende, and the kidnapping and torture of four teachers' leaders and a union employee in March 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Another ruling by the Supreme Court ended all hope of rapid progress in clarifying the fate of some 7(X) prisoners who "disappeared" following their arrest between 1973 and 1977. In September it amnestied 38 members of the armed forces and two civilian collaborators accused of involvement in the illegal arrest of two Communist Party members in 1976. The 40 men had been charged with "unlawful association" by civilian judge Carlos Cerda. In the course of his investigations he found conclusive evidence of the existence of secret military groups set up to eliminate members of the opposition. The higher court however ruled that the law of amnesty had to be applied at that stage, and the case closed. Judge Carlos Cerda was suspended for two months for contesting the ruling on the grounds that his investigation had not been completed.
Amnesty International investigated the cases of several prisoner whom it believed had been charged solely on the basis of confessions extracted under torture and was concerned about a number of judicial irregularities in the trials of political prisoners. It called for
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
145
faster progress in the trials of political prisoners, some of which had been in the investigative stage for several years, and for better medical treatment for political prisoners. Treatment was often delayed, particularly when detainees needed facilities not available in prison. Amnesty International was concerned also that a number of detainees were held in prolonged incommunicado detention after their transfer to prison. There was strong evidence that some had been tortured while held by the security forces.
No judicial executions were carried out in 1986. Three political prisoners were sentenced to death on 28 November, but the sentences were revoked temporarily by the military appeals court because of procedural irregularities. A fourth political prisoner under sentence of death was awaiting the results of his appeal. There was no progress in the trials of 10 others who had had death sentences recommended by the prosecution.
Amnesty International submitted information on human rights violations in Chile to the Organization of American States and to the relevant UN bodies.
