Congo
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the long-term detention without trial of suspected government opponents, including prisoners of conscience, and about aspects of a major political trial in August which did not conform to intemational standards. The organization was also concemed about new arrests of people who might be prisoners of conscience, reports of torture and the use of the death penalty.
Following an announcement by President Denis Sassou-Nguesso at the end of 1985 that those suspected of causing bomb explosions in Brazzaville in March and July 1982 were to be brought to trial, seven detainees who had been held without charge since 1983 and 1984 had their cases referred for investigation by a commission d'instruction (investigating commission) in April 1986. They were tried by the Revolutionary Court of Justice, a special court with jurisdiction over political cases, in August 1986. Three others were tried in absentia. Among the defendants were two former senior officials of the ruling Parti congolais du travail (PCT), Congolese Labour Party — Jean-Pierre Thystère-Tchicaya and Claude-Ernest Ndalla — on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational had made repeated inquiries to the authorities since their arrest in 1984.
The trial sought to establish responsibility for just one of the 1982 bomb explosions, the July 1982 bombing at Brazzaville airport. Claude-Ernest Ndalla was accused of master-minding the attack, while Jean-Pierre Thystère-Tchicaya was said to have suggested the idea to him. One of the accused, Claude Kembissila, claimed in court that he had been tortured while in the custody of the state security service, the Direction générale de la sécurité de l'Etat (DGSE), General State Security Directorate. Other defendants retracted statements which they had made in custody on the grounds that they had been made under duress, but the presiding judge prevented several of them from giving details. The court did not investigate any of these allegations further and in general accepted the accuracy of statements made to the DGSE. The principal evidence against Claude-Ernest Ndalla and the others accused was a two-hour video-recording by the DGSE in which he confessed to the bombing and incriminated others. However, in court he denied his previous statements. He admitted that he had been in possession of explosives, but retracted all his other statements, saying that he had been "tricked" into making them. Further evidence against Claude-Ernest
44	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Ndalla and the others came from Gaspard Kivouna, one of the accused, who was said to be an informer for the state security service. At the end of the trial all 10 accused were convicted. Claude-Ernest Ndalla was sentenced to death. Jean-Pierre Thystère-Tchicaya and one other received five-year suspended sentences and were released; the other defendants received sentences of 10 or 20 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International appealed to President Sassou-Nguesso to commute the death sentence. By the end of 1986 the sentence was not known to have been carried out.
The trial was attended by an Amnesty International observer. He concluded that the trial produced sufficient credible evidence to believe that some of the accused had been involved in some way in placing a bomb at Brazzaville airport. However, he also concluded that certain of the accused had not been involved and that two, including Jean-Pierre Thystère-Tchicaya, were prisoners of conscience. The evidence presented at the trial linking Claude-Ernest Ndalla to the possession of explosives led Amnesty International to revise its earlier belief that he was a prisoner of conscience. However, the organization remained concerned about the serious shortcomings that marked the trial and about the imposition of the death penalty on Claude-Ernest Ndalla. The procedures followed in the trial were defective in several ways. In particular, questions, rulings and statements from several of the nine judges indicated that they had made a previous assessment that the accused were lying and were guilty. Several of the judges were membere of the PCT Central Committee and had been personally involved in the case at an earlier stage. The court admitted as evidence statements which the accused said had been obtained under torture or ill-treatment, when they were held in prolonged incommunicado detention. They retracted the statements in court. The court did not carry out any inquiries to establish whether the allegations of torture were true. Finally, the organization was concerned that those convicted had no right of appeal or review by a higher court.
After the trial Amnesty International asked the authorities about a number of other people arrested in 1982 in connection with the bomb explosions — notably Bernard Kolelas, Eugène Madimba, Philippe Bikinkita and Malonga — who were apparently still being held without trial. The authorities did not respond to these inquiries. At the end of 1986 it appeared that they might have been released, although this had not been confirmed.
Amnesty International learned of a number of arrests of suspected government opponents during 1986. In April Georges Mafouta-Kitoko, a civil servant, and two others were arrested, apparently because they were suspected of meeting to discuss the political
45	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
situation in the country and of being in contact with government opponents abroad. Amnesty International was concerned that they might be prisoner of conscience and took up their cases for investigation. After a student demonstration in Brazzaville in November, during which three students were reportedly shot dead, there were further arrests of students and others. At the beginning of December at least seven people, including two civil servants working in the Prime Minister's office, were arrested after the authorities learned that a leaflet criticizing the government was being circulated. Most were released uncharged around the end of the year but one man, Jean-Félix Demba-Ntelo. the director of a state construction company, was still held incommunicado at the end of 1986. In all cases, those concerned were detained by the DGSE and were not remanded in custody by judicial authorities.
In early 1986 Antoine Gizenga, a former Deputy Prime Minister in Zaire, who had been detained without trial in the Congo since his arrival in April 1985, was released and allowed to remain in the country. Another Zairian who had been arrested in July 1985, Eke Akonga Nkoy, was also released during the year and allowed to leave the country. One other refugee in custody, David Kudila, was among seven Zairian refugees who were expelled from the Congo in September.
