Dominican Republic
Amnesty International was concerned about allegations of deliberate political killings by the police.
In June the organization appealed to the authorities to undertake an independent investigation into the killings of Daniel Valdez de la Rosa and Charles Henry Tejada Jackson, who were shot dead on 6 June by police in an alleged armed confrontation. According to eye-witness reports published in the press, the two men were not armed at the time of the shooting and pleaded for mercy before being killed. Amnesty International was concerned that the killings may have been motivated by their political activities: they both had a background of political activism. In its appeals Amnesty International expressed concern at allegations that deliberate killings by the police were a widespread practice and called for measures to ensure that this was not so. The organization urged the government to distribute the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials in order to ensure that all law enforcement officials were aware of their responsibilities with regard to human rights. Amnesty International also recommended that, if it were proved that the National Police had
156	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
carried out these killings unlawfully, the victims' families should be afforded redress and compensation in accordance with national law. The two cases caused considerable public concern in the country, and the Public Prosecutor promised that there would be an exhaustive investigation. The newly-elected President of the Dominican Republic Dr Joaquin Balaguer was quoted as saying before he took office in August that such killing were not new and had been happening for years. He went on to say that he had evidence that people who were released in a presidential amnesty in 1978 had been gradually eliminated by the police. In October, in response to appeals from Amnesty International, the President of the Republic sent the organization documentation related to the trial and acquittal by a police court of the two police officers involved in the killings. The documentation included death certificates and documents stressing the alleged criminal activities of the victims and supporting the police account that there had been an exchange of fire and that the police had acted in legitimate self-defence. It was not clear from the documentation enclosed whether the witnesses challenging the police account had been interviewed and their testimony taken into account. In his letter the President stated that his government was "engaged in an arduous process to purge the armed institutions of the nation, with the purpose of guaranteeing, in the most effective way possible . . . [the] free exercise of human rights", and that he had taken "the firm decision to prevent abuses under "[his] rule, by carefully selecting membere of forces of order and by punishing any who were directly or indirectly guilty of any violation".
Amnesty International continued to press the government to investigate the whereabouts of Samuel Roche, a Haitian refugee who "disappeared" following his arrest on 4 June 1982, and Pablo Liberato Rodríguez, who "disappeared" after his arrest under the previous government of Dr Joaquin Balaguer in 1974. However, Amnesty International was not aware of any steps taken during 1986 to clarify the "disappearances" and to bring to justice those responsible.
Amnesty Intemational RefX>rt 1987 The Americas
