Chad
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience. Some political detainees were released during 1986 but others remained in custody throughout the year, including at least six possible prisoners of conscience held without trial since 1983. Amnesty International was also concerned about the government's continued failure to account for a number of people who "disappeared" after being detained in previous years, who were mostly reported to have been executed extrajudicially by government security forces.
The government alleged that Libyan troops in northern Chad committed human rights abuses. TTie government news agency reported "frequent imprisonment, corporal punishment and physical elimination". However, when asked by Amnesty International to supply details of these allegations, the government did not do so.
Tliere was continued conflict between the government of President
39	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Hissein Habré and the Gouvernement d'union nationale de transition, (GUNT), Transitional Government of National Unity, of former President Goukouni Weddeye, which continued to occupy parts of northern Chad. In the south, there was a reduction in strife partly as a result of agreements reached between President Habré's government and groups known as commandos or codos which had previously engaged in armed opposition. This reduction in the scale and extent of internal armed conflict had a beneficial impact on human rights.
In January President Habré announced the release of 122 named political detainees. They had apparently been held in various provincial centres and in N'Djamena, the capital. It appeared that their release was linked to the conclusion of peace agreements between the government and codo groups. None of their cases had been known to Amnesty International.
Amnesty International pressed throughout 1986 for the trial or release of six prisoners. Abdelkarim Annadif, a former local administrator, Abbo Saleh, a trader, and four others had been detained since July 1983 when they were arrested at Abéché in eastern Chad as suspected supporters of the GUNT. Information available to Amnesty International indicated that the six might have been part of a group of Abéché citizens who signed a petition appealing to the opposition forces not to bombard the town and welcoming them. When government troops retook the town, a large number of people were arrested, including some who had signed the petition. Amnesty International was concerned that the six detained people might be prisoners of conscience and appealed to the authorities to release them without further delay if they were not to be charged and fairly tried.
Two possible prisoners of conscience detained since 1985, Clement Abaifouta and Noel Noksou, were released in May 1986, according to information received by Amnesty International. The two were apparently arrested because their names appeared on a list of people to receive grants to study abroad from an opposition group.
Information was received by Amnesty International in 1986 concerning the "disappearance" of several individuals after their reported arrests by government forces in earlier years. For example, Felix Ekeh, a Nigerian citizen, was arrested in November 1984 at his business premises in Doba, southern Chad, by government troops and taken to Doba barracks. Subsequent efforts by his family and employees to trace him were fruitless despite reported inquiries by the Nigerian Government. Amnesty International appealed in May 1986 for information about Felix Ekeh's whereabouts and legal status. Officials replied that Felix Ekeh's case was not known to them although they had undertaken an investigation, prompted by the
40	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
inquiry from the Nigerian Government. They stated that he had not been arrested. Amnesty International remained concerned about the reports of Feiix Ekeh's arrest by government troops and his subsequent "disappearance".
In May Amnesty International asked the government for information about Souleymane Boikete, a Chadian citizen arrested in November 1984 in Gore, southern Chad, who subsequently "disappeared". The government did not reply, despite a further request for information in October.
