Morocco and Western Sahara
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued imprisonment of 228 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience; the detention of pK)litical prisoners; pre-trial and trial proceedings which did not appear to conform to internationally recognized standards; allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners; and secret detention and continued detention after expiry of sentence.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of 63 prisoners of conscience, and investigated the cases of 165 possible prisoners of conscience. Groups of these prisoners went on hunger-strike for limited periods on several occasions during the year to draw attention to their situation. Most of the prisoners of conscience had been sentenced to long prison terms in 1977 on charges including membership of various Marxist-Leninist groups. Among them was Hassan El Bou, whose mental health was believed to be deteriorating. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that he was not receiving adequate medical treatment.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release of 23 adopted prisoners of conscience. Fifteen were released at the end of their sentences, and eight as a result of a royal pardon. Among those who benefited from the royal pardon were Azzouz Laarich and Abdelaziz Tribak, both sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment; and Mohamed Mechbal and Mohamed Loubnani, sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. Four members of the Union sociaUste des forces popidaires (USFP), Socialist Union of Popular Forces, whose cases the organization was investigating (see Amnesty International Report 1986) were released upon completion of their prison sentences.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of 31 individuals, mainly students, who were accused of being members of Qa'idiyin, a continuation of the underground movements Ila-al Amam, Forward, and 23 Mars, 23 March. They were tried in 1984 and sentenced to prison terms of up to 15 years on charges including conspiracy to overthrow the govemment (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986). Amnesty Intemational was concemed that many, if not all, might have been imprisoned for their conscientiously held beliefe, and sought information on the nature of the Qa'idiyin ideology and
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	375
its position on violence. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about several aspects of their pre-trial and trial proceedings which appeared to fall short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial: they were held in garde à vue (incommunicado) detention in police custody for several months; they alleged that their confessions were extracted under duress and later invoked as evidence in court proceeding; the pre-trial investigation in most of their cases was carried out without the presence of their defence lawyers; and defence lawyers did not have enough time to prepare the defence, and had difficulties in gaining access to the case dossiers. During the trial the court reportedly refUsed to investigate procedural irregularities and complaints by the defendants that their confessions were extracted under torture.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of over 80 Saharans allegedly taken into custody by Moroccan security forces as long ago as 1976. In response to Amnesty Intemational's appeals, the Moroccan authorities replied on a number of these cases, denying that they were in detention.
Amnesty Intemational also investigated the cases of 41 individuals accused of belonging to the underground movement lla-al Amam. Most were engineers, doctors, students or teachers belonging either to the Union nationale des étudiants marocains (UNEM), Moroccan National Students Union, or the Syndicat national des enseignants (SNE), National Union of Teachers. Forty-two were arrested in October and November 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Fifteen of them were tried and sentenced by the court of first instance in Casablanca on 31 January to prison terms of between three and four years, on charges reportedly related to public order offences during the riots of January 1984, membership of an illegal organization, and distribution of leaflets hostile to the govemment. Twenty-seven were tried by the Criminal Chamber of the Court of Appeal in Casablanca on 12 Febmary on charges of conspiracy against the govemment. One was acquitted and 26 were sentenced to between three and 20 years' imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational feared that some if not all of these prisoners may have been sentenced for their non-violent political beliefs. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of irregularities in their pre-trial and trial proceedings. These included prolonged incommunicado detention in police custody; alleged torture during garde à vue detention; and convictions allegedly obtained on the basis of confessions extracted under torture or the threat of torture. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the authorities about these aspects of the case, asked whether the court had taken steps to investigate the torture allegations, and requested details of the charges and evidence
366	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
produced against them. In reply, the authorities gave details of the charges against and date and place of trial of one of the group, Dr Mohamed Jaidi. However, the govemment did not answer in full Amnesty International's concems on his case, nor did it give any information about the rest of the group.
On 31 October Amnesty International wrote to the authorities about the trial and imprisonment of five students sentenced to between two and six months' imprisonment by the court of first instance in Fez on 16 October for public order offences. They had reportedly been arrested on 6 and 8 October. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem at allegations of torture and ill-treatment during pre-trial detention, as well as about allegations that confessions extracted under torture had been used as evidence in court. Amnesty Intemational requested details of the charges and evidence against them and urged an impartial and public inquiry into these allegations.
Amnesty International received reports of the arrest and prolonged incommunicado detention of a number of individuals, including students, trade unionists, and members of various political groups. On 7 February Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of 10 phosphate miners, among them EL Haj Mastour, Secretary General of the Union générale des travailleurs du phosphate, General Union of Phosphate Workers, who were arrested between 25 and 31 January in connection with a strike against dismissals and for better working conditions and wages. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that they might have been detained to prevent them from exercising their rights of association and expression, and requested information about their legal position. Nine of the miners were released shortly afterwards and El Haj Mastour was released in May after more than three months in detention without trial. Amnesty Intemational wrote again to the authorities on 31 October, asking for information about the arrest of Youssef A1 Idrissi, a member of the Organisation pour raction démocratique et populaire (OADP), Organization for Popular and Democratic Action, and Hassan AI Dradbi, a member of UNEM. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the two individuals had reportedly been kept in prolonged garde à vue detention since their arrest at the beginning of the month and urged them to be allowed access to lawyers and relatives. Amnesty International later learned that Youssef A1 Idrissi had been relecised and that Hassan AI Dradbi had been presented before the court of first instance in Casablanca, reportedly accused of public order offences.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of ill-treatment of political prisoners in various prisons. They were reportedly beaten and kept in isolation in dark, windowless, cold cells, and denied, or made to endure delays before receiving, medical treatment, in most
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	367
cases needed for injuries resulting from torture during pre-trial detention. Amnesty Intemational also received reports that their families were subjected to repeated interrogation and harassment. A number of prisoners in different prisons staged hunger-strikes in protest at their prison conditions. Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of the group of 41 prisoners accused of belonging to Ila-al Amam whose cases the organization was investigating, following reports that they had staged a series of short hunger-strikes in protest at, among other things, their dispersal to a number of prisons. During these hunger-strikes they were reportedly subjected to various forms of ill-treatment, including beatings, and denied medical treatment. Amnesty Intemational also continued to appeal on behalf of six prisoners who had gone on hunger-strike in April 1985, listing a number of demands including medical care (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Their families were reportedly not able to visit them or to obtain information about their health or where they were held, once they started their hunger-strike. No reply was received from the authorities.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about the fate of approximately 100 military prisoners arrested following attempts on the life of King Hassan II in 1971 and 1972. According to Amnesty International's information, these individuals had been held in secret detention, incommunicado, since 1973. Reports indicated that they were kept in isolation in windowless, filthy and unventilated cells in extreme temperatures, with inadequate food, and given arbitrary punishment, and no medical care. Amnesty Intemational feared that a number of these prisoners might already have died as a result of these conditions. Several had already completed their prison sentences, but were not released.
