Tunisia
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment or restriction of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience; prolonged incommunicado detention; and the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational adopted as a prisoner of conscience Moncef Ben Slimane, assistant university lecturer in sociology and Secretary General of the Syndicat de l'enseignement supérieur et de la recherche scientifique (SESRS), Union of Higher Education and Scientific Research. He was tried on 4 June by the court of first instance in Tunis and sentenced to one year's imprisonment for "defamation of the public order and public institutions". Amnesty Intemational delegates observed his trial. The charge related to a letter sent by the SESRS to the Minister of Education criticizing govemment policies, and in particular its handling of disturbances at Tunis University. In October the Court of Appeal in Tunis reduced his sentence to six months, and he was released from prison on 14 November.
Amnesty Intemational also adopted as prisoners of conscience Ahmed Mestiri, Secretary General of the Mouvement des démocrates socialistes (MDS), Movement of Socialist Democrats; Hassan Ben
374	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
Rabiha, an MDS member; and Omar Mestiri and Abdellatif Hermassi, both members of the political bureau of the Rassemblement socialiste progressiste (RSP), Progressive Socialist Assembly. They had all been arrested at the start of a non-violent demonstration in Tunis on 16 April in protest against the US raid on Libya. They were convicted by a cantonal court on 22 April of "assembling on a public highway" and each sentenced to four months' imprisonment, upheld on appeal on 14 June. The appeal hearing was attended by Amnesty Intemational delegates. TTiree of the defendants were imprisoned and Ahmed Mestiri was placed under house arrest.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release upon expiry of his sentence on 14 June of adopted prisoner of conscience Beshir Essid, lawyer and Secretary General of the Rassemblement nationaliste arabe (RNA), Arab Nationalist Assembly Movement.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of 18 members of the Tunisian armed forces sentenced in 1983 to between five and eight years' imprisonment on charges including membership of the Islamic Liberation Party, a banned political group. These prisoners were among 29 individuals tried in August 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of a number of trade unionists arrested in various towns in November 1985, during a series of country-wide strikes and demonstrations which followed the breakdown of annual wage negotiations between the govemment and the Union générale des travailleurs tunisiens (UGTT), Tunisian General Workers' Union. They were tried in November and December 1985 and received sentences of between six and eight months' imprisonment on charges including the dissemination of information designed to disturb public order, and incitement to and participation in illegal strikes. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that these prisoners may have been imprisoned solely for their non-violent trade union activities.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to investigate the case of Habib Achour, Secretary General of the UGTT. He was sentenced to one year's imprisonment in December 1985 on charges of breaking into and taking control of a fishing cooperative in Sfax in 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1986), the sentence being reduced to eight months on appeal. He w^ brought to trial for a second time in 1986 on charges of mismanagement of union funds, and sentenced in April to two years' imprisonment by the court of first instance in Tunis. The sentence was upheld on appeal. Amnesty International was concemed that Habib Achour may have been imprisoned to prevent him carrying out his trade union activities. It was also concemed because his first trial was held in camera, and may in other
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	375
respects have fallen short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly expressed concern about reports of a deterioration in his health as a result of inadequate medical attention in prison. He was reported to be suffering from diabetes, a heart condition and arthritis. He was reported to be in the military hospital in Tunis at the end of 1986. Amnesty Intemational learned that Habib Achour was tried again in December and sentenced to a further four years' imprisonment by the Criminal Chamber of the Court of Appeal in Tunis on charges of complicity in the mismanagement of funds. At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was seeking more information about his latest trial.
In October Amnesty International raised with the authorities the cases of a number of individuals reportedly arrested between July and September and held in prolonged garde à vue (incommunicado) detention since their arrest. They included members of the Mouvement d'unité populaire (MUP), The Movement for Popular Unity, an unauthorized political organization, and members of the unauthorized Mouvement de la tendance islamique (MTI), Islamic Tendency Movement. Amnesty Intemational requested details of their arrest and detention and of any charges against them, and urged that they be allowed immediate access to lawyers and relatives.
Amnesty International learned of 18 executions during 1986 and of two death sentences, all for the crimes of rape, murder, theft, assault and attempted murder, and appealed to the authorities in every case. Among those executed was Mohamed Lazrak, a Tunisian national sentenced to death in absentia on 10 July by the Military Court in Tunis for assauh, theft and attempted murder. He was executed on 2 September following his retum from Saudi Arabia. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports that he had been forcibly retumed from Saudi Arabia to Tunisia, and wrote to the Saudi Arabian Minister of the Interior (see Saudi Arabia entry). Amnesty Intemational reiterated its opposition to the involuntary retum of individuals to any country where they may face persecution for their conscientiously held beliefs, torture or the death penalty, and sought clarification of the circumstances surrounding the retum of Mohamed Lazrak to Tunisia. The Saudi Arabian Minister of the Interior replied that, contrary to Amnesty Intemational's information, Mohamed Lazrak had retumed to Tunisia of his own accord.
376	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
