Hungary
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about prisoners of conscience. Some were conscientious objectors to military service, others had helped people attempting to exercise their right to freedom of movement. The organization was also concemed that people were detained for short periods, harassed and, in one case, allegedly confined to a psychiatric hospital for exercising their right to freedom of expression. Amnesty Intemational leamed of the imposition of one death sentence.
Military service is compulsory in Hungary and the law does not provide for alternative civilian service outside the military system. Article 336 of the criminal code allows the courts to impose sentences of up to five years' imprisonment (five to 15 years in time of war) on those who refuse military service. Since 1977 members of some small Christian sects, including the Nazarenes and the Jehovah's Witnesses, have been allowed to do unarmed military service, but the authorities have refused to extend this to Roman Catholics. According to reports received by Amnesty Intemational, in 1986 there were approximately 150 conscientious objectors serving sentences in Baracska prison where conscientious objectors are generally held. Most were Jehovah's Witnesses who had refused to do any form of military service, including unarmed military service.
Amnesty Intemational could not obtain details on most of these prisoners but it worked for the release of nine Roman Catholic
298	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
conscientious objectors, who, according to Amnesty International's information, belonged to small, pacifist, "basic communities" which advocate strict adherence to the teachings of the Bible. Three were adopted during 1986, including Joszef Peller, from Sopron. He was arrested in August and sentenced in October by the Budapest Military Court to three years' imprisonment under Article 336. He was allegedly ill-treated in pre-trial detention.
Ferenc Fulemule, a resident of Switzerland, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment by the Gyor/Sopron county court during 1986 for attempting to smuggle his cousin, a citizen of Czechoslovakia, out of Hungary to Austria. Similarly, Jan-Peter Busching, previously a citizen of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) who had emigrated to the Federal Republic of Germany in December 1985, was arrested on 9 August while attempting to smuggle a friend, a GDR citizen, out of Hungary to Austria. Jan-Peter Busching was subsequently sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment. Amnesty International believes that the people they had been trying to help were returned to Czechoslovakia and the GDR respectively, where they faced imprisonment of up to five or eight years for attempting to leave their countries illegally. On 23 October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Hungarian authorities pointing out that by returning such people they were party to the imprisonment of individuals for exercising their right to leave their country, albeit via a second country. Amnesty International regards as prisoners of conscience people imprisoned for trying to leave their own country for reasons of conscience, and likewise those imprisoned for trying to help them to do this. Ferenc Fulemule and Jan-Peter Busching were adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Under Article 269 of the criminal code p)eople convicted of acts liable to incite hatred of Hungary's constitutional order or allies, or national, racial or religious hatred, may be imprisoned for up to two years. If convicted of deliberate intent to incite, they face imprisonment of between one and five years under Article 14^. If the offence is committed before a "large public" or by members of a group the punishment may be increased to up to three years' imprisonment under Article 269 and two to eight years under Article 148. Amnesty Intemational believes that most people imprisoned for political offences were charged with "incitement" under these two articles.
On 15 March police broke up an unofficial peaceful procession of four to five hundred people commemorating the anniversary of the Hungarian revolution of 1848. Eleven people were arrested and others allegedly beaten by police. Tibor Pakh, a former prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1983), was reportedly detained for the entire day to prevent him taking part in the
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	299
procession. Olga Dioszegi was arrested and briefly detained earlier that day for collecting money during another demonstration. She was raising money to help pay a fine imposed on Jeno Nagy for unofficial publishing. Several people were sentenced, some repeatedly, during 1986 to fines of up to 10,000 forints (US$228) or 40 days' imprisonment for such activities.
Laszlo Rusai, a teacher from Hatvan, was arrested on 20 October after hanging a poster from his window commemorating the 30th anniversary of the Hungarian revolution of 1956. He was reportedly taken to the neurological department of the Bugat Pal hospital in Gyongos. On 23 October he was transferred to a restricted ward in the Visonta mental hospital where he was forcibly confined until his release on 11 November. Laszlo Rusai had been active in opposition circles and with unofficial publications. In 1985 he had been reportedly detained for 39 days, beaten by the police, and given a police warning for "violating the community" on account of his activities. As a result of this he had required psychiatric treatment. To Amnesty International's knowledge he had never been violent and this was the only psychiatric treatment he had previously undergone. Before his arrest he was reportedly in good health, physically and mentally.
Amnesty International learned of one death sentence, imposed on Ladislav Ambruz, a Czech citizen, for murder and rape. In July the Hungarian authorities stated in a report submitted to the Human Rights Committee, set up under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, that in the preceding 10 years there had been 25 executions.
