Taiwan
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of 19 prisoners of conscience arrested between 1975 and 1980 and to urge the retrial of some 70 prisoners, most of whom were arrested in the 1970s and were convicted of sedition after military trials which Amnesty International considered unfair. During 1986, 27 political prisoners were released, including one prisoner of conscience. Amnesty International received reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal prisoners and of several deaths in custody. Seven people convicted of murder were executed.
On 10 October Amnesty International wrote to President Chiang Ching-kuo welcoming his announcement on 7 October that his government would soon lift martial law, in force in Taiwan since 1949, and end the practice of trying civilians by military courts. Amnesty International believed that the procedures of military courts which tried civilians for sedition and serious criminal offences carrying the death penalty contravened international standards of fair trial. Amnesty International was concerned because suspects tried under the Military Trial Law were denied access to lawyers for up to four months until their indictment, military trials were sometimes
270	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
held in closed sessions and, in practice, military courts were not entirely independent from the govemment.
Amnesty International was concemed about the reported ill-health of two prisoners of conscience, Chen Ming-chong and Yang Chin-hai. The authorities supplied Amnesty Intemational with information on their medical condition and treatment. In July Amnesty Intemational wrote to the government acknowledging that Chen Ming-chong and Yang Chin-hai had been given medical treatment but expressing concern at their continued ill-health and urging their immediate release. Chen Ming-chong had a history of illness including a peptic ulcer. He had previously been arrested in the 1950s and spent 10 years in prison for allegedly belonging to a communist organization. He was rearrested in July 1976 and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment for allegedly plotting an armed communist rebellion. However, to Amnesty International's knowledge, the only evidence that Chen Ming-chong had planned to smuggle arms into Taiwan consisted of "confessions" by himself and his co-defendant, reportedly extracted under torture. He was also said to have assisted an opposition member of the Legislative Yuan (Assembly) during his election campaign in December 1975 and to have been involved in a project to set up an opposition party. Yang Chin-hai, a businessman and the president of the Kaohsiung District Chamber of Commerce, had assisted opposition candidates in local and national elections. He supported Yen Ming-sheng in the December 1975 elections to the Legislative Yuan and was arrested with him in May 1976. Both men had been involved in a project to set up an opposition party. Yang Chin-hai and Yen Ming-sheng were convicted of planning to overthrow the govemment by distributing "subversive literature" and planning acts of sabotage. They were sentenced to life imprisonment and 12 years respectively. The evidence against them was contained in confessions which they said had been obtained under torture. Yang Chin-hai was suffering from a chronic peptic ulcer and a lung complaint.
Amnesty Intemational also called for the release of Yu Hsin-min, a taxi driver, who was arrested on 17 April 1985 for "making propaganda for the communists". He was sentenced to three years' reformatory education. Yu Hsin-min, who was born on mainland China and went to Taiwan in 1949, was reportedly convicted for listening to radio broadcasts from the People's Republic of China and talking about them.
Among the political prisoners released during 1986 was Chen Chu, the assistant manager of the Kaohsiung branch of Formosa magazine and a long-time political and human rights activist, who Amnesty Intemational adopted as a prisoner of conscience after her arrest in
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	271
1979. She was released on parole on 4 February after serving half her 12-year sentence for sedition. Twenty-six other prisoners convicted of sedition were released on parole on 4 February and 30 October. They had been arrested in the 1970s under the Statute for the Punishment of Sedition and given sentences of between 10 years and life imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational had made inquiries about 20 of them. Although it had few details on their cases it believed that they might be prisoners of conscience and had urged the authorities to review their cases.
A visit to Taiwan requested by Amnesty Intemational did not take place. In October 1985 Amnesty Intemational delegates had been denied entry visas to visit Taiwan to discuss human rights concems with the govemment and others. A visit by a doctor to investigate the condition of four prisoners of conscience whose health was of concern to Amnesty Intemational had also been refused. Subsequently, the authorities stated that they would welcome a visit but required that all meetings be arranged by themselves or by the Chinese Association for Human Rights, a condition which Amnesty Intemational would not accept.
Amnesty Intemational received several reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects and convicts in custody. It also received reports that four people had died in custody as a result of torture and ill-treatment. Among them were Huang Nan-hsing, who died on 18 April in Taliao prison in Kaohsiung and whose body was covered with bmises according to an initial coroner's report and Chiang Kai-chieh who died on 15 August at the Hsichi police station, whose body was also said to be covered with bmises. The detailed conclusions of the authorities' investigations into these cases and two other cases of deaths in custody were not known to Amnesty Intemational. In another case, a police officer from the Sanchung police branch in Taipei was charged with assaulting Hsu Chin-yuan in early April. The results of the trial were not known to Amnesty Intemational.
Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern to the authorities about the execution of seven people convicted of murder by civilian courts.
272	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
