Nicaragua
Amnesty International was concerned about a pattern of short-term arrests of supporters of opposition parties and trade unions, some of whom the organization believed may have been prisoners of conscience. Such detentions occurred particularly in rural areas where irregular military forces opposed to the government known as the contras were active. Amnesty International also remained concerned about conditions of pre-trial custody for security-related detainees, who were often subjected to long periods of incommunicado detention before being released or allowed access to their families and lawyers. A number of reports alleging ill-treatment of detainees during pre-trial detention were received. Delays in the completion of interrogation and in the indictment or release of prisoners, particularly in rural areas, were reported. Restrictions on the right to fair trial arising from the use of self-incriminating evidence obtained under duress while prisoners were held incommunicado and summary trial procedures under the state of emergency also continued to be of concern.
Frequent reports of deliberate killings, abductions and torture of non-combatant civilians by the contras continued to be received. Amnesty International remained concerned that military assistance to these forces from the United States Government may have contributed directly to such practices, and twice asked that government what measures were being taken to ensure this was not the case.
In February Amnesty International published its report Nicaragua: The Human Rights Record, providing a summary of the organization's concerns since the overthrow of the government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in July 1979. Many of the human rights violations of concern to Amnesty International had been reported in the context of armed conflict in remote rural areas, and of measures throughout the country to detect and punish people assisting the armed opposition forces. Most political prisoners detained since the imposition of the state of emergency in March 1982 were charged with involvement with armed opposition groups. The report expressed concern that the extraordinary powers accorded under the state of emergency to the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE), the State Security Service, the curtailment of habeas corpus in political cases, and the lack of access to prisoners in pre-trial detention centres, had facilitated the arbitrary detention and harassment of opposition party and trade union members. The report also criticized the system of
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	189
special courts. Tribunales Populares Anti-Somocistas, established in April 1983 to deal with political cases under the Public Order Law, for failing to provide defendants with guarantees of a fair and impartial trial. The report noted that most prisoners believed to be prisoners of conscience were released before their cases came to trial or pardoned not long after their conviction by these courts. The organization received no response from the government to the concems published in the report, which had been communicated in a letter to President Daniel Ortega before publication.
Some of the prisoners whose cases were discussed in the report were convicted or released in 1986. Julio Ramón Montes Martinez, a leader of the Partido Social Cristiano (PSC), Social Christian Party, who was arrested on 20 November 1984, was sentenced in January 1986 to nine years' imprisonment for counter-revolutionary activity, including the distribution of party literature attacking military conscription laws. Amnesty International made inquiries on his behalf as a possible prisoner of conscience. Among those released was journalist Luis Mora Sánchez, who had been detained on 15 June 1985 with Mauricio Membreno Gaitán, an official of the Partido Social Demócrata, Social Democratic Party, and charged with inciting a riot, following a demonstration during which a violent attack was alleged to have been made on police. Luis Mora was released in Febmary and left the country in March. Mauricio Membreno Gaitán was sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment in Febmary, reduced on appeal to eight years. Amnesty Intemafional believed there were doubts about the evidence of his participation in the violent incidents, and continued to investigate his case.
In September the Minister of the Interior stated that 3,910 prisoners were being held for offences committed under the Somoza government and for counter-revolufionary acfivities committed since its overthrow. At a news conference in July the Minister had put the number of prisoners in the first category (chiefly members of the Somoza Nafional Guard) at 2,157, and in the second category at 1,802, of whom 777 had been convicted and 1,025 were awaifing trial. In June the National Assembly approved pardons for 308 prisoners serving sentences. Non-governmental sources reported an increase in the number of security related indictments during 1986, with the majority of detentions occurring in mral areas in which anti-government forces were acfive.
Many of those detained were members of legal opposition parties or party-affiliated trades unions, in particular the PSC, and the Partido Liberal Independiente (PLI), Independent Liberal Party. On 3 October Amnesty International informed the government of its concern about the continued detention of 16 members of the PLI
190	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
reportedly arrested in May in the province of Nueva Segovia — among them Pedro Joaquin Ponce, José Castellón Rocha and Florinda Paniagua, all local party leaders — and about the arrest on 3 September of PLI Vice-President Bayardo Guzmán Martínez in Managua. It also expressed concern about the arrest on 29 August of Agustín Sánchez Narvaez, a leader of the Central de Trabajadores de Nicaragua (CTN), Nicaraguan Workers Confederation. The Foreign Ministry replied on 25 October that Bayardo Guzmán and Agustín Sánchez had been detained under the I^blic Order Law, and were released on 16 and 19 September respectively. No information was provided about the 16 PLI prisoners detained in May but a party source later informed Amnesty Intemational that negotiations with the govemment had secured the release in July or August of Pedro Joaquin Ponce, Florinda Paniagua, and other local PLI leaders.
Amnesty International wrote in September to the Ministry of the Interior al^ut the legal position of Dr Hugo Hernández Ochomogo, a doctor from Matiguas, Matagalpa, who was arrested by the DGSE on 20 February and held for trial. There were reports that he had been accused of giving medical assistance to wounded contras and of participating in fund-raising meetings on behalf of the contras. He denied both charges. No response was received to the letter and Amnesty International continued to investigate his case.
A number of reports and testimonies by released prisoners were received alleging ill-treatment of detainees held for interrogation by the DGSE, particularly in the major detention facility of El Chipote, in Managua. There were frequent complaints that detainees had been held for several days with very little or no food, forced to endure solitary confinement in cramped conditions without adequate lighting or ventilation, and subjected to treatment intended to disorient and weaken resistance, including sleep deprivation. Reports were also received of threats towards detainees or members of their families. After his release in February, Luis Mora Sánchez told journalists in Costa Rica that he had been kept handcuffed to the wall, naked and without food or drink for four days after his arrest on 29 April 1984. He also claimed to have been beaten and subjected to a mock execution. Mauricio Membreno Gaitán was also reported to have been kept handcuffed and fettered for four days after his arrest on 15 June 1985. Information received during 1986 reinforced the concern expressed in Amnesty International's February report about the treatment of detainees and the recommendations contained in that report that the authorities should impartially investigate all allegations of ill-treatment and introduce effective controls on the powers of arrest and detention exercised by the security police.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the death in
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	191
custody of Salomon Tellería Salinas, a member of the Social Christian Party from León. He was detained by DGSE officers on 6 December 1985 and taken to a detention centre in León known as Quinta Ye. He was reportedly moved from there to hospital on 12 February, where he died two days later. It was reported that while he was held in Quinta Ye, his detention was repeatedly denied, and that when a relative visited him in hospital a day before his death, his body was covered with bruises and other apparent signs of ill-treatment. In August Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Comisión Nacional de Promoción y Protección de los Derechos Humanos (CNPPDH), the National Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, a government supported body, having received reports that it had investigated the case. Amnesty Intemational received no reply from the CNPPDH, and at the end of 1986 had received no further information as to whether an official inquiry had been opened into the case.
Reports of deliberate killings and summary executions of civilians, torture and kidnappings by the contra were received throughout 1986. The victims of killings and abductions included foreign volunteers working in govemment health and development projects in mral areas. In Febmary and October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the US Secretary of State, expressing concern at a pattern of such abuses by irregular forces under the political leadership of the Unidad Nicaragüense Opositora (UNO), the United Nicaraguan Opposition, which had in previous years received military assistance and training from agencies of the US Govemment. In June the US Congress voted to renew military assistance programs to these forces, including training, and to relax restrictions imposed by Congress in 1984 on the involvement in such programs of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). In its October letter to the Secretary of State, Amnesty Intemational referred to a military manual, produced in 1983 by the CIA and distributed to the Fuerza Democrática Nicaragüense (FDN), Nicaraguan Democratic Force, which proposed the public "neutralization" of civilian local government officials, police and military personnel. Cases cited in the letter included the alleged torture and execution of Roman Catholic catechist Donato Mendoza by FDN forces on 25 March near Siuna, in the province of Northern Zelaya, and the killing of four Nicaraguan relief workers employed by the Evangelical Committee for Aid to Development (CEPAD) on 31 July in San José de Mula, Matagalpa province. The health clinic in which they worked was reportedly ransacked. The bodies of the four men were discovered, allegedly mutilated, by a search party a day after the attack on the clinic. Amnesty International asked the Secretary of State for information about the measures taken to ensure
192	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
that the US Govemment assistance to these forces did not contribute to human rights abuses, including torture and summary executions. No reply had been received to either letter by the end of 1986.
	
	
	
\ r'	
	
	^ ^ r 1 w/
