Bolivia
Ttie Americas
Amnesty International's concerns continued to centre on the short-term detention of people held solely for their suspected, nonviolent, opposition activities. Over 50 people, including church workers, human rights activists, labour leaders and political opposition figures were sent into internal exile following the declaration of a state of siege in August. Amnesty International continued to follow the progress of judicial investigations into extrajudicial executions which occurred during the military government of General Luis Garcia Meza (1980-1982) and was concerned about reports of harassment of lawyers acting on behalf of complainants. Seven polifical prisoners who were arrested in October 1983 and whose cases had been under investigation by Amnesty International were released during 1986. Amnesty International noted with concern that the Bolivian Congress was considering the reintroduction of the death penalty for certain crimes.
On 28 August the government declared a nationwide 90-day state of siege and arrested over 160 people in several cities including La Paz, Potosí, Oruro and Cochabamba. Among those detained were labour leaders, church workers, journalists, human rights acfivists and political opposition figures. Amnesty International believed that most of them were prisoners of conscience. Government sources said that the state of siege had been imposed in response to "serious political and social disturbances", including a march from the mining town of Oruro to La Paz by over 5,000 miners protesting against government plans to restructure the state-owned mining company Corporación Minera de Bolivia (COMIBOL). While many of those detained under the provisions of the state of siege were released after several days in incommunicado detention, over 50 people were sent into internal exile to remote regions in the north of the country where they were held in detention camps. Amnesty International expressed concern about the arrests and urged the government to release all the prisoners immediately and unconditionally unless they were to be charged with criminal offences. On 14 September a church-mediated meeting between representatives of the government and the Federación Sindical de Trabajadores Mineros (FSTMB), the Trade Union Federation of Bolivian Mineworkers, agreed to modify plans for the reorganization of COMIBOL. By 18 September all those in internal exile had been released. Amnesty International received reports.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	135
however, that several were subject to continuing control and harassment by the authorities in their home towns, and had to report daily to their local police stations.
Amnesty International continued to monitor investigations into human rights abuses which occurred under previous governments. In February 1986 the joint Constitutional and Justice Commission of the National Congress concluded the initial proceedings stage of the "Juicio de Responsabilidades"" (responsibilities trial) in which former president General Luis Garcia Meza and his closest collaborators during the period of military government from July 19^ to October 1982 were charged with responsibility for human rights abuses. The proceedings were initiated in February 1984 when two left-wing political parties presented Congress with a petition against General Garcia Meza and 54 of his collaborators on charges including assa^ination of political opponents, genocide, sedition, organization of irregular armed groups and misappropriation of public funds. Under Bolivian legislation the initial stage of trial proceedings against former heads of government must be conducted by Congress. In February, following the recommendation of the Commission, the case was sent to the Supreme Court of Justice. Although the final stage of the trial in the Supreme Court began on 7 April, there were many delays and the trial was still in progress at the end of 1986. Amnesty International was concerned about reports that lawyers acting on behalf of relatives of the alleged victims of the accused had been threatened and intimidated in the course of their work by paramilitary groups reportedly linked to the armed forces.
During 19í¿ Amnesty International learned of the release of seven political prisoners who had been arrested in the Luribay area in October 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984, 1985 and 1986). The five Bolivians and two Chileans were released on completion of sentences of two and a half to three years each handed down by the Tribunal Permanente de Justicia Militar (TPJM), the Permanent Tribunal of Military Justice. Amnesty International had reiterated its concern to successive governments about the refusal of the TPJM to implement an amnesty decreed by former president Hernán Siles Zuazo in October 19M. and its belief that the prisoners had been tortured during the initial period of their detention.
In October Amnesty International wrote to President Victor Paz Estenssoro expressing its concern that Congress was considering the reintroduction of the death penalty, following the killing of eight-year-old Alvaro Rolando Tavera Nava, which had caused a public outcry. The death penalty was abolished in Bolivia in the State Political Constitution of 1967 and although it was reintroduced in the penal, code and code of military justice adopted during the period of
136	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
military rule in the 1970s, the constitutional prohibition of the death penalty was not modified. In September two bills were presented to Congress, proposing the modification of Article 17 of the State Political Constitution to allow the death penalty for the abduction and murder of minors. Amnesty International pointed out that Article 4(3) of the American Convention on Human Rights, to which Bolivia is party, prohibits the reintroduction of the death penalty in countries that have abolished it. The organization urged the govemment to oppose the reform of the State Political Constitution and to adopt measures to eliminate the death penalty from Bolivian legislation.
In December, the judge recommended the death sentence for one of those accused of Alvaro Tavera Nava's murder; two received sentences of two years' imprisonment and a further two were acquitted.
