Afghanistan
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about persistent reports of systematic torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in the custody of the Khedamat-e Etela-at-e Dawlati (KHAD), State Information Services, renamed the Ministry of State Security. Reports of extrajudicial executions by Soviet troops supported by Afghan military personnel continued to be of concern. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the continued imprisonment of thousands of political prisoners, some of whom were prisoners of conscience. Political prisoners, many of whom were accused of active support for the armed opposition, were held without trial, or were imprisoned after political trials that did not conform to intemationally recognized standards. Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imposition of the death penalty, including its use in cases involving politically motivated violent crimes heard by special revolutionary courts without right of appeal.
In May Dr Najib was appointed General Secretary of the mling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) and on 20 November President Babrak Karmal resigned from the presidency of the Revolutionary Council.
Torture was a major concem of Amnesty Intemational. On 9 September Amnesty Intemational wrote to the President of the Revolutionary Council, expressing its concem about persistent allegations of torture. These allegations were described in detail in an Amnesty Intemational report published on 19 November: Afghanistan: Torture of Political Prisoners, which marked the start of a worldwide campaign. It contained testimonies from former political
214	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
prisoners who stated that they had been tortured by KHAD agents and quoted some former prisoners who said that Soviet personnel had been present when they were tortured. The report described widespread arrests of government officials, teachers, shopkeepers and students. Among them were people said to have been active in armed opposition groups as well as people who had not used or advocated violence. Prisoners were reported to have been most commonly tortured in KHAD interrogation centres in Kabul or in provincial cities, but Amnesty Intemational also interviewed people who were tortured in prisons and at military posts. The torture was said to include beatings, electric shocks to sensitive parts of the body, being burnt with cigarettes and having hair tom from the scalp. Women prisoners reported not only being tortured but being forced to witness the torture of male prisoners. Many prisoners stated that Soviet personnel were present during torture and often participated in interrogations, but did not themselves torture prisoners. In a few cases Amnesty International received allegations that Soviet personnel were directly involved in applying torture themselves. The report pHjinted out that torture was prohibited by Afghanistan's constitution, as well as by international human rights instmments ratified by Afghanistan.
In its letters to President Karmal on 9 September and a subsequent letter to General Secretary Dr Najib of 24 November Amnesty Intemational urged the government to implement recommendations for the prevention of torture. The organization urged it to issue clear public instructions that torture would not be tolerated. It also urged the govemment to ensure that relatives, lawyers and doctors had frequent access to detainees and that detainees would be brought promptly before a judicial authority to ensure that incommunicado detention did not become an opportunity for torture. It urged the government to establish an impartial body to investigate all complaints and reports of torture. Amnesty International also reminded the authorities that according to intemational standards, confessions or other evidence obtained under duress should not be invoked as evidence in legal proceedings.
In view of the allegations that Soviet p>ersonnel were sometimes present when prisoners were tortured or ill-treated, Amnesty Intemational wrote on 9 September to the President of the USSR. It urged the Soviet Govemment to investigate the allegations of involvement of Soviet personnel in torture in Afghanistan. Amnesty Intemational also called for Soviet personnel alleged to be involved in torture to be brought to trial.
As in previous years, fighting between Soviet and Afghan troops on the one side and armed opposition groups on the other continued
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	215
throughout 1986. The conflict inhibited the collection of reliable information: direct communications with the victims of human rights violations within Amnesty International's mandate was extremely difficult. The govemment failed to respond to Amnesty International's repeated requests for information and the official, govemment-controlled Afghan news media provided little information of relevance to Amnesty Intemational's concems. Intemational observers continued to face difficulties in obtaining access to the country. The special rapporteur appointed by the UN Commission on Human Rights in 1984 made yet another unsuccessful attempt in June to travel to Afghanistan. The Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was able to visit Afghanistan to discuss future activities. However, according to its published reports, the ICRC was not able to visit prisons or prisoners during the year for protection purposes.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive allegations of extrajudicial executions in a number of Afghanistan's 29 provinces. For example, a total of 30 unarmed civilians were reported to have been killed by Soviet and Afghan military personnel on 23 March in a military operation in the villages of Bamba Koat, Sairum Qala and Omar Qala in the vicinity of Darra-e Noor valley in the Kuz Kunar district of Nangarhar province. The killings were reported to have been in reprisal for the killing of a Soviet military officer and some Afghan soldiers during earlier fighting between govemment forces and an armed opposition group in the nearby village of Khomargosh. According to the information available to Amnesty International, on 26 March, in a similar operation by Soviet and Afghan troops in the village of Suten, again in Darra-e Noor, a total of 66 unarmed villagers, among them children, were reportedly killed. Amnesty Intemational received other allegations of reprisal killings of civilians by Soviet and Afghan military personnel. On 16 August, 42 men, women and children were alleged to have been killed in a military operation in Naqiabad in the Injil district south of Herat. Civilians were also reported to have been killed in Wardak, in Takhar and in Kandahar in three other similar incidents. At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was still trying to obtain further information about these reported killings.
Amnesty International continued to call for the unconditional release of Professor Habiburahman Halah, Professor Hassan Kakar, Shukmllah Kohgadai and Dr Osman Rustar who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience. They had been members of a discussion group at Kabul University seeking a peaceful solution to the armed conflict and were sentenced in 1983 to seven, eight, seven and 10 years' imprisonment respectively. They were held in Pul-e Charkhi prison, Kabul. Professor Kakar was suffering from varicose veins and
216	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
his eyesight was poor and deteriorating. The authorities rejected Professor Kakar's request for a medical check-up. Amnesty International was unable to obtain further news of the other three prisoners.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of 35 political prisoners who were said to be members of the Afghan Mellat, Afghan Soda! Democratic Party. They were arrested in 1983, reportedly tortured and sentenced to between five and 18 years' imprisonment in trials that Amnesty Internationa! believed did not conform to internationally established standards for a fair trial. Three of the prisoners were reported to have been released.
Amnesty International received reports from various sources of people being arrested and detained on political grounds but was unable to establish the exact number of these arrests. In November the government announced that the sentences passed on a number of male and female prisoners were to be remitted. On 18 December Amnesty Internationa! wrote to the Minister of Justice asking for details of this measure.
The number of death sentences announced by Kabul Radio in 1986, including those imposed in absentia, was eight, fewer than the 40 officially announced the previous year. Amnesty International believed these were only a proportion of the total number of death sentences which were imposed. The organization received information indicating that Dr Mohammad Younis Akbari, a nuclear physicist who had been sentenced to death on charges of subversion and counter-revolutionary activities in May 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1984 and 1985), was still alive in late 1986. However, despite continued efforts throughout 1986 by Amnesty International to elicit a response from the government as to his fate, none was forthcoming.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture and executions of Soviet and Afghan soldiers and of supporters of the government by opposition groups. Three militiamen were executed in February after a "trial" by opix)sition groups in Herat. In a television program shown by the British Broadcasting Corporation on 13 October Mohammad Juma, a member of an armed opposition group in Kandahar led by Abdul Latif, stated that as the chief executioner of the group he had beheaded many captured prisoners. The program also contained a sequence in which a captured prisoner was ill-treated by members of the opposition group. Amnesty International condemns as a matter of principle the torture or killing of prisoners under any circumstances, whether by government or nongovernment forces.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	217
