Turkey
Amnesty International was concemed about the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and the imposition of the death penalty. After a study of trials of political prisoners by military courts the organization concluded that these courts did not give political prisoners fair trials.
At the end of 1986 martial law was still in force in five of Turkey's 67 provinces and a state of emergency existed in a further eight provinces. The exact number of prisoners of conscience was not known, but at the beginning of the year there were approximately 15,500 political prisoners, of whom several hundred were recognized as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. During 1986 many of these were released as a result of an amendment to the Law
316	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
on the Execution of Sentences which came into force on 19 March. The amendment increased the remission of sentences for some criminal and ix>litical prisoners. A number of defendants in political trials were also released conditionally while their trials continued.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International included members of political parties and groups, writers, journalists, publishers, academics, members of the Kurdish ethnic minority and people imprisoned for their religious activities.
Members of political parties and groups were usually imprisoned under Article 141 of the penal code, which prohibits membership of "illegal organizations". They included memt^rs of the illegal Turkish Communist Party (TKP) and of other left-wing parties which had been legal until they were banned after the 1980 military coup. Trials of members of the Turkish Workers' Party (TIP) continued in Istanbul military courts. In April the retrial of 47 TIP members was reported to have been postponed until June, but no further reports appeared. The trial of another 168 members which started in May 1984 was still in progress at the end of 1986. Amnesty Intemational did not know whether any of the defendants were in prison. Five members of the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Party (TIKP) remained in prison at the end of 1986. Legal proceedings continued in various parts of Turkey against members of the Turkish Socialist Workers' Party (TSIP). Amnesty Intemational knew of sbi defendants who were still in prison at the end of 1986 serving sentences relating to previous convictions. Another TSIP member was rearrested in November. (See Amnesty International Report 1985 and Ì95Ó for all the above cases.)
Four members of the Turkish Communist Party-Union (TKP-B) were arrested and charged under Article 141 with planning to distribute political leaflets disguised as sweets at a trade union rally on 22 Febmary in Izmir. Their trial ended in November when they were sentenced to between four and six years' imprisonment. The trials of other TKP-B membere continued, but the total number of TKP-B members in prison at the end of the year was not known.
In Febmary and March the 12 remaining imprisoned defendants in the Turkish Peace Association (TPA) case were released. The two trials of TPA members were combined and in November the Military Prosecutor asked for sentences of between five and 15 years for 37 defendants and acquittal for 28. Four defendants had their cases set aside. Two defendants, Orhan Apaydin and Ismail Hakki Oztomn, died during the year. The trial was still continuing at the end of 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1983 to 1986).
The trial of the 1,477 leaders, officials and advisers of the Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DISK) which had been
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	317
running for five years, ended in Istanbul on 23 December. Two hundred and sixty four defendants received prison sentences of between five and a half and 10 years; 1,169 were acquitted and the remainder either had their cases set aside for separate trial or dropped. All those convicted were also sentenced to periods of internal exile and banned from public service for life. Defence and prosecution have appealed against the verdict. DISK and 28 of its 30 affiliated trade unions were dissolved.
Journalists, writers and publishers continued to be prosecuted under Article 142 of the penal code which prohibits making "communist propaganda". Hiiseyin Kivan?, a publisher, was detained on 13 May. His trial had opened 10 years earlier. On 23 October he was acquitted in one case. The three other cases against him were combined. The trial continued at the end of the year.
On 12 November Halil Berktay, a political scientist, Cenan Bigakgi, a trade unionist, and Ali Kalan, a lawyer, were also arrested under Article 142. They had participated in a meeting organized by the journal Sagak in Ankara on 26 July. The Public Prosecutor issued arrest warrants on the grounds that the discussion had violated Article 142. The three men remained in prison awaiting trial at the end of 1986.
Many Kurds remained in prison. Some were charged with or convicted of violent offences; others imprisoned on account of their non-violent political or cultural activities were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. Among these were Mehdi Zana, former Mayor of Diyarbakir, and Recep Mara§li, a publisher, who remained in Diyarbakir Military Prison (see Amnesty International Report 1984, 1985 and 1986). The hearing of Mehdi Zana's appeal against his 24-year sentence passed in October 1983 was scheduled for 25 November but was adjoumed until 1987.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience several Muslim activists who were convicted under Article 163 of the penal code which prohibits attempts to adapt "the basic social, economic, political or judicial orders of the State to religious principles or beliefs". Among them was Osman Co§kun, an imam who was sentenced to seven years and three months' imprisonment in November for his non-violent religious activities in Muslim communities in the Federal Republic of Germany, where he lived from 1980 until his return to Turkey in March 1986. Other people imprisoned under Article 163 included writers and joumalists. Emine §enlikoglu, writer and chief editor of the periodical Mektup remained in prison serving a sentence of six years three months for a book she wrote (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
In June the Plenary of the Courts of Appeal quashed the sentences
318	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
reimposed on 23 Jehovah's Witnesses by the Ankara State Security Court in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1985 and 1986). The Plenary stated that "every Turkish citizen has the right to freedom of faith and conscience, the choice of faith and religious practice" and ruled that Jehovah's Witnesses should not, therefore, prosecuted under Article 163.
On 15 December Amnesty International wrote again to Prime Minister Turgut Ozal about three Greek Cypriots — Andreas Hatjiloizou, Andreas Costas Kassapis and Leontios Leontious — taken prisoner by the Turkish armed forces during the hostilities in Cyprus in 1974 and missing since then (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1974 to 1981, and 1986). No response had been received to earlier letters calling for an investigation into the whereabouts of the three men, who were among many Greek Cypriots taken prisoner and missing since 1974.
Political cases continued to be heard by military courts even in those provinces no longer under martial law. In October Amnesty Intemational published a report, Unfair Trial of Political Prisoners in Turkey. Since the introduction of martial law in December 1978 more than 48,000 political prisoners had been sentenced to imprisonment or death after unfair trials. The report concluded that the military courts were not independent from the executive authorities either in law or in practice; that lawyers defending political prisoners had been prevented from adequately representing their clients; that detainees charged with political offences had been subjected to excessively long trials and periods of pre-trial detention; and that military courts had re{>eatedly failed to investigate defendants' allegations that statements had been extracted under torture. On 13 April the newspaper Cumhuriyet reported that Military Court No. 1 of Diyarbakir province had ruled that an admission of guilt by a defendant could be considered as evidence even if it had been obtained by illegal means.
Allegations of torture of both political and criminal prisoners continued. These related to both those held in incommunicado detention in police stations and prisoners in military and civilian prisons. Among the allegations of torture received was that of Servet Ziya (^orakli, a member of TKP-B. He was detained in Izmir on 21 Febmary and charged with planning the distribution of political leaflets at a trade union rally on 22 February. In April Amnesty Intemational heard that he had been repeatedly tortured during detention and was severely injured. He had been admitted to a military hospital several times.
In November Amnesty International issued a document Turkey: Torture and Ill-Treatment of Detainees and Prisoners which stated that Amnesty International had not observed any fundamental
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	319
changes in the attitude or the practice of the police or prison officials relating to the torture of detainees and prisoners during the previous 12 months. The document provided detailed information about alleged torture during 1985 and 1986, including statements from former prisoners who had been interviewed by Amnesty Intemational. The organization knew of eight deaths which occurred either in custody or shortly after release between January and July 1986, alleged to be the result of ill-treatment during interrogation.
In December, following student protests and hunger-strikes. Amnesty Intemational received details of students who had been detained and tortured. Among them were Sedat Karaduman and Salih Turan, students at Ankara University. They were detained on 26 November and held for 11 and 15 days respectively, during which time Salih Turan had to receive hospital treatment. Yilmaz Onay, a theatre director and writer who was also detained in Ankara from 22 to 25 December, told a press conference that he had been stripped naked, given electric shocks and hosed with ice-cold water during his interrogation by police. He gave journalists a copy of a medical report which he stated confirmed that his body bore the signs of torture.
In April 1986 an Istanbul military court sentenced three policemen to prison terms of 10 years eight months for causing the death under torture of Mustafa Hayrullahoglu in November 1982, two days after he had been detained. Amnesty International had urged the authorities to investigate the cause of death (see Amnesty International Report 1984).
A memorandum submitted to the authorities in February dealt with Amnesty Intemational's concems about Iranian refugees who could face torture, execution or imprisonment as prisoners of conscience if returned to Iran. The memorandum included a series of recommendations and requests for clarification. The organization welcomed the wiUingness expressed by officials to investigate its reports of refoulement (forcible return) and the stated policy of the authorities that any Iranian who feared persecution in Iran would not be returned there. However, the organization continued to receive reports of refoulement and of Iranians seeking asylum in Turkey being turned back at the border before their cases could be evaluated by competent officials. In one border incident on 2 January, four Iranians were shot dead by Turkish border guards. In response to Amnesty International's appeal for information the authorities said that the four were among a group entering Turkey illegally. They had been fired on by guards after disobeying an order to stop. A fifth person was wounded and later resettled in a third country. In October Amnesty International leamed of several Iranians being expelled. The organization asked for urgent consideration to be given to
320	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
reviewing the procedures for deaHng with Iranian refugees to protect them against the possibility of refoulement. The authorities replied that the cases referred to were under investigation and assured Amnesty Intemational that genuine refugees were not retumed to Iran.
However, an article in the Iranian newspaper Keyhan, published in Tehran on 29 November, reported that six people it described as members of the Kurdish political parties, Komaleh and the Kurdish Democratic Party, had been arrested in Turkey and handed over to the Iranian police. On 22 December Amnesty Intemational asked the Turkish authorities about the six men, who could face torture or execution in Iran because of their suspected pKDlitical activities.
Although no executions took place during 1986, 134 death sentences were reported in the Turkish press. The number of people under sentence of death at the end of 1986 was estimated to be several hundred. One hundred and twenty-four death sentences were awaiting ratification by the Turkish Grand National Assembly (TBMM). Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal against executions and for the total abolition of the death penalty.
