Malaysia
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about the long-term detention without charge or trial of about 30 prisoners, including a number of prisoners of conscience under the Internal Security Act (ISA), and about the increased use of the death penalty, mostly for offences related to drugs and firearms. It was also concerned about the extension of provisions under the Dangerous Drugs Act to introduce mandatory caning for minor offences. An Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Malaysia during March 1986 to investigate information relating to the detention of political prisoners under the ISA.
Under Section 8 of the ISA people considered by the authorities to represent a threat to national security may be detained without charge or trial for renewable two-year periods. At the beginning of 1986 Amnesty Intemational knew of approximately 80 such prisoners, most of them accused of being members of the banned Communist Party of Malaya (CPM). Some of these detainees had been held for more than 10 years. There is no opportunity for them to challenge their detention in court. Among the prisoners of conscience for whose release Amnesty Intemational has appealed for many years were Wong Yong Huat and Loo Ming Leong, both held without trial since 1972. At least 14 prisoners who had been held since the mid-1970s were released during 1986. According to the govemment three people were arrested under this legislation during 1986.
Among those held under the ISA for whose release Amnesty Intemational worked were members of the Islamic opposition party Parti Islam se Malaysia (PAS). Abu Bakar Bin Chik and Haji Suhaimi Said were released during 1986, having been detained since July 1984 and March 1985 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985 and 1986). However, both men were released under ISA restriction orders which limited their ft^eedom of movement and association. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the detention without charge or trial under the ISA of 36 followers of the Islamic teacher Ibrahim Mahmud. Together with 123 others who were later released, they had been arrested in connection with the "Memali incident" in November 1985 when 18 people, including the teacher, died in violent clashes between Muslim activists and the police. The 36 had originally been arrested under the Emergency Ordinance, and in January 1986 they were served with two-year detention orders under the ISA. They were released in June, two months before Malaysia's general elections, by order of the
252	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Head of State on the grounds that they no longer posed a threat to national security.
Those still detained under the ISA were believed to be held at the Kamunting Detention Centre in Taiping, the Police Rehabilitation Centre in Mukim Batu near Kuala Lumpur, and the Special Branch Detention Centre in Johore Bahru.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the increasing use of the death penalty. At least 15 people were executed during the year, and at least 48 sentenced to death. In all cases the organization appealed to the govemment to commute the death sentences imposed, and expressed its regret at the executions that took place. Thirty-five of the death sentences were imposed following convictions for dmg trafficking. Those executed were mostly Malaysian nationals but included three foreigners — two Australians and an Indonesian — who were hanged in July and August despite widespread appeals for clemency. TTiis brought the number of people executed for dmg trafficking offences since 1975, when the death penalty was introduced for such offences, to 47. A further 139 people had already been convicted and were awaiting the outcome of tiieir appeals.
According to Malaysia's National Security Council, at least 590 suspected dmg traffickers were arrested during the year under Section 39(B) of the Dangerous Dmgs Act (1952), as amended in 1983. Conviction for trafficking carries a mandatory death penalty and the possession of 15 grams of heroin, 200 grams of cannabis or 1,000 grams of opium is considered sufficient evidence of trafficking. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about a new amendment to the Dangerous Dmgs Act introduced in December which imposed stiffer penalties for minor dmg offences, including mandatory caning of between sbi and 10 strokes, which Amnesty Intemational considers cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment, in addition to a jail sentence.
At least nine people were sentenced to death during the year for the illegal possession of firearms under Section 57 of the ISA, which carries a mandatory death sentence. TTiis brought the number of people convicted under this section of the ISA and awaiting the outcome of their appeals to 83. At least 31 people convicted under Section 57 of the ISA have been executed since 1975. Among them was Sim Kie Chon who was executed in March, after two stays of execution (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986).
Amnesty Intemational Reporti967 Asia	253
