Gambia
Amnesty International was concerned about the retention of the death penalty and the introduction of new legislation extending its applicability. However, no executions were reported to have taken place.
Amnesty International learned of two cases in which critics of the government appeared to have been arrested for political reasons. In February, Boubacar Langley was arrested when he displayed a banner which
52	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
appeared to criticize the government at Independence Day celebrations. He was reported to have been sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for damaging government property, but the circumstances of his conviction were not clear. Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior in early December asking for details of his case. In October, Suntou Fatty, a leading member of the opposition Gambia People's Party, was arrested for allegedly possessing "compromising documents", but he was released after a few days.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in March after receiving reports that Pap Cheyassin Secka, a lawyer and politician convicted of participating in an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1981, was being held in solitary confinement and denied adequate medical treatment despite poor health. In response, the Minister of the Interior stated that such reports were groundless and that Pap Cheyassin Secka was in good health.
In May the President, Sir Dawda Jawara, approved an amendment to the criminal code which extended the use of the death penalty for treason, and made it mandatory in cases arising from violent attempts to overthrow the government. However, there had been no prosecutions under this provision by the end of 1986.
In early December Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice about Metta Camara, a former corporal in the Gambian Field Force, who had been sentenced to death in December 1985 after being convicted of participating in an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1981. Recalling that President Jawara had previously granted clemency to others sentenced to death for participation in the coup attempt. Amnesty International appealed for Metta Camara's sentence to be commuted by the President if it were confirmed by the Court of Appeal. In response the Director of Public Prosecutions informed Amnesty International that the Court of Appeal had confirmed Metta Camara's conviction but had reduced his sentence to 20 years' imprisonment.
One other death sentence was reported to have been imposed in December at the end of a murder trial but the case was expected to go to appeal.
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
