Israel and the Occupied Territories
Amnesty international's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and people who might be prisoner of conscience, and the continued use of administrative detention and restriction. Amnesty Intemational received allegations of ill-treatment and torture of detainees in Israel and the Occupied Territories and in the border zone of South Lebanon where Israeli military forces maintained a presence. It was concemed about the inadequacy of safeguards to prevent ill-treatment and torture and about deficiencies in the complaints machinery for investigating allegations.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational adopted three prisoners of conscience, who were later released, and investigated the cases of 36 possible prisoners of conscience, 20 of whom were released. Six of the 39 were convicted of membership of an illegal organization or of incitement, one was a conscientious objector, 14 were under restriction orders and 18 were in administrative detention.
Amnesty Intemational called for the unconditional release of Naftali Omer, a reservist in the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF), who was sentenced in September to 19 days' imprisonment for refusing to serve in the West Bank for reasons of conscience. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about three women who served between 12 and 40 days in prison in August, September and October after leaving their units and seeking exemption from military service
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	349
on grounds of conscience developed after they had been conscripted. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Defence on 4 November and called for them to be granted exemption on grounds of conscience. It later leamed that all three had been exempted on grounds of "unsuitability". All the conscientious objectors taken up by Amnesty Intemational objected to doing military service only in particular areas. Amnesty Intemational understood that a number of other conscientious objectors to military service and to serving in the Occupied Territories did receive exemption and were not imprisoned.
Amnesty Intemational expressed concern to the authorities about two people it believed might be prisoners of conscience. Said Muhammad AI Ayla, from Gaza, was sentenced in Febmary to nine months' imprisonment and two and a half years' suspended on charges of incitement, under Article 7(a) of Military Order (MO) 62. During a strike in support of security detainees in Ashkelon prison he had instmcted someone to distribute leaflets denouncing the state of Israel. 'Alammudin Abu Ziad, from Majdal Shams in the Golan Heights, was sentenced in September to six months' imprisonment under the Law of Sedition (Section 133 of the Israeli penal code). He was charged with singing anti-Israeli, pro-Syrian songs during a demonstration in February 1985, which marked the anniversary of a protest strike against the annexation of the Golan Heights.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate a number of cases of people imprisoned after being accused of membership of (or association with) various factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Some were convicted by the courts, others held in administrative detention. Amnesty Intemational sou^t to determine the nature of the prisoners' involvement in these organizations and their activities, and the precise accusations and evidence against them. In each of the cases taken up by Amnesty Intemational for investigation the organization had no evidence that the individual had personally used or advocated violence. In correspondence with Amnesty Intemational the authorities maintained that membership of or active support for such organizations in itself amounted to advocating or contributing to the violence p>erpetrated by them. However, Amnesty Intemational took into account the facts that there were in effect no legal political parties in the Occupied Territories and that the specific activities of these individuals had, as far as was known to Amnesty Intemational, been peaceful. Amnesty Intemational believed that each case had to be examined on its merits to determine whether an individual's association with a banned organization involved advocacy of violence.
Administrative measures were used to detain people for up to six
350	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
months without giving full reasons (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986). Amnesty Intemational received the names of 144 people administratively detained during 1986. They were mainly students and trade unionists and 107 of them had been released by the end of the year. Amnesty Intemational considers that administrative detention is open to abuse and that many administrative detainees might have been prisoners of conscience. The Attomey General wrote to Amnesty Intemational on 26 January that administrative detention was a preventive measure "generally invoked only in special circumstances and where there is corroborating evidence from two or more sources that the individual is engaged in illegal acts that involve direct danger to state security and to the lives of innocent people." However, details of detainees' activities and past convictions provided by the authorities did not always convince Amnesty Intemation^ that these detainees had used or advocated violence. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned that detainees were not given the full and precise reasons for their detention orders. The Attomey General's letter said that administrative detention was used only when "normal judicial procedures cannot be followed because of the danger to the lives of witnesses or because secret sources of information cannot be revealed in open court." Amnesty Intemational replied on 30 July, saying that while it was in no position to assess the validity of this claim, it was concerned that this argument was used in almost all cases. It said that as a result, people were imprisoned on the basis of anonymous testimony. Furthermore, although administrative detention was subject to judicial review after 48 hours and at three months, and there was a right to appeal to the Israeli High Court, such safeguards were insufficient if detainees were never given the evidence against them and could not therefore challenge the grounds for their detention.
On 6 November Amnesty Intemational telexed the Minister of Defence about Akram Haniyah, editor of the Jerusalem newspaper Al Sha'ab who had been detained pending deportation to Jordan on suspicion of being a PLO activist and a conduit for PLO funds and instmctions. Amnesty Intemational believed he might have been a prisoner of conscience and called for him to be formally charged and tried or released immediately, and not deported to Jordan or any other country where he might face imprisonment on account of his non-violent political beliefs. Akram Haniyah was deported to Algeria via Switzerland on 28 December.
The use of restriction orders (formally termed special supervision orders), which had been largely replaced in 1985 by administrative detention, was renewed. Amnesty Intemational received the names of 66 people, mostly students and trade unionists, who during 1986
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	351
were restricted to their home towns or villages. Majid al Labadi, a trade unionist from Al Bireh, spent one year under a restriction order imposed in October 1984 confining him to his home town, then six months in administrative detention. In July 1986 he was served with another six-month restriction order. According to the authorities he was a leading activist in the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP — a faction of the PLO which had been involved in acts of violence) and had previous convictions for recruiting others to the organization. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem that he had been restricted and detained for over two years without full reasons being given when it had not been shown that he had used or advocated violence.
During September Amnesty Intemational publicized the case of Adnan Mansour Ghanem, who alleged he was tortured during interrogation in Gaza prison between 22 December 1985 and 21 January 1986. In May 1985 he was released after spending 17 and a half years in prison for armed infiltration into the Occupied Territories, and was rearrested in December on suspicion of renewed activity in the PLO. He alleged that he was hooded and handcuffed during prolonged periods of enforced standing and kneeling, subjected to near-suffocation, sleep deprivation, prolonged ice-cold showers, humiliation and threats and beatings all over the body which caused wounds and bmises to the face and head. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the apparent failure of safeguards to protect him from ill-treatment: he was denied access to his lawyer for 35 days, and to his family for six weeks. Despite his complaints at three court hearings, the judge ordered a medical examination only at the third hearing; and, although the judge sought assurances from the police that the interrogation was over, Adnan Mansour Ghanem alleged that his interrogation continued on his retum to prison. Neither Amnesty Intemational nor the defence lawyer were able to discover how often he saw a doctor during his detention in Gaza prison. A representative of the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) visited him on 6 and 20 January. The ICRC has access to security detainees in the Occupied Territories from the fourteenth day of detention. Amnesty Intemational considered that, while ICRC access to prisoners was an important safeguard, it was not sufficient to give full protection to detainees from ill-treatment. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities in January and in June urging an independent inquiry into this case and later learned that an investigation was being carried out.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to investigate complaints of ill-treatment made by seven other security suspects who were detained in Jenin and Nablus prisons on the West
352	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
Bank, in Moscobiya detention centre in Jerusalem and in Acre police station in Israel. TTiey alleged that the ill-treatment included beatings, prolonged hooding and enforced standing, solitary confinement and lengthy subjection to cold air and showers.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that detainees held in Khiam prison in the border zone of South Lebanon by the South Lebanon Army (SLA) were ill-treated and tortured, sometimes, it was alleged, under the supervision of members of the IDF or the Israeli General Security Service. In September Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Israeli authorities and to the leader of the SLA for an inquiry into these allegations (see Lebanon entry).
On 26 February Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Defence about reports that dozens of villagers from Shakra in the security zone, who had been detained and interrogated by members of the IDF on 20 Febmary, had been ill-treated and tortured by members of the SLA who were assisting the IDF. The IDF was seeking information about two Israeli soldiers who had been abducted in South Lebanon. According to journalists who subsequently spoke to some of those released, the detainees were beaten with wooden batons, bumt with cigarette ends and lighters and subjected to electric shocks. Five were hospitalized after their release. Amnesty Intemational said that it appreciated the Israeli authorities' concem for the two soldiers but that this could not justify the use of ill-treatment and torture. Amnesty Intemational also said that the fact that it was the SLA and not the IDF who physically ill-treated the detainees did not exonerate the Israeli authorities from responsibility. Amnesty Intemational called for an inquiry to be carried out, the findings made public and any members of the IDF found to have ordered or tolerated such treatment duly prosecuted.
In May three former members of the General Security Service (GSS) alleged that two Palestinians who had hijacked a bus in April 1984 had been deliberately killed in the custody of the GSS, and that the Prime Minister had ordered the killings and a subsequent cover-up. At the time, officials had said that the two died during the storming of the bus, but press photographs showed them alive after capture by the army. A 1985 commission of inquiry found that the two Palestinians had been beaten to death during interrogation, but was unable to determine who was responsible. It recommended that an army commander should be tried, but an internal disciplinary court found that he had used "reasonable force" and cleared him of direct responsibility for the deaths (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In June Amnesty Intemational urged an investigation into the new allegations. Following a p)olice investigation, the Attorney General's office published its findings on 30 December. It found no
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	353
evidence linking the Prime Minister to the incident, but criticized the political leadership for trying to avoid an investigation on grounds of national security. The members of the GSS implicated had earlier received pre-indictment presidential pardons.
