Pakistan
Amnesty International was concerned about the arrests of hundreds of opposition party members who were jailed for short periods for participating in non-violent political activities. Dozens of members of the Ahmadiyya community were arrested for defying the ban on practising their faith. Several long-term prisoners of conscience were released during 1986, but political prisoners convicted under the previous martial law administration remained without judicial redress. They had been sentenced by military courts after trials which Amnesty Intemational considered unfair. Reports of extrajudicial executions, particularly in Sind province, and of torture by the police were investigated by the organization. Dozens of floggings were imposed by the courts, and several death sentences, although the frequency of such punishments was less than in previous years.
Martial law was lifted on 30 December 1985. Military courts were abolished and constitutional rights suspended since 1977, such as freedom of speech and freedom of assembly, were restored. The High Courts could again hear petitions invoking fundamental rights. However, before the lifting of martial law, the constitution had been amended to provide an absolute indemnity for all acts under the martial law regulations. This was intended to prevent prisoners sentenced by military courts from challenging the legality of their convictions.
Among the prisoners of conscience released during 1986 were Rasul Bux Palejo, Fazil Rahu and Dr Hasan Zafar Arif (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986), who had been held without trial under detention orders for five and a half years, two and a half years and one and a half years respectively. Other prisoners of conscience were freed at the end of their prison sentences. They included the peasant leader Jam Saqi who had been in jail since December 1978, and student activists Sher Mohammad Mangrio and Imdad Hussain Chandio who had been in jail for over five years. Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of Ahmad Kamal Warsi and Ghulam Shabbir Shar, arrested in July 1980, who were serving seven-year sentences imposed by a military court in 1985. They had been convicted of sedition for possessing "anti-state literature" and other charges relating to their non-violent political activities.
The alliance opposition of more than a dozen political parties, the
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	257
Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD), which had boycotted national elections held under martial law in 1985, continued to call for new elections. Huge public gatherings were held in the weeks following the return in April of Benazir Bhutto, the leader of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP), the largest party in the MRD. In defiance of a government ban on rallies on Independence Day, 14 August, the MRD continued to organize demonstrations in Lahore and Karachi. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that hundreds of MRD leaders and activists had been arrested in the days preceding the planned demonstrations and were held for some weeks without trial under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (MPO). Benazir Bhutto was arrested following her attempt to address a public meeting in Karachi on 14 August. Further demonstrations, to protest at these arrests, were held during the remainder of August and early September, and many hundreds of people were arrested. Some of these demonstrations, particularly in Sind province, resulted in violent clashes with the police. Benazir Bhutto was released on 8 September and by the end of the month all the prisoners held under the MPO were freed.
During September and October leaders of the Sindhi-Baluch-Pakhtoon Front (SBPF), which advocates a confederal stmcture for Pakistan, toured Sind province to promote their party's program. In early November, several were arrested under the MPO. Mumtaz AH Bhutto, the party's convenor, was arrested on the grounds that his speeches had "aimed at dismpting the territorial integrity of the country . . . creating commotion and disturbing public tranquillity . . ." Another 10 leaders of the SBPF were arrested and reportedly charged with sedition. Amnesty International asked the Sind authorities for the reasons for their arrest and expressed concem that their detention might have violated their right to freedom of expression.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community continued to face arrest and up to three years' imprisonment for calling themselves Muslims or using Muslim practices in worship (see Amnesty International Report 1985 and 1986). In Mardan, more than 15 Ahmadis were arrested and charged. They included two brothers, shop proprietors, who were arrested because the cash receipt pad used in their shop was inscribed with a Muslim epithet, "In the name of God the Benificent, the Merciful". They were each sentenced to five years' imprisonment, charged under two sections of the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC). On the morning of 17 August, the Muslim festival of Bid, over Ahmadis who had gathered at the community's place of worship in Mardan were taken into police custody after which their place of worship was demolished by a group of local people. All were
258	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
released late the same night, except for four prominent members of the community who were charged under Section 298 of the PPC. Similar arrests took place in Karachi, Quetta and other parts of the country. Those convicted were sentenced to between one and 10 years' imprisonment. While awaiting trial or appeal hearings, these prisoners were released on bail.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the retrial of over 100 political prisoners charged with criminal conspiracy and sedition and sentenced to long periods of imprisonment by military courts during martial law. They had been sentenced in closed trials, with no right of appeal. Amnesty Intemational believed their trials failed to conform to intemational standards of faimess and was concerned that they still had no form of judicial redress. Amnesty Intemational called for them to be retried before an ordinary court in which all minimum legal safeguards for a fair trial were guaranteed. In spite of the constitutional ban on challenging convictions by military courts, some prisoners filed petitions before the high courts, arguing that the military courts which had convicted them were constituted in contravention of military law, or that their arrest and interrogation had been unlawful. No progress had been made by the end of the year. In late 1986 the Minister for Justice and Parliamentary Affairs repeatedly stated that the government was considering a proposal to grant the right of appeal to these prisoners but no further details had been announced by the end of the year.
Allegations of extrajudicial executions by law enforcement personnel were investigated by Amnesty Intemational. In Lahore, two men were shot dead on 18 September after a curfew had been imposed during clashes between Sunni and Shi'a Muslims. According to the authorities, the men had been shot by law enforcement personnel as they damaged a Shi'a mosque. But local residents claimed they had been summarily killed as they were eating lunch in a house near the mosque. Amnesty Intemational called for a judicial inquiry to be held into these deaths.
Amnesty International also received complaints that some unarmed villagers from rural areas of Sind province, where the anti-government protests in August had been most widespread, had been arbitrarily killed by police or paramilitary personnel in settlements where the authorities stated that criminals were sheltering. For example. Amnesty Intemational received allegations that in the village of Ahmed Khan Brihmani, near Dadu, an elderly man named Chatto Khan was summarily killed by law enforcement personnel on 23 August. Units from the paramilitary Indus Rangers and local police were said to have ordered all the houses to be evacuated, and, finding him inside one of them reportedly dragged
Amnesty Intemational Reportl987 Asia	259
him out and shot him at close range. Amnesty International was seeking further details about this and other alleged arbitrary killings in Sind. No official inquiries were known to have been initiated into these deaths.
Throughout the country, torture of criminal suspects in police custody was reported. Some political prisoners were also allegedly tortured, apparently to intimidate them. Allah Dino, from the village of Tando Mohammad Khan, was arrested in late August by police after he had filed a petition to a local court complaining that his brother had been unlawfully killed during a demonstration held by the PPP on 5 July. Allah Dino was kept in police custody for 15 days and reportedly beaten on the soles of his feet and his back, and hung upside down. He was reportedly then forced to make his thumb impression on a paper he could not read, authorizing the withdrawal of his petition. In Lahore, Qamar Anjum, a student activist in a faction of the Muslim League belonging to the MRD, was arrested on 25 August after addressing a public meeting. According to his bail petition both his feet were injured "due to physical torture by the police" and he needed five days hospital treatment.
Sentences of flogging continued to be imposed, mainly for drug-related offences or violation of Islamic ordinances concerning sexual offences.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the total abolition of the use of bar fetters and shackles on prisoners. During the year a few political prisoners and a much larger number of prisoners held on criminal charges, had been kept in fetters for varying periods, in violation of international standards for the treatment of prisoners.
Large numbers of prisoners reportedly remained under sentence of death, although the precise number was not known. According to the official figures published by the Jail Reforms Committee, established by the government in 1983 to review the prison system, there were 2,105 prisoners under sentence of death in Decemt^r 1984, including those awaiting appeal. Death sentences continued to be imposed in criminal cases. In Punjab province, more than 40 prisoners were executed between July 1985 and June 1986. Some prisoners previously sentenced to death by miHtary courts challenged their convictions in the high courts and were granted interim orders staying execution. Among these was Javed Iqbal, who was convicted of murder five days before the lifting of martial law. According to the petition filed on his behalf, Javed Iqbal was already in jail at the time the murder was allegedly committed, and an entry in the jail register apparently confirmed this. The cases of four prisoners sentenced to death by military courts in verdicts announced after the lifting of
260	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
martial law were submitted by Amnesty Intemational to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions.
