Burma
Amnesty International was concerned about continuing allegations of extrajudicial executions and torture of civilian political suspects, most of whom were of ethnic minority origin, by the Burmese armed forces in areas of armed rebellion in eastern Burma, particularly in Karen State. Suspects were reportedly detained without charge or trial, as were alleged members of Muslim or communist armed groups in the western state of Arakan, some of whom were allegedly also tortured.
In eastern Burma, combat continued between govemment forces and armed groups claiming to be fighting for the autonomy of various minorities, including the Karens, the Kayah and the Möns. It resulted in the flow of thousands of refugees to Thailand.
These refugees claimed there had been ■ numerous human rights abuses by the Burmese army since mid-1984, when government operations against insurgents in eastern Burma intensified. Amnesty Intemational attempted to assess this information, which was consistent with earlier such allegations (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Among the allegations received in 1986 were that the army had killed or tortured civilian Karen villagers in custody, and shot civilian Karen villagers on sight while they were fleeing from their homes. According to the refugees, the victims were ill-treated and executed because they were suspected of involvement in the activities of the insurgent Karen National Union, or in some instances simply because they were Karen. Among the forms of torture they alleged were buming and mutilation of parts of the body and near-drowning and near-suffocation.
Refugees from Karen State also alleged that traders and porters of Karen or other ethnic minority origin continued to be extrajudicially executed while travelling through restricted areas. They were allegedly shot by army firing-squads on the grounds that their presence in the area was prohibited.
Amnesty International also leamed that refugees from the Mon, Kayah and Shan States had made similar allegations. They too alleged that Burmese troops operating in these eastern parts of the country had in 1986 and earlier years committed human rights abuses.
In January Amnesty Intemational publicly expressed its continuing concern about 18 Muslims from the western state of Arakan who had allegedly been tortured in late 1985 by security forces in order to extract "confessions". They were charged at the end of 1985 with
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	223
treason and accused of involvement in armed opposition to the Buddhist-dominated central government (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Concerned that evidence produced by torture might be used against them, the organization again urged the government to investigate the allegations and ensure that these prisoners were being humanely treated. It also asked for assurances that they would be promptly tried. However, by the end of 1986 no news had been received that their trial had begun, and Amnesty International was unaware of any action taken by the government to look into allegations that they had been tortured.
In early September Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to allow four Arakanese Muslims arrested in August, apparently on suspicion of anti-government activities, access to relatives and legal counsel. They were reportedly detained incommunicado. TTie organization also appealed for them not to be held without charge or trial, but by the end of 1986 there was no news of any proceedings against them.
In mid-September Amnesty International expressed concem about reports that at least 14 Arakanese, most of whom were Buddhists, who had been arrested in June and July on suspicion of involvement in the armed activities of the insurgent Arakanese Communist Party, were being held without charge or trial in Rangoon, and about allegations that another person arrested with them, a lawyer named Soe Myint, had been tortured. It urged the govemment to investigate the torture allegations and to ensure that all those held were being well treated and would either be released or promptly charged and fairly tried. In early November the official press announced that 24 people had been charged in connection with alleged Arakanese Communist Party activities. They included Soe Myint and the 14 others about whom Amnesty International had expressed concern.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	234
