Guatemala
During 1986 Amnesty International was concerned about instances of apparent "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, although such reports were received on a lesser scale than in previous years. It was also concerned about the harassment and intimidation of those seeking clarification of past human rights violations. However, Amnesty International welcomed a number of legislative changes relevant to its human rights concerns instituted or promised by the country's first elected president in more than 20 years, Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo, who took office in January. Despite some improvement in the human rights situation, however, there was minimal progress in determining responsibility for the tens of thousands of cases of torture, "disapp>earance" and extrajudicial execution of people from all sectors of Guatemalan society which had occurred during the previous two decades of military government.
Under President Cerezo's predecessors, the perpetrators of such abuses were sometimes clearly identified as uniformed members of Guatemala's police and military forces. On other occasions abductions and killings were carried out by heavily armed men in plain clothes acting in the guise of "death squads". However, since the 1970s Amnesty International had examined hundreds of such cases and had concluded that the "death squads" were generally made up of regular police and military personnel, acting in plain clothes but under superior orders. Amnesty International had never received a substantive reply to its repeated appeals to the authorities to carry out investigations into the reported abuses in order to determine
168	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
responsibility for them and bring the perpetrators to justice.
Amnesty Intemational therefore wrote to President Cerezo shortly before his inauguration expressing its hopes that the protection and promotion of human rights would be an integral part of his program of govemment. Amnesty Intemational submitted to the new President a copy of the memorandum summarizing its long-term concems in Guatemala which it had sent to his predecessor. General Oscar Humberto Mejía Víctores, in December 1985. Amnesty Intemational also submitted a series of recommendations which it felt the new govemment should implement to ensure respect for human rights in the country. The organization stressed its belief that in-depth investigations into how "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions had been planned and carried out were necessary in order to identify and modify the institutionalized structures and policies which had permitted these violations to take place on a massive scale for more than two decades.
In Febmary an Amnesty International news release announced that it had put these recommendations to President Cerezo. It also explained Amnesty International's view of the general amnesty which had been announced by the outgoing military govemment on the eve of President Cerezo's inauguration. The measure. Decree 08-86, was one of an estimated 40 decrees, not all of them made public, passed by the outgoing military government in its final days in power. Under the decree it would not be possible to prosecute the perpetrators of "political crimes and related common crimes" committed between March 1982 (when General Efrain Ríos Montt came to power in a military coup) and 14 January 1986. Amnesty Intemational does not oppose measures of magnanimity or clemency, provided that they do not pre-empt or obstmct judicial, administrative or other investigations to establish publicly the tmth about what had occurred. Amnesty International was concerned, however, that the January 1986 amnesty law could encourage further human rights violations by giving the perpetrators of past crimes a sense that they could act with impunity.
In the first months of his administration supporters of President Cerezo's own Christian Democrat Party "disappeared" and were killed, apparently the victims of extrajudicial execution. For example. Christian Democrat Alfonso Jerónimo Pérez was killed by armed men in civilian dress as he retumed home to Jocatán, Chiquimula, on 29 January. His assailants then cut off his hands, ears and head.
Trade unionists also were subjected to human rights violations during 1986 as they attempted to revive Guatemala's trade union movement, virtually obliterated by the wholesale repression of its leadership and members since the late 1970s. In Febmary, for
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	169
example, José Mercedes Sotz was seized on a Guatemala City street by heavily armed men who held him for several hours while they tried to intimidate him into giving up his activities with the Sindicato Central de Trabajadores Municipales (SCTM), Central Municipal Workers Union. In August Amnesty International called for investigations into the whereabouts of Jorge Herrera, a legal adviser to several Guatemalan trade union organizations and a former teacher at the School of Trade Union Studies at the Universidad de San Carlos (USAC), University of San Carlos, itself a long-term target of govemment repression. Jorge Herrera, who was abducted in the capital on 26 July and was still missing at the end of the year, was the fifth member of his family to have "disappeared" or been killed in recent years reportedly because of their trade union activities. Jorge Herrera's brother and sister-in-law were among 17 trade unionists who "disappeared" after being abducted in front of witnesses by approximately 50 armed soldiers while attending a trade union seminar in Escuintla in August 1980. In letters to President Cerezo in August 1986 Amnesty Intemational again called attention to the cases of the trade unionists abducted from Escuintla. It said these "disappearances" were representative of cases where Amnesty Intemational considered that sufficient information was already available to enable further inquiries to establish who was responsible and bring them to justice. Among other such cases to which Amnesty Intemational drew special attention in 1986 were those of student Luis Femando de la Roca Elias, who "disappeared" after being seized in September 1985 by kidnappers using cars subsequently traced to the Ministry of Justice and the Justo Rufino Barrios military barracks in Guatemala City; teacher Hugo de León Palacios, who was abducted in front of his students in Guatemala City in March 1984; and Ileana del Rosario Solares Castillo, who was detained in Guatemala City in September 1982 under the terms of Decree 46-82 of July 1982. She was seen in custody by another prisoner who was later freed, but her name was not included in the list of those released when Decree 46-82 was rescinded in 1983, and there was no further news of her whereabouts.
Amnesty International's letters to President Cerezo in August welcomed certain legislative developments in Guatemala, including the provision in its new constitution that the intemational conventions to which Guatemala was a party would in principle prevail over the country's own laws. Amnesty Intemational also welcomed the country's new amparo and habeas corpus act, (Decree 1-86 of January 1986), and the provisions of the new constitution which called for the appointment of a Procurador General de Derechos Humanos, Human Rights Attorney, and for the establishment of a
170	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Congressional human rights commission. Amnesty International also noted President Cerezo's announcement in February that he had disbanded the Departamento de Investigaciones Técnicas (DIT), Department of Technical Investigations, the intelligence division of the National Police which had repeatedly been named as responsible for "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions since its discredited predecessor, the Cuerpo de Detectives, Detective Corps, was itself disbanded under the administration of General Ríos Montt.
In November Amnesty International's delegation to the Organization of American States (OAS) General Assembly in Guatemala City met President Cerezo. TTie delegation expressed the organization's disappointment that no further details were yet available of the proceedings which he had announced for the trial of former DIT agents accused of human rights abuses of civilians. The organization was also disappointed that by the close of the year, the Human Rights Attorney had not yet been appointed and the structure and operating methods of the Congressional human rights commission remained unclear.
Amnesty International was also concerned that members of the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo por el Aparecimiento con Vida de Nuestros Familiares (GAM), Mutual Support Group for the Appearance Alive of our Relatives, who had pressed for an alternative, independent commission to be established to inquire into the whereabouts of their missing relatives, had encountered threats and harassment. In May Amnesty International informed President Cerezo of its concern that GAM president Nineth Montenegro de Garcia had been followed through Guatemala City by eight men in a jeep who pointed their guns at her. It recalled the still unresolved killings of two GAM leaders in 1985, and asked the government to guarantee the physical integrity of the group's members so that they could continue their legal activities to find their missing relatives. TTie government replied that it was investigating the allegations and that groups such as GAM, which it described as "in opposition to the,government", were accorded the necessary protection by the government. In September Amnesty International again called upon the authorities to ensure the physical integrity of GAM members following reports that Nineth Montenegro de Garcia had once again begun receiving threatening telephone calls, and had on several occasions been called a "terrorist" on Guatemalan television. At an army news conference on 17 September she was accused of impugning the honour and prestige of the army and GAM's activities were described as "dangerous". President Cerezo replied to Amnesty International that it was the relatives of the "disappeared" who had adopted a threatening posture by interrupting a military parade to call attention to their relatives'
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	171
cases, and that the army communique had been misinterpreted. Amnesty International responded in a series of meetings with President Cerezo during his October tour of the USA and Europe that it considered that certain language used in the communique implied a threat to GAM. For example, it contained the passage: "If anything should happen to the GAM president or any of its members it was already anticipated by those who are their puppeteers and who conceived this Machiavellian plan." In December Basilio Tuíz Ramírez, who was associated with GAM, was abducted on the road between Panajachel and San Andrés, Sololá, by men carrying machetes and a Galil rifle believed by witnesses to be members of the army. He was still missing at the end of 1986.
On a number of occasions Amnesty Intemational expressed to President Cerezo its view that any repatriation of Guatemalan refugees should take place only under the supervision of qualified intemational observers. Many thousands of refugees had fled from army attacks upon their areas to seek asylum in Mexico and elsewhere. Amnesty International considered it to be the responsibility of the Guatemalan authorities to ensure that such returned refugees were protected from human rights abuses at the hands of the Guatemalan police and military forces.
In the course of 1986 Amnesty Intemational also raised its concerns in Guatemala with the UN special representative on Guatemala, its Working Group on Disappearances, its Special Rapporteurs on summary or arbitrary executions and on torture, the UNHCR and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States. In its 1986 Annual Report, the lACHR found that in Guatemala reports of human rights violations had decreased under the new government, but noted that the phenomenon of "disappearance" had not ceased. It expressed its fears that the amnesty decree could hinder judicial efforts to investigate actions of recent years which had left a legacy of a "large number of persons abducted, illegally detained, tortured, assassinated, and 'disappeared'."
At its March session the UN Commission on Human Rights asked for a Special Representative to be appointed to continue the human rights investigations previously carried out by the sf)ecial rapporteur it had named in 1983. The UN General Assembly decided to continue its examination of the human rights situation in the country.
172
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
