Angola
Amnesty International was concerned about the prolonged detention without trial of many suspected opponents of the government, including alleged supporters of armed opposition groups. It was also concerned about reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Most political prisoners were not brought before the courts: some 30 who were received unfair trials before military tribunals or the People's Revolutionary Tribunal and of these at least 17 were sentenced to death.
The conflict continued between the government of President José Eduardo dos Santos and guerrilla forces belonging to the Uniao Nacional para a Independència Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, an armed opposition movement headed by Dr Jonas Savimbi. It was accompanied by renewed allegations of torture and killings of prisoners and civilians by both sides. It was impossible, however, for Amnesty International independently to verify specific allegations or to attribute responsibility for individual killings. The conflict appeared most intense in southern and central Angola but UNITA guerrillas were also reportedly active in some northern districts and in the Cabinda enclave. South African military forces were also active in the south, apparently in support of UNITA and in opposition to nationalist guerrillas belonging to Namibia's South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO), operating from Angola. SWAPO was also reported to hold prisoners, among them several former senior officials of the organization alleged to be South African spies.
During 1986 several hundred alleged UNITA supporters were reported to have been arrested. Some were accused of treason.
22	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
armed rebellion or sabotage, while others were alleged to have supported UNITA in other ways, such as by providing weapons, information, shelter or food. The authorities were also reported to have detained people who were simply suspected of sympathizing with UNITA. TTie 200 or more UNITA guerrillas who were reported to have been arrested in 1986 by the Forças Armadas Populares para a Libertaçào de Angola (FAPLA), People's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola, were apparently held in security prisons or military bases in or near the provincial capitals. At least 100 people were reported to have been arrested in the Cabinda enclave on suspicion of supporting either UNITA or of one of the factions of the Frente de Libertaçào do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), Enclave of Cabinda Liberation Front. (One faction of FLEC was reported to have signed an accord with UNITA, while another had attempted to reach agreement with the Angolan Government.) Some detainees were reported to have been arrested because of false accusations by personal rivals and to have had little or no opportunity to test the legality of their detention. Some suspected UNITA supporters were reported to have been taken to Luanda, the capital, and held for questioning in a prison known as Estrada de Catete. Others were reportedly held in camps run by the Ministry of the Interior or in other places of detention. In some camps, detainees were apparently given political instruction with the declared object of eventually reintegrating them into society. Among them were former UNITA supporters who had taken advantage of a policy of clemency which the Angolan authorities instituted in 1978 towards members of opposition groups who surrendered.
Relatively few alleged UNITA supporters were ever brought to trial. They were apparently held for indefinite periods in administrative detention without reference to the courts and with no opportunity to appeal against their continuing detention. For example, Tito Tchikoko was detained in Huambo in 1979 on suspicion of being a UNITA supporter. Later that year he was taken to Luanda and subsequently to a detention centre in Quibala, southwest of the capital. He was not known to have been tried or released. The Angolan authorities did not respond to Amnesty International's inquiries about Tito Tchikoko and over a dozen other alleged UNITA supp>orters held for up to eight years.
A Zairian, Lizamoa Mongambenge, and an Angolan, Kiassonga Manuel Peterson, who had been detained without trial since 1975 and 1979 respectively, were believed to be still in detention at the end of 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Four other Zairians who were among a group of refugees arrested in March 1983 in Luena were also reported to have remained in
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	23
detention (see Amnesty International Report 1985).
There were several political trials which resulted in the death penalty but it was not known if any executions were carried out. In all cases, the defendants were alleged members or supporters of UNITA who were charged with offences such as treason, armed rebellion and espionage. Amnesty International learned of six separate trials, involving a total of 30 defendants, which took place before military tribunals in Benguela, Huambo, Lubango and Ndalatando. Sixteen of the defendants were sentenced to death. In March two people accused of being members of a special UNITA commando squad were sentenced to death in Luanda by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal, a civilian court. Amnesty International was concerned that the trials failed to meet internationally recognized standards of fairness. In particular, it appeared that defendants tried by military courts were unable to appeal against their verdict and sentence, contrary to Article 48 of Law 17/78 on the reform of military justice, which stipulates that appeals against death sentences should be lodged automatically with the highest military court, the Armed Forces Military Tribunal. The two people sentenced to death by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal were not reported to have lodged appeals. The organization was also concerned that defendants did not have access to legal counsel of their own choosing and that they did not have adequate op|X)rtunities to prepare their defence. Amnesty International informed the authorities of these concerns and appealed for commutation each time it learned that a death sentence had been passed.
In August Amnesty International welcomed the commutation by the President of three death sentences. Amilcar Fernandes Freire, a 66-year-old Portuguese national, and two Angolans, all accused of spying for South Africa, had been sentenced to death by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in September 1985. The sentences were upheld by the appeals court the following month. It was announced that the death sentence on Amilcar Freire had been commuted for humanitarian reasons on account of his age.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports that prisoners were tortured and ill-treated while held incommunicado for interrogation. The most commonly reported form of torture consisted of severe and repeated beatings. While it was unable to obtain independent confirmation of each report. Amnesty International received sufficient information to believe that control over personnel responsible for interrogation was inadequate and that prisoners were not given any opportunity to complain about their treatment.
Both government forces and UNITA claimed that their opponents committed human rights violations in areas of conflict. However, in
24	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
no case was Amnesty International able to obtain sufficient verification of the reports or attribute responsibility. Journalists visiting areas controlled by UNITA reported the killing of groups of civilians and the torture and mutilation of captives by government forces.
Two armed opposition organizations were reported to be holding prisoners in Angola. UNITA continued to abduct civilians, among them foreign nationals employed in Angola. About 2()0 foreign nationals held by UNITA were released by the end of 1986. SWAPO, the Namibian organization which is engaged in armed opposition to continued South African rule in Namibia, was reported to be holding more than 100 of its members as alleged spies for South Africa. They were reported to include Bernadinus Petrus and Victor Nkandi, on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed previously when they were detained incommunicado by South African security police in Namibia in the late 1970s before they went into exile. They and others were believed to be held at a SWAPO camp in Kwanza Sul province.
