Haiti
Amnesty International was concerned about indiscriminate killings of demonstrators, widespread arbitrary arrests, torture and "disappearances" before the govemment of "President for Life" Jean-Claude Duvalier was overthrown on 7 Febmary and replaced by a Conseil national de gouvernement (CNG), National Council of Govemment, composed of military officers and civilians. The new govemment took a number of measures with the declared aim of improving respect for human rights. However, with very few exceptions, it took no action to investigate the widespread human rights abuses which had taken place under previous govemments, despite well-documented evidence in many cases of the involvement of members of the security forces. Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned after Febmary about reports of the short-term detention of prisoners of conscience; the torture and ill-treatment of detainees; at least two "disappearances"; and about trials which did not conform to internationally recognized standards of fairness.
In the weeks before the overthrow of Jean-Claude Duvalier, protesters were indiscriminately killed by security forces and suspected opponents of the govemment were arbitrarily arrested, tortured or made to "disappear" in large numbers, against a background of generalized popular protest and demonstrations calling for an end to the Duvalier family's 29-year mie. Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of a number of the victims, such as Gabriel Hérard and Jacques Emmanuel Bonheur, members of the Parti démocrate chrétien haïtien (PDCH), Haitian Christian Democrat Party, who were arrested by security forces at the end of December 1985, and Augustin Auguste, another PDCH member, who was arrested on 28 January by members of the Volontaires de la sécurité nationale (VSN), National Security Volunteers, commonly known as tontons macoutes. Gabriel Hérard was released on 8 Febmary, but Jacques Emmanuel Bonheur and Augustin Auguste remained "disappeared".
After 7 Febmary when the CNG, headed by former Army Chief of Staff Henri Namphy, took power, a number of measures aimed at improving respect for human rights were implemented. On 7 Febmary, 26 political prisoner, most of whom had been held without charge or trial, were released from the National Penitentiary. It was announced that there were no political prisoners left in detention. On
174	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
13 February Amnesty International telexed the new govemment welcoming the releases of the political prisoners, among whom were a number of prisoners of conscience. However, Amnesty Intemational was concerned that those arrested in previous years who had "disappeared" were not among those released. It urged the new government to initiate thorough and impartial investigations into the fate of the "disappeared" and to prevent recurrence of such violations and, wherever possible, to compensate the victims.
The new govemment also brought in laws relating to a number of freedoms, including freedom of the press, association and assembly, which were previously unknown or severely limited. Dozens of new civic associations were formed, some of which were concemed with the protection of human rights, for example the Comité féminin de lutte contre la torture. Women's Committee against Torture; the Ligue des anciens prisonniers politiques haïtiens (LAPPH), League of Former Haitian Political Prisoners, and the Centre haïtien de défense des libertés publiques, Haitian Centre for the Defence of Public Liberty. Trade unions were organized in many workplaces, political exiles were allowed to return, new newspapers and magazines started to circulate and television became accessible to political groups and new associations.
The CNG published a schedule of political reforms to culminate in a presidential election in Febmary 1988. A Constituent Assembly was elected in October and a plebiscite on the new constitution was announced for February 1987. Other political measures taken by the CNG were the introduction of laws governing political parties and the press, which were passed in July. The failure of the CNG to bring an end to human rights abuses by the security forces was illustrated by the numerous killings carried out by army units as a means of crowd control. On 19 March five people were reportedly killed by an army unit in Martissant on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince. In another incident on 26 April, at least six people were killed and some 50 wounded after soldiers opened fire on an authorized and peaceful march of relatives of victims of human rights violations as it approached Fort Dimanche military barracks and prison in which hundreds of political prisoners had starved to death, been executed or "disappeared". Amnesty International appealed for an independent and impartial inquiry into the incident. The government announced that an inquiry would be carried out, but made it clear that it found the army's action a "normal reaction of enlisted soldiers ... in the face of an attempted invasion by individuals op)enly encouraged by agitators". An Amnesty International delegate in Haiti met the Minister of Justice within days of the incident and conveyed Amnesty Intemational's concems. The delegate also expressed concem about
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	175
continuing reports of ill-treatment of detainees, in particular at the Port-au-Prince police headquarters known as the Recherches criminelles. As far as Amnesty International was aware, the results of the announced government inquiry had not been made public by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International was not able to determine whether any of the prisoners still in detention at the end of 1986 were prisoners of conscience. In most cases the authorities did not bring the detainees before a judge or reveal the grounds for the detention. Amnesty International was, however, concerned about numerous short-term arrests of members of opposition political parties and associations, journalists, church workers and people involved in literacy campaigns, youth and other grassroots organizations. In April, according to the Haitian Centre for the Defence of Public Liberty, Pasteur Paul, a Baptist Minister, was held for eight days and beaten at the Recherches criminelles and then released without charge or explanation. Himler Laguerre, a member of the Association of Youth of the City of Aquin, was arrested by the army on 8 September and reportedly beaten in detention. He was released without charge on 8 October. Marie-Paule Jeune, a member of Racine, a grassroots organization, was taken to the Casernes Dessalines military barracks after being arrested at a rally on 18 October. She was beaten before being released, two days later. Jean Paul Duperval and José Sinai, two members of the Komite Inite Demokratik (KID), Committee for Democratic Unity, and Jean Robert Laforêt, a journalist at Radio Cacique, were arrested on 17 October when the two KID members announced that they were going on hunger-strike to protest against the conditions in which the Constituent Assembly elections were to be held on 19 October. Jean Robert Laforêt was covering the story for the radio station. The three were reportedly taken to the Casernes Dessalines. The journalist was released the same day, the other two on 20 October. Many other people were arrested in other parts of the country, including Cap Haïtien. Préméus Jasmin, a literacy worker, was arrested on 7 October without a warrant, beaten and held for several days. As in the other cases mentioned, he was apparently arrested because of his political views.
Amnesty International was concerned that, with very few exceptions, no action was taken by the government or the courts to investigate the human rights abuses which took place before 7 February, in spite of the well-documented evidence in many cases of the involvement of named members of the security forces in abuses not only before but also after the CNG took power. The organization received reports of at least two "disappearances" following arrest by the security forces after February. Chariot Jacquelin was arrested on
176	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
19 September in Cité Soleil, a shanty town on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince. Two men, one in civilian clothes and one dressed in olive green (normally worn by the military), were said to have entered his home while police officers in blue uniforms (worn by the Port-au-Prince police) waited outside. Chariot Jacquelin was taken to the local police station at Cité Soleil, where shortly afterwards eight police officers arrived and took him away to an unknown destination. In response to appeals from Amnesty Intemational, the Director of Judicial Affairs at the Ministry of Justice wrote on 21 October enclosing a communique issued by the headquarters of the Haitian armed forces on 30 September, which said that "the case of Chariot Jacquelin is unknown to the Port-au-Prince Police Headquarters". Chariot Jacquelin had been working as a literacy teacher on a church-mn project.
In July an Amnesty International delegate visited Haiti to gather information about the trials of several members of the governments of François Duvalier and Jean-Claude Duvalier. The organization wished to assess the fairness of the proceedings and to obtain information brought out at the trial about the widespread human rights violations which occurred under those govemments. The delegate attended the trial of Edouard C. Paul, former director of the Office national d'alphabétisation et d'action communautaire (ONAAC), National Office for Literacy and Community Action, charged in connection with the killing in March 1969 of Pierre Denis, a suspected Communist Party member. The jury found Edouard C. Paul guilty of complicity in the murder of Pierre Denis, and the judge sentenced him to three years' imprisonment. Amnesty International's delegate also studied the proceedings of the court martial of Colonel Samuel Jérémie, who was charged with beating, shooting and killing several demonstrators in Léogâne on 31 January 1986. On 30 May he was found guilty and sentenced to 15 years' hard labour. Another trial studied by the delegate was that of Luc Désir, close collaborator in security matters with both previous "Presidents-for-Life". The trial lasted 16 hours without interruption and ended at around 4.15 am on 6 July. Luc Désir was sentenced to death for the illegal arrest, torture and murder of three people suspected of being political opponents of François Duvalier. In the opinion of Amnesty International's delegate, the proceedings in the trials of Luc Désir and Edouard C. Paul were not marked by the solemnity and order required for a fair hearing. Furthermore, there were grounds for doubting the impartiality of the jury in the trial of Luc Désir: their questions revealed a bias against the defendant which was shared by the partisan crowd in the courtroom. These two trials were initiated by the victims' families. Amnesty International was concerned that there was no evidence that
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	177
the government had actively helped the investigations by seeking government records or conducting interviews with police and army officers who might have had evidence to offer. Amnesty International urged the government to establish an independent commission of inquiry to investigate past human rights abuses, particularly since named members of the army allegedly involved in serious abuses were still in active service.
Amnesty International received reports of the continued use of torture and other cruel and inhuman treatment of both pKDlitical and criminal suspects in prisons and other detention facilities. Wilnor Lapatrie, according to his own testimony, was arrested on 6 August by an army officer and two soldiers after he had been denounced as being a leader of the disbanded ionioni macoutes. He was taken to a local police station where he was tied in the position known as the ''djak" or "/7flM d'arara" (parrot perch) and repeatedly beaten with a stick. The following day he was transferred to Fort Dimanche where he remained for 11 days in a cell with no bed and with practically no food. Although he was injured by the beating, he was not given any medical treatment. He was released after he agreed to pay a fine.
However, the most frequent allegations of torture and other forms of ill-treatment concerned detainees held in the Recherches criminelles. For example, Benito Eddy, a member of the PDCH, alleged that he was arrested without warrant on 6 August and taken to the Recherches criminelles where he was beaten and kept in a small cell with 14 other prisonere, and where he remained for nine days before being released without charge. He said he saw three prisoners die, apparently as a consequence of lack of food and ill-treatment. Benito Eddy reportedly made a complaint to the Ministry of Justice, but Amnesty International was not aware of any inquiry being ordered, or of any general measures being taken to prevent ill-treatment of detainees.
Amnesty International submitted information to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
178	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
