Senegal
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of possible prisoners of conscience and reports of ill-treatment of prisoners.
Thirty-three people who had been among 105 people tried in 1985 for alleged participation in violent events in the Casamance region (see Amnesty International Report 1986) were sentenced in January to prison terms ranging from two years to life imprisonment, although in one case the sentence was suspended. An Amnesty International observer attended part of the trial. A number of those brought to trial were alleged to have been tortured or ill-treated after arrest, but no formal inquiry into the allegations was undertaken by the authorities. An Amnesty International delegate who visited Senegal before the trial had noted scars consistent with such allegations. In October the Minister of Justice observed that such scars might have been received in clashes with police at the time of arrest. However, those interviewed by Amnesty International's delegate all claimed to have been beaten or otherwise ill-treated in police custody. Moreover, Amnesty International's delegate had noted that a fairly high proportion of the arrests appeared to have taken place some time after the demonstrations, and that many were alleged to have been arbitrary. At least seven prisoners died before the trial but no formal inquests appeared to have been conducted.
On the 26th anniversary of independence in April, President Diouf announced that eight people sentenced for their part in the Casamance events of 1982 and 1983 were to be amnestied. A similar measure led to the release of Moustapha Toure, a transport union leader, and nine other trade unionists sentenced to prison terms after strike action in September 1985. On 27 March Boubacar Diop, editor of Promotion magazine, was released from detention. He had been
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
93
arrested on 9 August 1985, accused of insulting republican institutions and the head of state, and of spreading false information, after publishing an interview with an opposition personality.
On 1 October Amnesty International wrote to President Abdou Diouf asking the reasons for the arrest of El Hadj Mamadou Sow Sarr on 20 July and about his state of health. Amnesty International had learned that he was accused of having distributed copies of Fernent, a newspaper critical of the government, and was charged on 1 August with state security offences and distributing unauthorized literature. He was tried by the State Security Court in November and received a four-month prison sentence. However, he was released on 1 December in view of the time he had already been held.
Further arrests took place in the Casamance region in November and December. At least 40 people were known to have been transferred to Dakar awaiting trial. They were charged with offences against state security and with founding an illegal association.
