France
Amnesty International's principal concems were the forcible return of refugees who might face torture or ill-treatment in their country of origin; the imprisormient of conscientious objectors to military service and the progress of judicial inquiries into the violent deaths of political figures in the overseas territory of New Caledonia.
The new govemment elected in March 1986 announced its intention to reform the laws relating to the fight against crime, delinquency and terrorism. A new law was passed in September tightening the conditions of residence and acce^ by foreigners to France. This aspect of the projected legal reforms was of concem to Amnesty International when taken together with ministerial statements forecasting a change in French policy towards political refugees.
France has traditionally been unwilling to expel Spanish citizens of Basque origin when they claimed to be political refugees. On 19 July José Varona López, a Basque refugee, was expelled by administrative order under the procedure of "absolute urgency" {"urgence absolue") on the grounds that the French authorities considered his expulsion "an urgent necessity for the security of the State or the safety of the public". He was not accused of any offence at that time in either France or Spain. On 20 July the French Foreign Minister stated that there might be further expulsions and that José Varona López was not a political refugee. On 23 July another Basque refugee was expelled under the same procedure. Both were handed over to the Spanish police, arrested and held incommunicado under the anti-terrorist law. On 25 July Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister about these two expellees who were, in its opinion, in danger of torture or ill-treatment. Subsequently, Amnesty Intemational received reports from Madrid that following interrogation both men had alleged in court that they had been tortured. (See Spain entry.) On 1 August Amnesty International raised these reports with the govemment and urged it to review its p>olicy. The letter referred
290	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
to Article 3 of the UN Convention Against Torture, which was ratified by France on 18 February 1986, which states that a person must not be expelled to another state where there are substantial grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger of being subjected to torture. However, expulsions of Basques to Spain continued, with many of them making substantive allegations of torture and ill-treatment. The French Prime Minister replied to Amnesty International on 21 August citing the legal requirements that had to be fulfilled before a person could be expelled and pointing out that this procedure could only be used when the foreigner was not the subject of legal proceedings in another country; otherwise extradition was required. He emphasized that Spain was a democratic country which had accepted its human rights obligations under international law but did not comment on the allegations of ill-treatment.
Amnesty International was equally concerned about the possible extradition of Basque political refugees to Spain, because of the danger of torture and ill-treatment. In July José Maria Bereciartua was detained pending a decision as to whether France would agree to his extradition on charges of murder and related crimes. He had lived in France since 1973 as an officially recognized political refugee under the terms of the 1951 Geneva Convention. This status was withdrawn in 1979 because the French authorities considered that the altered political situation in Spain meant that he no longer required protection. However, he successfully appealed against this decision and his status as an officially recognized political refugee was restored in July 1984. On 2 December Amnesty International wrote to the Government asking it to obtain procedural guarantees from the Spanish Government before coming to any decision on extradition, ensuring that José María Bereciartua would not be tortured.
On 9 September the Minister Delegate for Security in the Ministry of the Interior declared that, in his view, the regulations protecting political refugee status in France no longer applied to nationals of any state within the European Community.
A new law on conditions of entry and residency in France was promulgated in September 1986. This retained the powers of expulsion by administrative order but widened its application to include all those whose presence, in the view of the authorities, "constitutes a particularly serious threat to public order".
By the end of 1986, 26 Basques had been expelled from France to Spain and a further six were the subject of extradition requests by the Government of Spain. Decisions on these extraditions were still pending at the end of 1986 and all six remained in detention.
Amnesty International adopted five conscientious objectors to military service as prisoners of conscience and continued to work for
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	291
the release from prison of two others. Bruno Poirier had informed the Ministry of Defence that he was opposed to any kind of armed service because of his non-violent beliefs but that he was not opposed to doing alternative civilian service. His application was rejected because it was incorrectly worded. His new application was not accepted because it was sent after the statutory time limit. In March he was given a one-month suspended sentence by the tribunal of Bordeaux for refusal to obey, and was also sentenced to 160 hours of community work. Immediately after completing this sentence he was rearrested by the military authorities and spent a total of 40 days in isolation for refusing to wear military uniform. In June the Court of Appeal sentenced him to 15 months' imprisonment for refusing to respond to call-up orders and he was in prison at the end of 1986.
There were several outbreaks of violence in the French overseas territory of New Caledonia between groups led by the Kanak Socialist Nationalist Liberation Front (FLNKS), advocating full independence, and anti-independence groups. In September an investigating magistrate of the court in Noumea ruled that there were no grounds for the prosecution of eight men charged with killing 10 Kanak men, among them two brothers of the FLNKS leader, Jean-Marie Tjibaou, in Hienghene in December 1984. The eight men did not deny their involvement in the killings but the judge ruled that they had acted in self-defence. On 23 October Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice expressing concern that the judge might not have examined all the available evidence and that failure to carry out a thorough and impartial investigation into these killings might give the impression that the govemment condoned them. The Attorney General and the plaintiffs (partie civile) appealed against the ruling. On 20 November the Appeal Court quashed it and ordered seven people to stand trial. The Minister of Justice informed Amnesty International of this decision on 5 December. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the length of time taken by the courts to investigate the violent deaths of political activists. A judicial investigation was opened in January 1985 into the killings earlier that month by marksmen of the Groupe d'intervention de la gendarmerie nationale (GIGN), Intervention Group of the National Police, of two FLNKS activists, Eloi Machoro and Marcel Nonnaro (see Amnesty International Report 1986 and Errata). The court had still not reached a conclusion by the end of 1986. Furthermore, there was no apparent progress in the judicial investigation into the killing in 1981 of Pierre Declercq, leader of the pro-independence party, Union calédonienne, Caledonian Union.
292	Amnesty International Report 1967 Europe
