Swaziland
Amnesty International was concerned about the death penalty and about the forcible abduction from Swaziland of suspected opponents of the South African Government.
At the beginning of January Amnesty International welcomed the release of former Finance Minister Sishayi Nxumalo and four other prisoners of conscience released from detention on 31 December 1985. At the same time. Amnesty International urged the government to abolish the renewable 60-day detention provision under which they had been held for a year, or to amend it in accordance with the requirements of international human rights law. The detention provision was not known to have been used in 1986, but it had not been amended by the end of the year.
In May Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini, a member of the royal family, and former Police Commissioner Majaji Simelane were tried and convicted in the High Court on charges of defeating the ends of justice. They were alleged to have fabricated accusations of treason against Sishayi Nxumalo and four others for political reasons. They were sentenced to seven and five years' imprisonment respectively.
The year was marked by continuing insecurity for South African refugees and exiles resident in Swaziland. Some alleged members of the African National Congress (ANC) of South Africa were arrested but deported to other African countries by the Swazi authorities, but other alleged opponents of the South African Government, including suspected ANC supporters, were the target of assassination or abduction by South African security forces. In some of these cases, there was a suspicion of collusion between local police officers and those responsible for the attacks. In early June three South African exiles were shot dead by what was officially described as a "hit squad" believed to have entered the country from South Africa. The same month, Sidney Msibi, an ANC member, was abducted from Manzini by South African agents. He was held incommunicado in South Africa until November, when he was released shortly before a legal challenge to his detention was to be heard in the South African Supreme Court.
In August an ANC member was taken by unidentified armed men from Mankayane police station to which he had been transferred shortly before. The ANC denied that they had freed him and it appeared that he too might have been abducted to South Africa.
Further abductions occurred in December when six people were
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
109
seized by South African security forces in night raids on houses in Manzini and Mbabane. Danger Nyoni, a Swazi national whose 13-year-old son was shot dead by his kidnappers, was released within a few hours and two Swiss nationals, Corinne Bischoff and Daniel Schneider, were released and returned from South Africa two days after their abduction. Another victim, Matthews Maphumulo, a registered refugee, was reported to have been killed by his abductors. Two others, Grace Cele, also a registered refugee, and Ismail Ibrahim, an alleged member of the ANC, were still detained in South Africa at the end of 1986. Amnesty International feared that they might be tortured.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of the death penalty. However, there were no precise figures on the number of people sentenced to death and it was not known whether any executions took place. On 29 April it was reported that all death sentences then in force had been commuted at the initiative of Queen Regent Ntombi to mark the coronation of her son. Prince Makhose-tive, as King Mswati III. Amnesty International welcomed this act of clemency but received no response from the government to its request for information on the number and identities of the prisoners who benefited.
