Cuba
i/^	Amnesty Intemational continued to
r^ Á—, «v-^ca- • ^ ^^ concerned about the detention of
prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, prolonged incommunicado detention, detention without trial, and prison conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
Following the intercession of French oceanographer Jacques Cousteau, about 33 prisoners were released in May, including Raúl Pérez Ribalta who had been sentenced in 1979 to 20 years'
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	151
imprisonment for espionage and whose case Amnesty Intemational had been investigating (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In September, 69 former prisoners who had been released as a result of the intervention of a delegation of US Catholic Bishops arrived in the USA. Most had been released between July and September, although a few had been released during 1984 and 1985. Many had been long-term prisoners who had been arrested in the late 195(k and early 196i3s, and who had been given sentences of up to 30 years' imprisonment. Other prisoners were released individually either upon expiry of their sentence or, in some cases, before; for example. Bay of Pigs (Playa Girón) veterans Ricardo Montero Duque and Ramón Conte Hernández, and former revolutionary leader Eloy Gutiérrez Menoyo, who was released following the intervention of Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González.
At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational knew of approximately 450 political prisoners, of whom 10 were adopted as prisoners of conscience. It was seeking further information on a number of other cases. The organization had only fragmentary information on most of the 450, who included some 80 ""plantados históricos'' ("historical plantados''), convicted in the 1960s, and a group of at least 43 ""nuevos plantados" ("new plantados"), mostly convicted in the 1980s. ""Plantados" is the unofficial term for prisoners who refuse on political grounds to obey certain prison regulations such as wearing prison uniforms worn by ordinary criminal prisoners. Both the historical plantados and the new plantados were held on a variety of charges such as sabotage, espionage, conspiracy to overthrow the government, trying to leave the country illegally and "enemy propaganda".
On 22 September Elizardo Sánchez, Vice-President of the unofficial Comité Cubano Pro Derechos Humanos (CCPDH), Cuban Committee for Human Rights, gave an interview to two foreign journalists in Havana, in which he denounced the arrests of CCPDH members Dr Domingo Delgado Fernández and José Luis Alvarado Delgado in the week before 27 August, when Ricardo Bofill Pagés, President of the CCPDH, sought refuge in the French Embassy in Havana. On 25 September Elizardo Sánchez was himself arrested, together with CCPDH members Adolfo Rivero Caro and Enrique Hernández. The journalists were expelled from the country on the same day. The five men detained were all thought to have been taken to the headquarters of the Departamento de Seguridad del Estado (DSE), Department of State Security Police, in Havana, also known as Villa Marista. Amnesty International received reports suggesting that they were ill-treated during the initial period of detention. In early November Elizardo Sánchez was transferred to the military hospital after going on hunger-strike for a week. His treatment was
152	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
said to have improved once he was in hospital, where he was allowed weekly visits from his mother. Adolfo Rivero Caro and Enrique Hernández received at least one or two visits from relatives at the DSE headquarters where they were still thought to be held at the end of 1986. The place of detention of Domingo Delgado and José Luis Alvarado at the end of the year was not clear, although some reports suggested that after they had both been released conditionally from prison a few months earlier, they had been returned to Combinado del Este prison on the outskirts of Havana, the main detention centre for political offenders. All five CCPDH members had been arrested on previous occasions, and in the cases of Elizardo Sánchez and Adolfo Rivero Caro, Amnesty International had taken action on their behalf. By the end of 1986 none of the five had been charged and all were still in detention, in apparent violation of the Cuban Code of Penal Procedure, which stipulates that detainees must be formally informed of the charges against them within 10 days of arrest. Amnesty International appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of the five on the grounds that they were prisoners of conscience.
Another prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International during the year was Andrés José Solares Teseiro, who was arrested on 5 November 1981. He was sentenced by the Sala de Delitos contra la Seguridad del Estado del Tribunal Provincial Popular de La Habana, Court of Crimes against State Security of the Havana Province People's Tribunal, to eight years' imprisonment on charges of "enemy propaganda", on the grounds that he was thinking of organizing a political party in opposition to the Cuban Communist Party, and that he had drafted several letters about this to eminent personalities abroad asking for their opinions. All the documents seized by the authorities, which appeared to be the only evidence produced against him, were ordered by the court to be burned after the trial.
Rafael Lanza, another adopted prisoner of conscience, was arrested in 1982 and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment, also for "enemy propaganda". He was reportedly accused of writing a number of letters to diplomats in Havana in which he criticized the economic, social and human rights record of the Cuban Government.
Other prisoners of conscience convicted of "enemy propaganda" whom Amnesty International adopted during 1986 were Julio Vento Roberes, arrested in 1982 and sentenced to six or eight years' imprisonment, apparently on the grounds that he had drawn cartoons considered detrimental to the government and to the person of Fidel Castro in particular; Pascual Andrés Hernández Murguía, arrested in 1982 and sentenced to six years' imprisonment, reportedly for having
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	153
expressed ideas considered detrimental to the state, both in writing and in conversations with friends; and Gregorio Peña Estrabao, arrested in July 1982 and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. The charge against him was reportedly based on a letter he had received from abroad which contained a press cutting criticizing the Cuban Government. (He had previously been arrested in 1979 for trying to leave the country illegally.)
Amnesty International was investigating the case of Dr Alfredo Samuel Martinez Lara, a psychiatrist, formerly employed at the Calixto García Hospital in Havana and at the Instituto de Investigaciones Científicas sobre el Cerebro, Institute of Scientific Research on the Brain. Arrested in September, he was still held in the DSE headquarters on unknown charges at the end of 1986. Some reports suggested that he might have been detained after providing foreign journalists with information. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities asking for information on the precise charges against him, but received no reply.
Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of brothers Sebastián and Gustavo Arcos Bergnes, arrested in December 1981 when they were trying to leave the country illegally, after having tried for many years to obtain permission to leave. Amnesty International was concerned about reports that Gustavo Arcos was suffering from high blood pressure and had lost a lot of weight. He and his brother had been kept in cells known as '"los candados" ("padlocked" cells), described by former prisoners as dark and wet. Gustavo Arcos was allegedly not being given appropriate treatment for his medical problem, which was aggravated by prison conditions. The organization also sought information about the health of prisoners of conscience Edmigio López Castillo, who was reportedly suffering from glaucoma and hypertension, and Ariel Hidalgo Guillén, who reportedly went on hunger-strike in protest at the arrest of the five CCPDH members. Amnesty International also continued to appeal for their immediate and unconditional release.
The conditions in which long-term political prisoners were confined continued to be of concern to Amnesty International. In January, 19 plantados went on hunger-strike in Combinado del Este prison. They were protesting at the suspension of six-monthly visits normally permitted to one family member, at being kept in small cells without ventilation, at the lack of medical attention, and at the existence of punishment cells where detainees were reportedly sent for periods of up to 21 days for making their demands known. Amnesty International did not know how long the hunger-strike lasted or whether conditions improved as a result.
The plantados' grievances were consistent with a number of
154
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
testimonies which Amnesty Intemational had received over the years on conditions in Cuban prisons. Lázaro Jordana, an art teacher, was sentenced after his arrest in March 1980 to 20 years' imprisonment on charges of trying to leave the country illegally and piracy, and was released in May. He described to Amnesty International his detention in a punishment cell in Combinado del Este prison after he had smuggled some drawings out of the prison. Between April and September or October 1984 he was kept in solitary confinement in a small cell with no clothes other than his underwear, and no bed. After two or three months and a hunger-strike his clothes were returned and he was given a sheet and mattress. The only light in the cell came from a light bulb which at one point broke and was not replaced for a week, during which time only very faint light filtered through the small hole through which his daily meals were passed. During his time in solitary confinement Lázaro Jordana was kept incommunicado and received no visitors.
Amnesty International received reports of the release and subsequent departure from the country of two political prisoners, Silvino Rodriguez Barrientos and Guillermo Casasús Toledo, who had been forcibly removed from Boniato prison in May 1983 and taken to an unknown destination (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In a public testimony Silvino Rodriguez said they were taken to the DSE building in Santiago de Cuba from where he was transferred after 54 days to the DSE headquarters in Havana. He said he spent a total of 18 months in solitary confinement during which he had no contact with the outside world, before being taken back to Boniato. Amnesty Intemational had repeatedly asked the govemment (without receiving any reply) to disclose the whereabouts of these two prisoners since they had been removed from their cells.
