Iran
In 1986 Amnesty International recorded 115 executions for political and criminal offences, but believed the actual figure was much higher; political prisoners were sentenced in unfair trials held in camera with no access to a lawyer or right of appeal; and an unknown number of people believed to be prisoners of conscience continued to be incarcerated. Reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees continued to be received, and the organization recorded a number of cases of stoning to death, amputation of fingers, mutilation and flogging, carried out as forms of judicial punishment.
In a memorandum to the govemment dated 8 August, Amnesty Intemational examined provisions of Iran's Islamic Penal Code in the light of intemational human rights standards, including the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Iran is a party, and submitted a series of 10 related recommendations. Amnesty Intemational pointed out that many punishments provided for in the penal code, such as stoning to death, cmcifixion, mutilation, amputation and flogging, constituted cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Amnesty Intemational recommended that they be replaced by other more humane punishments, consistent with intemational standards for the treatment and punishment of offenders. Other recommendations included a review of the use of confessions as a primary method of proof, which Amnesty Intemational feared encouraged the use of torture or ill-treatment during interrogation, and of legislation which could be used to incarcerate prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International was particularly concerned that there appeared to be no legal limit to incommunicado detention, and urged a review of the p)enal procedural code to ensure the protection of detainees from torture, and the right to a fair and prompt trial. Amnesty Intemational stated that it wished to contribute to the discussion in Iran before the final approval of the Islamic Penal Code of Iran, which had initially been approved for a five-year trial period and was to undergo a procès of assessment before it was finally approved.
A second memorandum, dated 20 November, was sent to the authorities explaining Amnesty International's concems in Iran: the incarceration of prisoners of conscience; the practice of arbitrary arrest and detention on political grounds; unfair trials of political prisoners; the use of torture and ill-treatment; and the application of
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	341
the death penalty and other judicial punishments constituting torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Amnesty Intemational again made a series of recommendations to the Iranian authorities to improve respect for human rights.
Amnesty Intemational sought comments on the two memoranda and proposed that they should be the basis for discussions between the organization and the govemment. It was ready to send a delegation to Tehran specifically for this purpose. Amnesty Intemational requested a response by 31 December but none was received.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational recorded 115 executions, some of which were carried out in public. The organization did not believe that this figure represented the actual number of executions, which was probably considerably higher. Nevertheless, the figure was substantially lower than those recorded in previous years. Amnesty Intemational continued throughout 1986 to appeal for an end to executions and for the death penalty to be replaced by altemative punishments. In most cases, as in previous years. Amnesty Intemational did not leam about death sentences until after execution had taken place. However, in some political and criminal cases in which news of death sentences reached the organization before execution took place. Amnesty Intemational appealed for their commutation. Among those executed during 1986 were members of various political groups and organizations, as well as three members of the Baha'i faith. Since the early 1980s most executions of suspected opposition activists have not been officially announced, and the majority of the executions recorded have been reportedly for criminal offences such as murder and drug trafficking. However, Amnesty Intemational has received reports that some of those executed in recent years ostensibly for such criminal offences were in fact punished for their political activities. Most executions in Iran were by hanging or firing-squad but Amnesty Intemational learned of six men and two women who were executed by stoning to death. They had been convicted on charges which included adultery, organizing prostitution and murder. Several other sentences of stoning were recorded but it was not known if they were carried out.
Amnesty International learned of hundreds of political arrests during 1986. Reports of releases of political prisoners or reductions in their sentences also reached the organization. Thousands of political prisoners were believed to be held but, as in previous years. Amnesty Intemational was not able to estimate their number, nor how many were prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International's memorandum of 20 November called for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience, and for an end to arbitrary arrest and detention on political grounds. Amnesty Intemational was concemed
342	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
that some prisoners who had completed their prison sentences nevertheless remained incarcerated.
In July a number of leading members of the medical profession and doctors throughout the country were arrested after a strike in protest against govemment measures to close down the elected goveming body of their professional association, and to introduce a parliamentary bill which would significantly reduce the association's autonomy. Some of those arrested were elderly and in poor health. Amnesty Intemational called for the immediate release of the arrested doctors who, it believed, had been detained as a result of their non-violent opposition to changes within their professional association. Most were released shortly afterwards, but several former board members, including the Secretary General, were sentenced to terms of intemal exile of between 12 and 18 months. Other political arrests included those of suspected members of opposition organizations.
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the conduct of political trials, which appeared to be summary and provided no right of appeal. Virtually all political cases were heard by Islamic Revolutionary Courts. Amnesty Intemational believed that the regulations goveming these courts did not guarantee a fair trial and that, in practice, even the safeguards provided by the regulations were not adhered to. The organization was particularly concemed that political detainees had no access at any stage of the judicial process to a defence lawyer and that trial proceedings were held in camera. Many political defendants were not told in advance what the charges against them were, and were not allowed to present evidence in their defence, such as calling witnesses. Amnesty Intemational considered that such procedures fell far short of internationally accepted standards for fair trial, including those set down in Article 14 of the ICCPR. Amnesty Intemational's memorandum and recommendations to the govemment set out the minimum standards for a fair trial, to include, among other things, the right to a defence lawyer of the detainee's own choosing and the right to appeal against conviction and sentence.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of physical and psychological torture of political detainees in prisons and detention centres throughout the country despite the constitutional provision forbidding such practices. The organization had received hundreds of reports of torture and ill-treatment over recent years. The detail in these reports, their number and their consistency made it clear that torture had been widespread, and that in some prisons and detention centres it had been routinely practised. Torture took place, according to Amnesty Intemational's information, immediately after arrest and during incommunicado detention. Torture was usually inflicted on
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	343
prisoners in order to extract confessions about political activities, and names of political activists. Another motive for torture was to induce prisoners to renounce their political or religious beliefs and sometimes to appear on television denouncing their former views. The methods most commonly reported to Amnesty International were beating, whipping and being suspended for long periods by the arms or wrists.
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued use of punishments such as flogging for a wide range of offences, and amputation of fingers for repeated acts of theft. Some floggings were carried out immediately after sentencing, with no possibility of appeal against verdict or sentence. Amnesty International recorded II cases of judicially imposed amputation in 1985 and the first half of 1986. In May a convicted thief had four fingers of his right hand severed by a special machine, in front of reporters, legal officials and prisoners, in Mashad. Amnesty International also recorded a number of cases in which prisoners were flogged before being executed. Amnesty Intemationars memorandum urged a prompt and thorough review of the training of law enforcement officials, proposed detailed measures to safeguard detainees from torture or ill-treatment, in particular limits to incommunicado detention, and called for an independent investigation into all allegations of such treatment with a view to compensating the victims and bringing those responsible to justice.
In February Amnesty International submitted a written statement to the 42nd session of the UN Commission on Human Rights. The statement summarized the organization's concerns and called on the Iranian authorities to comply with international human rights standards to which they were committed. In March the commission voted to extend for a further year the mandate of the Special Representative to monitor the human rights situation in Iran.
On 4 December the UN General Assembly adopted Resolution 41/159, noting the interim report submitted by the newly appointed Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights on the human rights siguation in Iran. The report expressed concern over the specific and detailed allegations of violations of human rights and urged the Government of Iran to uphold the rights in the ICCPR. The resolution urged the government to allow the Special Representative to visit the country, and concluded with a decision to continue to examine the human rights situation in Iran at the 42nd session of the General Assembly.
344	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
