Argentina
Amnesty International continued to follow the trials of members of the security forces accused of gross human rights violations, including the torture and "disappearance" of thousands of individuals, during the period of military rule between 1976 and 1983. The organization's concern was that the truth regarding the fate of the "disappeared" should be established and the rights of the defendants respected. During 1986 Amnesty International monitored official guidelines and new legislation introduced by the government to limit further prosecutions linked to past abuses. Amnesty International also followed the progress of investigations to trace the whereabouts of approximately 100 children who "disappeared" with their parents or were believed to have been bom in secret detention centres. (See Amnesty International Report 1986.) A further concern was the continued imprisonment of people convicted of ix)litically motivated crimes in unfair trials under the former government.
During 1986 Amnesty International continued to follow developments in more than 600 cases before the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces - the highest military court in Argentina - which had jurisdiction over all cases involving members of the police, military and security forces accused of offences committed between 1976 and 1982 in the course of anti-subversive operations. Proceedings before the Supreme Council were conducted in camera but Amnesty International received information that by the end of 1986 no progress had been made in the majority of the cases. Following reforms to the Code of Military Justice introduced in 1984, all judgments of the Supreme Council in such cases were subject to
130	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
review by civilian appeals courts, which were also empowered to take over a trial if there was evidence of unwarranted delay or negligence. Several major trials were in fact taken over by civilian appeals courts during 1986. On 24 April the Minister of Defence issued a series of instructions to the Military Prosecutor of the Supreme Council. The Military Prosecutor was directed to exempt all lower-ranking officers from prosecution on the grounds that they had been obeying orders, except where there was evidence that they had committed atrocities or exceeded their orders. Furthermore, the Military Prosecutor was to call for acquittal or order the case to be dropped whenever superior officers had already been acquitted of corresponding offences. Apparently in response to public criticism, on 1 May President Alfonsin announced to Congress that new instructions would be issued concerning prosecutions of those who could not necessarily claim to have been obeying orders.
While clarification of the government's instructions was awaited, prosecutions of former military officers were taken over by the Federal Criminal Appeals Courts from the Supreme Council. One such was the case against retired General Ramon Camps, Chief of Police in Buenos Aires Province between 1976 and 1979, and six former members of the police and army. This was the first trial involving senior, middle- and lower-ranking officers. The charges against the defendants included 32 murders, 120 cases of torture, two of torture leading to miscarriage, 214 kidnappings for ransom and the subsequent "disappearance" of 47 of the victims and 10 kidnapping of minors. The hearings before the Federal Criminal Appeals Court in Buenos Aires began in September and on 2 December General Camps was found guilty and sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment on 73 charges of torture. His deputy, Miguel Etchecolatz, received a 23-year sentence on more than 90 counts of torture and General Camps' successor as police chief, General Ovidio Riccheri, was sentenced to 14 years on 20 torture charges. Two retired senior police officers were acquitted and two junior officers — police doctor Jorge Berges and Corporal Norberto Cozzani — received prison sentences of six years and four years respectively. The convictions were seen by Argentine jurists as a landmark decision in that responsibility for human rights abuses had been extended to lower-ranking military and police officials. The judges' ruling clarified the principle of "due obedience". The court rejected the defence plea that some military officers should be acquitted of human rights crimes because they were acting under orders from junta members and superior officers. In its ruling the court stated that "there is no authority superior to the law" and upheld the principle that subordinates must disobey an order that does not conform with the law.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	131
Another major trial brought before the Federal Criminal Appeals Court of Buenos Aires was the prosecution of Navy Lieutenant Alfredo Astiz for the grievous wounding and abduction of 17-year-old Dagmar Hagelin, who had dual Swedish and Argentine nationality, in 1977 (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1986). Following a ruling by the Federal Criminal Appeals Court in 1985, proceedings against Lieutenant Astiz were reopened in the Supreme Council and in April the military court again brought in a verdict of not guilty for lack of evidence. On 5 December the Federal Criminal Appeals Court handed down its decision, which was to clear Lieutenant Astiz of the kidnapping and wounding of Dagmar Hageli, not for lack of evidence but because the six-year statute of limitations on the crime of kidnapping had expired.
On 9 December the government presented to Congress a draft bill — popularly known as the Punto Final (Full Stop) — proposing the introduction of a statute of limitations on future trials. The bill proposed that there should be no further prosecutions of members of the security and prison services for human rights violations committed before December 1983 unless the accused received a summons to testify in preliminary hearings within 60 days of the promulgation of the law. On 19 December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the leaders of both houses of Congress about the draft legislation. The organization was concerned that given the difficulty victims and their relatives had encountered in pursuing their complaints against members of the security forces, who in the past had been able to act in secrecy and with impunity, the proposed curtailment of judicial investigations might make it impossible to establish the truth. Amnesty International pointed out the Argentine Government's obligations under intemational law to investigate past abuses and urged members of Congress to take these obligations fully into account when considering the draft legislation. Despite widespread opposition. Congress approved the legislation which entered into force before the end of 1986. Congress introduced two amendments: the statute of limitations applied also to civilians who had participated in subversive acts against previous governments; and cases involving "disappeared" children were excluded. The courts had until 22 February 1987 to start further criminal prosecutions.
Amnesty International continued to study the cases of a group of prisoners who were convicted of politically motivated crimes of violence in the 1970s: those of 13 men in Villa Devoto Prison and of one woman in Ezeiza Prison (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Hernán Invernizzi and Juan Carlos Vallejos, two of the prisoners, were released by order of the Federal Criminal Appeals Courts of Buenos Aires and Rosario in May and September respectively. In
132
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
September Amnesty International wrote to President Alfonsin about the legal position of the remaining prisoners, whose trials the organization believed had failed to conform to internationally recognized standards. The prisoners were reportedly subjected to torture while in custody, testimonies extracted under duress were presented as evidence against them in the trials and they had been denied the right to an adequate defence. Amnesty International asked the government to consider a full judicial review of their trials. Draft legislation permitting a judicial review of the trials had not been debated by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International continued to monitor efforts to locate children reported missing after the abduction or killing of their parents by the military or security forces in the 1970s. Since 1977 the main organization concerned with this problem, the Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo, Grandmothers of Plaza de Mayo, formed by grandparents of missing children, had succeeded in tracing 39 children. Of these, four were knov i to have died; 18 were returned to their real families; nine were living with adoptive families but were in contact with remaining relatives; and, at the end of 1986, the cases of eight children were awaiting decisions by the courts.
Argentina ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the UN Convention Against Torture in August and September respectively.
