Liberia
Amnesty Internationa! was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government. An Amnesty International observer attended two major political trials in which the authorities attempted to deny a fair trial to the defendants, although all were eventually released. There was also concern that military personnel court-martialled for their alleged involvement in an attempted coup in November 1985 might not have received fair trials. At least one death sentence was imposed although it was not known if the sentence was carried out. Amnesty International continued to urge an impartial inquiry into the extrajudicial execution of journalist Charles Gbenyon, who was killed by government troops several days after the coup attempt.
At the beginning of 1986 several hundred people arrested after an attempt to overthrow the government on 12 November 1985 were still in detention. Many appeared to have had no involvement in the coup attempt but were arrested for their opposition to the government. Some of the several hundred soldiers detained were imprisoned, Amnesty International believed, because of their ethnic group rather than their involvement in the coup attempt. Many of them were from the Gio or Mano ethnic groups, reportedly victimized by members of the Khran ethnic group which is dominant in President Samuel Doe's administration. In June President Doe ordered the release of some of the soldiers detained without trial.
On 6 January, the day of his official inauguration, President Doe ordered the release of 19 of those arrested, some of whom Amnesty International considered to be prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience. Others were released later in January and February, among them Momolu Sirleaf, a publisher, and Isaac Bantu, a journalist. Several opposition politicians, including Jackson F. Doe, Chairman of the Liberian Action Party (LAP) and a candidate in the 1985 presidential elections were also released. However, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, another leading member of the LAP and former prisoner of conscience, was charged with treason and indicted by a grand jury on 2 April 1986. An Amnesty International observer who attended the committal proceedings re|X)rted that some jurors alleged that they had been threatened and offered bribes by court officials to indict her. She was released on the orders of President Doe in early June. In September, she left Liberia to seek
67	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
refuge abroad, reportedly after being threatened with death by a senior official of the ruling National Democratic Party of Liberia. Three other civilians were charged in 1986 with criminal offences associated with the attempted coup and brought to trial before civilian courts. A large number of others were tried in camera by court-martial. Most were believed to be soldiers, although details of individual trials were not available to Amnesty International.
The trial on charges of treason arising from the coup attempt of James Holder, Anthony Macquee and Robert Phillips began in February. They were alleged to have supplied weapons to the rebels. An Amnesty International observer reported that the trial judge was accused by jurors of having tried to influence them in favour of the prosecution by means of threats and bribes. Despite this, in early May the jury returned a unanimous verdict of not guilty with respect to James Holder and Robert Phillips. They were not released until June, when President Doe ordered them to be freed, together with Anthony Macquee and a number of others detained in the wake of the coup attempt. In February, Amnesty International had expressed concern to the government about reports that Robert Phillips had been tortured with electric shocks during his pre-trial detention. The government did not respond. Amnesty International subsequently learned that these reports were untrue, but did confirm that Robert Phillips had been ill-treated.
In July three opposition politicians — Jackson Doe, Gabriel Kpolleh and Edward Kessely — were detained for about two weeks, first in Monrovia, the capital, and then at the remote prison of Bella Yellah in Lx)fa County, for refusing to pay a fine of US$1,(XX). The fine had been imposed because they had formed a party coalition which was not registered with the authorities in the same way that their individual parties were. Amnesty International considered them to be prisoners of conscience. They were released when they paid the fine.
In September the death ¡penalty was extended to cover armed robbery, and the Minister of National Defence, General Gray Allison, announced that any soldier, or civilian in uniform, accused of armed robbery would be court-martialled and immediately executed if found guilty. It was not known if anyone was court-martialled and sentenced to death under this legislation in 1986. However, at least one person was sentenced to death after being convicted of murder. Amnesty International urged the government to grant clemency in all cases in which the death penalty was imposed.
68
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
