Colombia
Amnesty International's concerns centred on a sharp rise in extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". The victims were scores of students, teachers, trade unionists and supporters of opposition parties and civic movements, as well as alleged petty criminals, vagrants, squatters and homosexuals, believed to have numbered over a thousand. The government attributed most killings to "death squads": mysterious gunmen it described as civilians whom it could neither identify nor control. However, Amnesty International believed that actions attributed to "death squads" were in fact carried out by police and military personnel, sometimes in uniform, and by civilian gunmen working with them — acting on the apparent authority of the army high command. Long-standing concerns included persistent reports of torture, the failure of the authorities to account for hundreds of prisoners who had "disappeared" in recent years, and the paralysis of most announced investigations into "disappearances" and apparent extrajudicial executions. Amnesty International apf)ealed on behalf of 33 p)eople it
146	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
believed to be prisoners of conscience, most of them peasant farmers seized during land disputes who were released after relatively brief periods.
Execution-style killings of captives by several guerrilla groups were reported, in particular by the Frente Ricardo Franco, Ricardo Franco Front. Amnesty International condemns in all cases the torture or killing of captives — whether by governments or opposition groups.
Detention procedures leading to short-term or prolonged "disappearance" continued to be the norm in political cases, although detentions were frequently acknowledged by the authorities after some days or weeks. As a rule arrests by the military were not, to the knowledge of Amnesty International, acknowledged to civilians unless release or consignment to the courts was imminent. The civilian authorities had no access to military intelligence prisoner records.
The authority to punish human rights abuse was delegated exclusively to military courts. With few exceptions this meant that security force personnel and their civilian auxiliaries responsible for torture, "disappearances" or political killings operated with impunity. Those identified by civilian prosecutors as criminally liable in political cases generally remained in their posts, or, in some cases, were promoted: whenever civilian investigators found evidence involving police or military personnel, cases were transferred to military courts, where military prosecutors generally declined to pursue them.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 11 prisoners whose detentions were initially denied by the authorities. Some of these prisoners later described prolonged interrogations by military and National Police intelligence personnel involving physical and psychological torture: from threats of summary execution to systematic beatings, near-drowning and electric shocks. However, others remained missing. Jaime Casas, a teacher at a rural school in Norte de Santander department, was reportedly detained by soldiers of the "Garcia Rovira" Battalion on 22 March near Cubara, in Boyacá department. Army spokesmen denied any knowledge of his arrest. Edilberto Cardenas Cardenas was reportedly seized on 10 October in Bogotá by men in plain clothes travelling in an unmarked car, backed by two armed men on a motorcycle. Although uniformed police were also reportedly at the scene, in a stationary patrol car, they did not intervene. The authorities subsequently denied any responsibility.
Other "disappeared" prisoners were found dead, their bodies tortured or mutilated not long after their detention. Poet and singer Jesús Peña was seized by armed men believed to be members of the security services in Bucaramanga, Santander, on 4 May. He was found dead in a rural area two days later with his right hand cut off
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	147
and other mutilations. Other cases raised by Amnesty International were those of victims shot in their homes or in public where the method of the kiUing, the description of the killers, and the response of law enforcement agencies suggested official complicity. Amnesty Intemational issued repeated appeals for measures to halt the wave of apparent extrajudicial executions, and for inquiries into 24 specific cases.
Human rights activists were among the victims. Antonio Hernández Niño, a member of the Colombian organization of relatives of the "disappeared", ASFADES, was seized on 8 April after leaving a human rights meeting in Bogotá. On 10 August his body, bound hand and foot, was found with four gunshot wounds, on the outskirts of the capital. Another man, Guillermo Marín, was detained on the same night. He was interrogated under torture, and eariy on 11 April shot twice in the head. He survived, however, and gave extensive testimony to civilian public prosecutors which directly implicated the army's Bogotá Intelligence and Counter-intelligence Battalion (BINCI). Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to investigate the detention, torture and shooting of the two men, and to guarantee the safety of Guillermo Marín. As the army was implicated, however, further investigation of the case fell under the exclusive jurisdiction of the military itself. In July the Chief Military Procurator said the case was to be closed as it had been proved that the allegations of army involvement were false, and that in any case Guillermo Marín was "a vulgar kidnapper and common criminal". However, the military investigation dossier, a copy of which was sent to Amnesty International by the govemment, did not disprove the allegations.
Eberth Marín Cotrini, who worked in a Cali human rights office, was to have left Colombia on 10 October following a series of death threats. On 9 October he was seized in a Cali street and "disappeared". Amnesty Intemational appealed for his safety on 10 October, but the next day his body, bound and apparently tortured, was found. Amnesty International believed Eberth Marín was tortured and killed by govemment forces or with their acquiescence because of his role as a human rights monitor. On 13 October the organization told President Virgilio Barco, who took office on 7 August, that the case of Eberth Marín was similar to numerous others in which "disappearance", torture and extrajudicial execution had been carried out with impunity in Colombia.
Most victims of killings attributed by the authorities to "death squads" came from the urban poor: residents of slums and squatter settlements, vagrants, and, in several cities, homosexuals. The murder or "disappearance" of political activists took place in a
148	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
context of daily "death squad" killings of victims described by some authorities and news media as dangerous criminals best eliminated. "Death squad" killings of victims who could not be identified, or were described by the news media as "delinquents" or "transvestites", were not systematically chronicled within Colombia. The number of victims of "death squad" killings could therefore only be estimated, although trade unions and political groups provided documentation on cases involving members of their own organizations. The legal left-wing political coalition Unión Patriótica (UP), Patriotic Unity, said in late 1986 that since its formation in 1984 over 350 members had been killed by "paramilitary groups" it said were directed by the armed forces, including in 1986 three of its 12 elected members of the legislature and some 30 elected municipal officers. In mid-September a Bogotá television station broadcast the findings of its own survey, and reported that there had been over 1,200 victims of unsolved "death squad" killings since January, most of them with criminal records, but also union leaders and journalists. More than 350 killings were attributed to "death squads" in the city of Cali alone in the first half of 1986. Many of the victims remained unidentified — some of them disfigured by acid or fire — and were buried in mass graves.
Colombia's Attorney General expressed dismay on 10 May 1986 at the "rising wave of official violence". He protested that police and military personnel remained untouchable for crimes committed while carrying out "the dirty work of counter-insurgency and counter-delinquency", and named Cali's National Police commanders — among others — as meriting prosecution.
Amnesty International reported its own mid-year estimate in a news release on 18 July. It believed that more than 600 Colombians had been seized and killed or shot on the spot in the first six months of the year by troops, police and gunmen working with them. The organization estimated the number of victims to number over 1,000 by the end of 1986.
Overwhelming evidence of official responsibility emerged from hundreds of Amnesty International case studies. "Death squad" gunmen openly carried military weapons in the presence of uniformed troops and police and travelled in military vehicles or unmarked cars without licence plates — some of which were seen parked in police and military compounds. The gunmen passed freely through ubiquitous army roadblocks — Colombia was under a state of siege — and were sometimes observed handing over prisoners at military bases and barracks. In many individual cases witnesses identified by name police and military personnel, and several "death squad" victims survived and described their detention, interrogation
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	149
under torture, and attempted murder by regular army forces.
Although denying responsibility for the killings, army publicity campaigns against "subversion" appeared to support "death squad" actions. Wall slogans — sometimes painted by men working from army trucks — warned that the killings were "cleaning operations" to exterminate criminals, bandits and "all the Communists bleeding the Nation". Similar campaigns were launched throughout the country in the name of ostensibly civilian groups: in Pereira, "Mano Negra", the "Black Hand"; in Cartagena, "Ejército Popular Unido", United Popular Army; in Popayén, "Falange"; in Buga, "Bandera Negra", Black Flag"; in Tulua, "ElJusticiero", "The Justice Bringer"; and in the capital "MAS", "Muerte a Secuestradores", "Death to Kidnappers". Although over 40 names of alleged "death squads" emerged in wall slogans, leaflets and news reports during 1986, Amnesty Intemational was unaware of a single case in which alleged "death squad" members were convicted by the courts. No cases were known in which such supposedly independent armed units clashed with police or military forces patrolling the same areas.
In a letter of 22 April — made public in July — Amnesty Intemational called on outgoing President Belisario Betancur to take Steps to halt the rise in "disappearances", torture, and political killings and to establish procedures for police or military personnel who violated human rights to be investigated and prosecuted by an independent — not military — judiciary. It said that torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution appeared to form part of a comprehensive counter-subversion policy of the Colombian armed forces. A public debate on the human rights situation followed, including a series of statements by civilian and military authorities. Some civilian ministers agreed with the need to take action. On 26 July the Minister of the Interior said that what was unquestionable was that there was an "authentic crisis in the administration of justice" requiring urgent reforms, including restrictions on the scope of military justice to consider only intemal organization and discipline and performance of service.
Military spokesmen did not dispute the estimated death toll, but characterized the victims as "criminals" and "subversives" and their killers as mysterious civilian vigilantes. They rejected as one-sided Amnesty International's denunciation of the "death squad" killings. The Minister of Defence protested that he saw no reference in the statement to "the 630 guerrilla crimes committed this year". The head of the armed forces attributed the actions to "paramilitary" groups, but said "the armed forces have nothing to do with them".
Although grave abuses of human rights increased during 1986, Amnesty Intemational welcomed the Colombian Government's
150	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
copying to it of documentation prepared for the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances on investigations into specific cases of "disappearance" and political killing. Amnesty Intemational received a copy of a dossier prepared by the office of the Chief Military Procurator on an investigation into 313 cases of "disappearance" reported by Colombian organizations. The dossier summarized evidence said to confirm the reappearance of 50 — some of these were disputed by Colombian rights groups — and the deaths of nine. The Procurator concluded that the investigation absolved the military of any wrong-doing.
Some information on cases of murder or torture before the military courts was also sent to Amnesty International, including a list of 242 cases of allegations of ill-treatment under investigation by the Chief Procurator of the National Police during 1985. Nine of these had led to disciplinary penalties ranging from "reprimand" to fines of five days' salary, and, in one case, suspension for 30 days. Police investigafions had been opened into 18 cases of alleged forcible "disappearance", with a recommendation in one case that criminal charges be brought. Although in most cases known to Amnesty Intemational, military court or disciplinary hearings into alleged human rights abuse led, at most, to fines or brief suspension, some prison sentences were reported. The Chief Military Procurator told a press conference in June that two soldiers had been sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment for the murder of guerrilla suspects, although the details of the case were not made public, and in November an army captain and a sergeant were sentenced to 18 and 24 years respectively by a court martial for a much publicized murder of six miners in 1985 — a case without apparent political elements.
