Nigeria
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the frequent use of the death penalty. More than 100 people were sentenced to death, the majority of them after trials from which no judicial appeal was allowed, and more than 60 executions were recorded. However, complete statistics were not available to Amnesty International and the real number of those sentenced and executed was thought to have been considerably higher.
86	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
The only prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International at the beginning of 1986, the musician Fela Anikulapo Kuti, was releed in April by order of the President (see Amnesty International Report 1986). However, there were several short-term detentions of p)eople believed to be prisoners of conscience. In late May Dr Junaid Mohammed, an opposition politician under the former government of President Shagari, was arrested after criticizing the government in an interview broadcast by the British Broadcasting Corporation. He was held under Decree 2, the State Security (Detention of Persons) Decree, 1984, which permits detention without trial and which was widely used by the former government led by Major-General Muhamadu Buhari. Amnesty International appealed for his release as it believed that he was detained solely because of his non-violent opposition to government policy. Dr Mohammed was released uncharged in August.
There were further politically motivated arrests in June following incidents in May at the Ahmadou Bello University in Zaria when security forces opened fire on a student demonstration. Leaders of the Nigerian Labour Congress led by their President, Ali Ciroma, protested against the shootings and were arrested. They were released uncharged after eight days in custody.
A large number of people who had been detained without charge or trial since early 1984, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were either released under judicial review procedures in 1986 or prosecuted for criminal offences or due to be prosecuted. Most were members of former President Shagari's administration. For example, both President Shagari himself and his deputy, former Vice-President Ekueme, were released in July. However, three top officials of the military government which overthrew the Shagari administration — former Head of State Major-General Muhamadu Buhari. Major-General Tunde Idiagbon and Alhadji Rawal Rafinda-di — remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1986.
The death penalty remained a major concern. Amnesty International learned of the imposition of 111 death sentences but the real total was believed to be considerably higher. There were at least 64 executions. Of those sentenced to death, 101 had been convicted by special Robbery and Firearms Tribunals, each composed of a High Court judge, one military officer and one police officer. All the 64 people known to have been executed had been convicted by Robbery and Firearms Tribunals.
The Robbery and Firearms Tribunals, which were re-established in 1984, had jurisdiction over cases of robbery in which the accused was alleged to have been armed or to have used personal violence. There was no right of appeal to a higher court for those sentenced by the
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	87
tribunals, in contrast to cases involving other serious offences such as murder which were tried before the High Court, from which appeals could be made to the Appeal Court and then the Supreme Court. Although the law governing the Robbery and Firearms Tribunals did not allow any appeal against their sentences, there was a "confirmation" process which was believed to vary from state to state. In some states the confirmation involved consideration of the sentence by a state Prerogative of Mercy Committee, and then a final decision on whether to execute from the state's military governor. This process was more akin to a clemency hearing than a judicial appeal to a higher court, and Amnesty International believed it provided insufficient legal safeguards for people sentenced to death. In addition. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that some of the Prerogative of Mercy Committees were chaired by state Attorney Generals, who would have been ultimately responsible for the original prosecution, a situation that may not have l^en conducive to impartiality in consideration of clemency.
Throughout 1986 Amnesty International appealed to state and federal authorities to grant clemency. For example, on 8 September the Plateau State Robbery and Firearms Tribunal sentenced Alexander Takunde Genga, a teacher, to death by hanging after convicting him of robbing a student at gunpoint on 22 April 1985. Amnesty Intemational app>ealed to the military governor for clemency, but did not learn whether he was executed. On 12 September a priest and seven other people were sentenced to death for armed robbery by the Oyo State Robbery and Firearms Tribunal, and again Amnesty Intemational appealed for clemency but five of the seven were subsequently executed.
Thirteen death sentences were passed in February by a special military tribunal composed of senior officers on army and air force officers convicted of plotting to overthrow the government. Their alleged leader was Major-General Mamman Vatsa, who, according to official reports, had been planning the coup since soon after the takeover of power by President Babangida in August 1985. Three of the 13 death sentences were subsequently commuted to prison terms after appeals for clemency but the other 10 were carried out. Amnesty International believed that the appeals for clemency had not been considered with sufficient thoroughness and impartiality; for example, appeals for clemency were made in the first instance to the armed forces' service chiefs who were the sup>erior officers of the convicted men, and sentences were then confirmed by the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC). The executions took place just a few hours after the AFRC convened to consider the confirmation of the sentences. Amnesty Intemational and prominent Nigerian figures
98	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
appealed for œmmutation of all the death sentences passed.
Amnesty International was particularly concerned about a new method of execution for convicted armed robbers introduced in Niger State, central Nigeria. According to press reports in July, execution by successive volleys of bullets fired at intervals, starting with shots aimed at the ankle, were ordered by the state governor. According to the reports, two people were executed in this way. Amnesty International appealed to the state governor concerned, as well as to the federal authorities, to stop this particularly abhorrent method of torture and execution.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the case of Nasiru Bello who, according to a Supreme Court inquiry in 1986, was executed illegally in 1981 after being sentenced to death by a High Court for murder; his appeal had not yet been heard by the Appeal Court. In a unanimous decision announced on 5 December, seven Supreme Court judges held that Nasiru Bello's constitutional right to an appeal hearing had been infringed. The Attorney General of Oyo State, where the original death sentence had been passed, agreed under examination at the Supreme Court that the execution had been "unlawful".
Amnesty International welcomed an announcement in July by the Minister of Justice that the death penalty would no longer be used for people convicted of offences under SMC Decree 20, the Special Tribunal (Miscellaneous Offences) Decree of 1984, which covered offences including drug trafficking and illegal oil sales. Three people had been sentenced to death and executed under the provisions of this decree in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). The organization was also pleased to note that the death penalty was removed from the provisions of the Counterfeit Currency (Special Provisions) Decree No. 22 of 1984.
Amnesty International welcomed an invitation in July by the Minister of Justice for the organization to send a delegation to Nigeria to discuss the use of the death penalty and other issues, but by the end of 1986 dates and arrangements for the visit had not yet been finalized.
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
