South Africa
99
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of several thousand critics and opponents of the government, including many prisoners of conscience, under state of emergency regulations and other security laws. Other prisoners of conscience were among hundreds of people brought to trial for alleged political offences. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of uncharged detainees, and there were further deaths in detention in suspicious circumstances. Administrative banning orders were effectively invalidated by an Appeal Court ruling but the government used its emergency powers to restrict critics. The death penalty remained a major concern: there were 121 executions in Pretoria Central Prison and others were carried out in nominally independent "homelands".
South African security forces abducted political opponents from neighbouring countries, killing others in the process, and appeared closely connected with attacks on opponents of the government carried out by armed vigilante groups in areas such as Cape Town and KwaNdebele. The police and military were also accused of unprovoked killings of civilians and there was suspicion that people acting on behalf of the government may have t^en responsible for the murder of a leading black doctor and his wife in December. No arrests were made in connection with killings of several political opponents which had occurred in 1985.
In January, Amnesty International published South Africa: Imprisonment under the Pass Laws to document its concern about the imprisonment of up to a quarter of a million black people each year, effectively on grounds of race. The report criticized the so-called pass laws as flagrantly discriminatory in their nature and application and said that they provided a context for systematic and extensive violations of fundamental human rights. The report also criticized the conditions under which pass law prisoners were held and a parole system which appeared to be close to a system of forced labour. Amnesty International called for the total abolition of the pass laws as a necessary step to ending the imprisonment of black people on account of their race.
A few days after publication of the report. State President P.W. Botha announced the government's intention to withdraw the pass laws, and this was accomplished on 1 July. However, the law continued to provide for registration of the population by race and
100	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
required that all adults should possess individual identity documents, although failure to produce these on demand no longer resulted in immediate arrest. The Group Areas Act, which provides for residential segregation, was retained and it appeared that the authorities were using anti-squatter legislation to control the flow of black fHJople to the cities.
In March Amnesty International launched a worldwide campaign against human rights violations in South Africa and published a briefing on its concerns. It called on the government to end imprisonment on racial and political grounds, torture and other human rights abuses. The organization published an open letter to State President P.W. Botha in which it urged the immediate release of prisoners of conscience, an end to arbitrary detention, removal of the immunity from prosecution protecfing police and other security forces, and the establishment of impartial inquiries into reports of torture, killings and abductions alleged to have been committed by agents of the government. Amnesty Intemational also called for the abolition of the death penalty. During the campaign, it wrote to more than 10,000 individuals and organizations in South Africa urging them to support the open letter's proposals and work for the protection of human rights.
The state of emergency in force in some districts since July 1985 was lifted in early March and many uncharged detainees were then released. However, following continued widespread civil unrest, the government imposed a new nationwide state of emergency from midnight on 11 June. It was not announced until several hours after it came into force, by which time security police had raided homes throughout the country and detained many critics and opponents of the government. They included prominent churchmen, trade union and black community leaders, and leaders of the United Democratic Front (UDF) and the Azanian People's Organisation (AZAPO). Young whites belonging to the End Conscription Campaign were also detained. The emergency regulations empowered all police and other security force personnel to arrest people and hold them incommunicado and without charge for 14 days, after which the Minister of Law and Order was empowered to authorize continued indefinite detention without trial. The police, other security forces and government officials were given legal immunity for acts committed "in good faith" in connection with their use of emergency powers. Curbs were placed on reporting of incidents involving the security forces.
The emergency was accompanied by an unprecedented number of politically motivated arrests. By the end of 1986, more than 20,000 people were believed to have been detained under the emergency
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	101
regulations. A significant proportion were young people, including children as young as 11 or 12, some of whom were detained for several months and still held at the end of 1986. Amnesty International adopted many of those detained and investigated the cases of others as possible prisoners of conscience.
Government efforts to suppress dissent resulted in the detention of entire church congregations at Elsies River, near Cape Town, at Graaff-Reinet and at Duncan Village, near East London, on 15 and 16 June. In all, more than 1,(XX) people were arrested for attending services on these days to commemorate the killings of student protestors in 1976. Some were soon released but others were held for several months.
Some children and youths were released from detention only after being sent to so-called "rehabilitation camps" run by the security forces. The existence of the camps was revealed in September after initial government denials.
A number of people released from detention under the emergency were restricted by the Minister of Law and Order to curtail their movements, attendance at meetings and participation in organizations opposed to the government. Similar restrictions under the emergency regulations were also imposed on several anti-apartheid activists who had not been detained. In previous years, such people might have been restricted under banning orders under the Internal Security Act, but an Appeal Court ruling in March had invalidated all such banning orders then in force.
There were also many detentions during the year under Section 29 of the Internal Security Act, which empowers security police to detain susjDects incommunicado and in solitary confinement without charge indefinitely. Those held under this provision included Pinda Molefe, a mother of three, whose husband was on trial throughout 1986 at Delmas (see below). She was detained in early June and still held incommunicado at the end of the year. Amnesty International called for her release if she was not to be brought promptly to trial on criminal charges. Others detained under Section 29 included leaders of the Kagiso Residents Association who had brought a court case against the government alleging politically motivated killings by the security forces.
Two new security provisions were introduced. Section 50A was inserted into the Internal Security Act to empower police to hold uncharged detainees for 180 days, after another detention provision of the act. Section 28, was undermined by an Appeal Court ruling. The Public Safety Act, the law permitting the declaration of a state of emergency, was also amended in order to empower the Minister of Law and Order to declare "unrest areas" in which emergency-style
102	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
powers could be authorized.
Amnesty International received many new reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees during 1986, particularly after the imposition of the state of emergency. Father Smangaliso Mkhatshwa, a prisoner of conscience and leading Catholic churchman, was assaulted and humiliated during 30 hours' continuous interrogation following his arrest in June. Afterwards, he could hardly stand. His detention and ill-treatment were challenged in the Supreme Court: this resulted in an official undertaking that he would not be further ill-treated and his removal to another place of detention, but he was not released. Military p>ersonnel were reported to have been responsible for his ill-treatment, but in other cases the security police were accused of torture. Often, the victims were children or young people, some of whom were alleged to have been tortured with electric shocks, severely beaten or threatened with death. In one case five girls aged 15 to 18 were among a group of detainees tortured with electric shocks at Heilbron Police Station in the Orange Free State. There was considerable evidence that police and security forces committed abuses in the knowledge that they were protected from prosecution under the emergency regulations.
In the first half of 1986 there were many reports of police violence towards detainees and civilians in the Lebowa "homeland". Two deaths in detention occurred within a few days in April. Makompo Kutumela, an AZAPO official, was reported to have been beaten to death in police custody at Mahwelereng on 5 April. Three others arrested with him were also severely assaulted and required hospital treatment. Six days later, Peter Nchabaleng, a UDF leader and former political prisoner, also died in Lebowa police custody. The authorities said he had collapsed but they at first withheld his body: subsequently, there were reports that he had died from an assault. Neither case had been the subject of a formal inquest by the end of 1986. However, the Lebowa "homeland" authorities introduced retroactive immunity provisions under which they and the police would be protected from prosecution for acts committed "in good faith".
There were further deaths in detention under the emergency regulations. The victims included Xoluso Jacobs, who was reported to have been found hanged in his cell in Upington Prison on 22 October. He had been held without charge since 15 June. Student leader Simon Marula died in detention in late December having been held without charge since 20 June.
Inquests began into the deaths in detention in 1985 of Sipho Mutsi and Andries Raditsela (see Amnesty International Report 1986) but neither had been completed by the end of 1986. At both, there was
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	103
evidence that the detainees had been assaulted by police shortly before their deaths. In December the government agreed to pay compensation to Andries Raditsela's family who had sued for damages in the Supreme Court. In the Transkei "homeland" two policemen were charged with the death of student leader Batandwa Ndondo in September 1985, but their trial had not begun by the end of 1986.
There were many politically motivated arrests in the Transkei and Ciskei "homelands" under local laws similar to the Internal Security Act. In both "homelands" detainees were reported to have been tortured and ill-treated. For example, Synod Madlebe was reported to have had his head repeatedly thrust into a water-filled bag, following his arrest in Transkei in late July, and the Reverend Arthur Stofile, a former prisoner of conscience, was reported to have been severely assaulted after he was detained by Ciskei security police in October.
Another former prisoner of conscience and torture victim. Dean T.S. Farisani, was detained without charge by security police in the Venda "homeland" on 24 November. The local head of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, he was still held incommunicado at the end of 1986 and was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International. Earlier, he had visited several countries in support of Amnesty International's campaign against human rights violations in South Africa.
There were many political trials during 1986, some of which resulted in the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. In June the Natal Supreme Court acquitted the last four of 16 UDF leaders who had been brought to trial on treason charges in 1985. In a separate trial, 22 other leaders of the UDF and Black Consciousness movement were brought to trial at Delmas charged with treason and other offences relating to the outbreak of civil unrest in the "Vaal Triangle" in late 1984. The trial was still in progress at the end of 1986, by which time three defendants had been acquitted.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the use of the death penalty. There were 121 executions in Pretoria Central Prison and an unknown number of hanging in Transkei and other nominally independent "homelands". Three people, all alleged members of the banned African National Congress (ANC), were executed for politically motivated offences on 9 September. They included Andrew Sibusiso Zondo who was sentenced to death in April for causing a bomb explosion which killed five people. At least 10 others were believed to have been sentenced to death for politically motivated offences but not executed by the end of 1986.
There was evidence that South African security forces were
104
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
responsible for |X)litically motivated killings of suspected govemment opponents at home and in neighbouring countries. In a number of areas, there appeared to be close links between security forces and armed vigilante groups who carried out attacks on community leaders and opposition political activists, such as Chief Ampie Mayisa, who was killed at Leandra in January. In June vigilantes attacking residents at the Crossroads squatter camp near Cape Town were seen to be directed by white security force personnel. There was suspicion of such involvement also in the fatal shooting of Dr Fabian Ribeiro and his wife, both known opponents of the government, in December at Mamelodi township, Pretoria. No arrests in connection with these killings had been made by the end of 1986, nor in connection with the murders in 1985 of other prominent government opponents such as Matthew Goniwe and Victoria Mxenge (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Police and army shootings of township protestors remained common and resulted in many civilian deaths, some of which may have constituted extrajudicial executions. In August more than 20 people were killed by police in Soweto during protests against the forcible eviction of township residents supporting a widespread rent boycott.
Amnesty International submitted information on its concerns in South Africa to the UN Commission on Human Rights and its Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Southem Africa, and to the UN Special Committee against Apartheid.
