Mali
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of several prisoners of conscience, all of whom were released by the end of 1986. There were reports of ill-treatment of detainees and of harsh conditions at Taoudenit prison camp. Amnesty International was also concerned about the death penalty.
Eight people were detained in January after the authorities intercepted certain documents sent by an exiled opponent of the government to a student, Perignama Sylla. The documents apparently criticized the government, suggested the revival of an independent student organization and recalled the death in detention in 1980 of a student leader, Abdoul Karim "Cabral" Camara. Perignama Sylla left the country but eight of his friends and relatives, who were suspected of assisting his departure, were arrested. They were held incommunicado in police custody for 10 weeks, during which some of them were reported to have been hung up by their hands or feet and denied adequate food or medical treatment. Two were subsequently released without charge. The six others were moved in early April to Bamako prison, where their legal status remained uncertain until 20 June when a formal order authorizing their detention was issued. They were then charged with insulting the head of state, distributing false information, aiding and abetting, and harbouring criminals. Amnesty International raised the detainees' cases with the Malian authorities, on the grounds that they appeared to be prisoners of conscience. On 4 November they were brought to trial before the court of first instance in Bamako. Four of the defendants, including student Oumar Mariko, were convicted of harbouring criminals and given suspended prison sentences. Two others, one of whom was retired mechanic Bakary Diarra, were acquitted. All six were released. Perignama Sylla and another former student were tried in absentia, and the heaviest sentence, three years' imprisonment, was imposed on Perignama Sylla for insulting the head of state.
In November teachers went on strike in protest against delays in payment of their salaries. A number were arrested, including
72
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Diounkounda Traore, a teacher and trade union leader who had previously been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience in 1981. All were apparently released uncharged after a few days in custody.
Amnesty Intemational received new reports of harsh conditions in Taoudenit prison, a military camp situated in a remote desert area. Political prisoners were reportedly allowed no contact with the outside world, denied adequate focxl and medical treatment, forced to work in salt mines despite the extreme heat, and beaten if they did not work hard enough. Among those held there were prisoners convicted in 1978 of attempting to overthrow the govemment. The severe conditions in the camp were believed to have seriously affected the health of some prisoners, and to have led to some deaths. Of two prisoners released late in 1985, one was reported to have required surgery as a result of his treatment in the camp and another, released in a severely debilitated state, died two months later.
Five people were reported to have been sentenced to death in absentia: Sidi Demba Madina Soumbounou, convicted in August of treason and insulting the head of state, and four men convicted in December of theft, grievous bodily harm and possession of stolen goods. It was not known if any other death sentences were imposed during 1986, or if any executions were carried out.
