Bangladesh
Amnesty International was concerned about the short-term detention of hundreds of govemment opponents — including some prisoners of conscience — at times of parliamentary and presidential elections, when specific restrictions were imposed on political activities. Several prisoners arrested in connection with criminal offences were reported to have died as a result of torture. With mounting conflict in the Chittagong Hill Tracts there were increased reports of arbitrary arrests, torture and extrajudicial executions of non-combatant tribal people by military and paramilitary forces. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the death penalty; among the prisoners executed was a youth aged only 16 at the time of the murder of which he was convicted.
Martial law, imposed in March 1982, remained in force until 10 November, although martial law courts were withdrawn after 22 March. The lifting of martial law followed parliament's adoption of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, also known as the Indemnity Bill. This provided for the full restoration of rights guaranteed in the Constitution, including fundamental rights such as freedom from arbitrary arrest and torture. It also validated all sentences passed by any martial law court, stating that they could "not be called into question before any court or tribunal".
Parliamentary elections were held on 7 May amid reports of widespread violence, which was mainly instigated by govemment supporters, and election rigging. Martial Law Regulation No. V of 1986, issued the previous week, prescribed up to seven years' imprisonment for anti-election publicity or participation in anti-election meetings or processions. The Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), the opposition party led by Begum Khaleda Zia, wife of former President Zia-ur-Rahman, boycotted the elections. Among those arrested were several BNP leaders, who were detained under the Special Powers Act (SPA) for several days. Political activists were also reported to have been arrested in different parts of the country. Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Ershad on 2 May for the release of all individuals detained for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression or peaceful assembly.
Amnesty International also appealed for the release of Golam Mohiuddin Ghous, executive director of the journal Amader Kather (Our Message), the owner of the press on which it was published, the publisher of Shangbadik (Joumalist) and one of Shangbadik's
218	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
reporters. All four men were arrested on 15 May and placed under one-month detention orders under the SPA. The two journals had reportedly carried articles accusing the govemment of electoral fraud. All were released when the detention orders expired.
The presidential elections were held on 15 October, and were won by President Ershad. They were boycotted by the two main opposition party alliances, led by the Awami League (AL) and the BNP respectively. Criticism of the elections and anti-election activities were again made punishable under a martial law regulation by up to seven years' imprisonment. Dozens of political activists belonging to different opposition parties were reportedly arrested in the mn-up to the elections, some for defying the ban on holding anti-election rallies. They were released; some after only a few days' detention, others some weeks later.
On various Islamic and national holidays prisoners were released. On 7 June the government freed 136 political prisoners. Among them were several whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International, which had urged that they should be released or charged with a recognizable criminal offence. They included Jalal Ahmed, a leader of the student organization affiliated to the BNP, who had been held without trial for 15 months; Tipu Biswas, leader of the Communist League of Bangladesh; and Zahimddin Swapan, prominent in the League's affiliated student organization, who had been charged, together with two othere, with participating in an "unlawful assembly" the previous November. In August the authorities released a ftirther 177 prisoners, including some who had been held under the SPA. It was unclear how many of these were political prisoners. In mid-December 203 prisoners were released. Among them were an unsp>ecified number of SPA detainees, including, reportedly, political, trade union and student activists arrested for their opposition to martial law.
A new security force, the Presidential Security Force, was established in June to protect the President and other senior officials. It was given wide powers of arrest without warrant and authorized to use lethal force on anyone resisting arrest. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that members of the force were granted immunity from prosecution, except when expressly ordered by the govemment.
In June Amnesty Intemational published a File on Torture containing testimonies of torture from political prisoners arrested between Febmary 1983 and mid-1985, who had been held incommunicado in the custody of the armed forces intelligence service, the Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI). The File on Torture also presented information about political prisoners and criminal suspects reportedly tortured in police stations. The testimo-
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	219
nies alleged: persistent beatings with a wooden cane or "hunter", a whip-like instrument of plaited leather; being suspended from the ceiling by the arms; exposure to cold air fans for extended periods; and having the face covered by a cloth repeatedly soaked in water. Amnesty International also received reports that several prisoners arrested in connection with criminal offences died in 1986 as a result of police torture. It raised three such cases with the authorities. Two of the victims were said to be aged 17. The post-mortem on Mohammad Ashiqul Islam, a school student, noted that his death was caused by a brain haemorrhage and injuries "which are . . . homicidal in nature". An inquiry into his death was conducted by an army officer and a magistrate, and in July three police officers at the station where he had been held were dismissed. Three other police officers were suspended from duty in October, pending the outcome of a departmental inquiry into the death of Shafiqul Islam Arun, an apprentice, after he had been held for three days in a Dhaka police station. In December the Inspector General of Police was reported to have warned that a police officer found torturing a detainee would risk dismissal and could also be jailed. Amnesty Intemational appealed for impartial judicial inquiries into complaints of police torture and for criminal proceedings to be insfituted against any police personnel against whom there was evidence of involvement in torture.
In October Amnesty Internafional published a report — Bangladesh: Unlawful Killings and Torture in the Chittagong Hill Tracts — which detailed extrajudicial killings and torture of non-combatant tribal people reportedly committed by military and paramilitary personnel. Many of the incidents described took place in the first half of 1986. Amnesty International acknowledged that the armed opposition group, the tribal Shanti Bahini (Peace Force) had killed non-tribal residents in the area and emphasized its condemnation of the execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups. Among the reported extrajudicial killings by law enforcement personnel which Amnesty Intemational described were killings attributed to the Bangladesh Rifles (BDR) on 18/19 May near the Indian border post at Silacherri. A group of some 200 tribal people were said to be approaching the border to cross into India, having left their villages following military operafions in their locality in early May. They were reportedly apprehended by troops of the 31st battalion of the BDR, who were said to have surrounded them and made them walk into a narrow valley. In this restricted space, the soldiers are reported to have fired indiscriminately, killing an unknown number of unarmed people. The report also contained testimonies from tribal villagers describing being tortured during
220	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
interrogation at army and BDR camps. Prisoners were reported to have been kept for several days in pits or trenches within the camps' perimeters and questioned about the whereabouts of Shanti Bahini units. The most frequently cited methods of torture were having hot water poured into the mouth and nostrils, being hung upside down and beaten and being burned with cigarettes. Amnesty International called u|X)n the govemment to estabhsh an impartial, independent commission of inquiry to investigate this and other reports of unlawful killings and torture by the security forces, and to publish its findings. At the end of 1986 the govemment sent Amnesty Intemational a response to its report stating that all allegations of human rights abuse were investigated and appropriate action taken against those responsible. On 21 December Amnesty Intemational replied, asking for specific information on the nature and findings of the inquiries the government said it had conducted. It also requested further details of three incidents in May during which people were reportedly killed unlawfully. Amnesty International also expressed concern about reports that following an attack on army personnel by Shanti Bahini forces in the area in mid-October, tribal people had been tortured during interrogation by military j>ersonne! at the sports stadium at Rangamati. Later in the month tribal men from a village in Khagrachari district, where Shanti Bahini units were understood to have been active, were reportedly beaten in Bet Chari army camp.
At least 10 people were sentenced to death by special martial law courts between January and March. Amnesty Intemational learned of three executions during 1986, but it believed that the total number of death sentences and executions was probably higher. In July Amnesty Intemational appealed for the commutation of the death sentences imposed on bank employees Mansur Hussain Khan and Abdur Rashid Mia, convicted by a special martial law court under martial law regulations of misappropriation of funds. This was the first case known to Amnesty Intemational in which the death penalty was imposed for an offence other than murder or serious injury. The court reportedly sentenced them originally to 30 years' imprisonment and the administrative body that reviewed this verdict noted that these sentences could "not be disturbed". (Sentences imposed by military courts could not be submitted for judicial appeal.) However, President Ershad increased the sentences to the death penalty on 3 July. This was the second occasion known to Amnesty Intemational on which President Ershad substituted a death penalty for a term of imprisonment imposed by a court. Amnesty International submitted information on these death sentences, as well as on the impending execution of Mohammad Selim, to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions. Mohammad Selim, aged 17 when
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	221
executed for murder on 27 February, had also been tried by a military court.
In November Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemment not to introduce the death penalty for drug-related offences, as had been recommended by an official committee.
