Paraguay
Amnesty International's concerns included numerous arbitrary arrests and short-term detentions of students, joumalists, peasants, trade unionists and opposition party activists, held in incommunicado detention under the state of siege. The organization was also concemed about judicial irregularities in the trials of political prisoners and the arrest and trial of several people under Law 209, which has frequently been used to prosecute people for the peaceful expression of their beliefs. A further concern was the torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and criminal suspects, and the death of a number of people while in the custody of security forces, who may have been the victims of extrajudicial execution.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational launched appeals on behalf of more than 150 individuals, the majority of whom were prisoners of conscience. Many were arrested during April and May in connection with a series of unprecedented anti-government demonstrations organized by trade unions, opposition parties and student organizations. Several peaceful protests were violently dispersed by the police, sometimes accompanied by armed civilians believed to be members of the Guardia Urbana (a militia force of the mling Colorado Party).
Amnesty International received reports of numerous short-term arrests; the ill-treatment of detainees was common. On 27 April several people, including Paraguayan and foreign joumalists, were reportedly beaten and then detained by |X)lice during a demonstration organized by the opposition Partido Liberal Radical Auténtico (PLRA), Authentic Liberal Radical Party. Police using tear gas, clubs and electric cattle prods dispersed approximately 1,000 members of the PLRA who were attempting to march peacefully to the Metropolitan Cathedral in support of the Roman Catholic church's call for "a national dialogue". Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals on behalf of José Luís Simón, a Paraguayan joumalist
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	193
who was reportedly beaten by police with clubs during his arrest and then transferred to the Departamento de Investigaciones de la Policía (DIPC), Police Investigations Department, in Asunción, where he was held in incommunicado detention until his release without charge on 29 April. Also arrested were two journalists from the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) and the press secretary of the FRG Embassy in Asunción who were held for several hours in the DIPC and alleged in a formal complaint that they had been ill-treated by the police. The state of siege in force in Asunción almost continuously since President Stroessner came to power in 1954 was renewed by the government every 90 days. Article 79 of the Constitution, which regulates the state of siege, was frequently invoked by the authorities to arrest political opponents "by order of the President" and to hold them for indefinite periods. Denial of the right to a fair trial and due process of law under state of siege powers of detention has been a long-standing Amnesty International concern.
In May Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Marcelino Corazón Medina, President of the Comité de Coordinación de Productores Agrícolas, Coordinating Committee for Agricultural Producers, who was arrested when a peaceful International Labour Day march organized by an independent trade union movement was violently broken up by police and armed civilians. He was reportedly beaten for several minutes by civilians armed with clubs before being arrested by police and taken to the DIPC, where he was held in incommunicado detention under Article 79 of the Constitution. He was transferred to the Guardia de Seguridad, a military barracks on the outskirts of Asunción, on 13 May and released without charge on 6 June.
Amnesty International also interceded on behalf of Alejandro Stumpfs, detained on 6 October and held in incommunicado detention under Article 79 of the Constitution in the Guardia de Seguridad until his release on 19 December. Alejandro Stumpfs is the second Vice-President of the Movimiento Popular Colorado (MOPOCO), the di^ident wing of the ruling Colorado Party. He has been arrested several times in the past, and subjected to internal banishment.
Amnesty International continued to express its concern that legal proceedings against political detainees did not conform to internationally accepted standards for fair trials. Of particular concern was the undue delay in bringing detainees to trial.
In January Amnesty International sent a delegate to Paraguay to investigate reports of irregularities in the trial of Remigio Gimenez Gamarra, who had been on hunger-strike since 13 December 1985 to protest against his prolonged detention (see Amnesty International
194	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Report 1986). He had been arrested in December 1978 and held in various detention centres under Article 79 of the Constitution until 1981, when he was formally charged with several offences allegedly committed between 1958 and 1960, including murder, armed robbery and being a leader of a subversive clandestine organization. Amnesty International's delegate met the criminal court judge in charge of the case and the President of the Supreme Court of Justice, explaining the organization's concems in the trial including the extreme delay in judicial proceedings. Although, according to the Code of Criminal Procedures, the investigative stage of a trial should be completed within two months, in the case of Remigio Gimenez it lasted over seven years. Remigio Gimenez suspended his hunger-strike on 11 Febmary; after receiving assurances from the authorities that legal proceedings would be expedited. In December 1986 he was sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment.
During the second half of 1986 there was a marked increase in the number of people arrested and charged under anti-subversive legislation, particularly Law 209 (In Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Per^ns). Although by the end of the year the majority of those prosecuted under Law 209 had been granted conditional releases, at least two people considered by Amnesty Intemational to be prisoners of conscience remained in prison while trial proceedings continued. One, Miguel Abdón Saguier, a lawyer and prominent member of the PLRA, was arrested on 13 September in the town of Ypacarai and transferred to Tacumbú National Prison, in Asunción. Dr Saguier was charged under Law 209 with sedition. At the trial the Prosecutor quoted remarks made by Dr Saguier about the right of people to rebel against oppression. Despite the court ruling that he should be in Ubre comunicación (free communication) in the prison, Dr Saguier was held in solitary confinement and visits were severely restricted.
Amnesty Intemational also called for the immediate and unconditional release of Oscar Acosta, a journalist with Radio Ñandutí, who was arrested on 21 December after attending a church service for political prisoners. He was held in incommunicado detention in the DIPC and then transferred to Tacumbú National Prison and charged under Law 209. Radio Ñandutí is an independent broadcasting station and as a result of its outspoken journalism, its owner and staff have frequently suffered harassment and arbitrary arrest.
In October Amnesty Intemational organized api>eals on behalf of two trade union activists, Benjamin Livieres and Maria Herminia Feliciangeli, who were arrested without warrant in Asunción by armed plainclothes police. After several days in unacknowledged detention in the DIPC, they were transferred to regular prisons and
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	195
formally charged under Law 209. Although the basis for the charges was not clear. Amnesty Intemational believed that their arrest may have been related to their trade union activities in the newly formed Agrupación Independiente de Trabajadores, Independent Workers' Movement, which had reportedly been responsible for publicizing the deficient working conditions of shop workers in Asunción. Maria Herminia Feliciangeli and Benjamin Livieres were conditionally released on 17 and 30 December respectively.
Several of the public demonstrations which took place in 1986 were organized by the Asociación de Médicos, Enfermeras y Empleados del Hospital de Clínicas (AMEEHC), Doctors, Nurses and Staff Association of the Clínicas Hospital, the main public hospital in Asunción, in support of their demand for higher wages. The peaceful marches and meetings organized by the AMEEHC were often violently broken up by the police. Many of the hospital staff were detained for short periods and several staff representatives on the AMEEHC faced prosecution for alleged violation of Law 209. On 29 November Carlos Filizzola, President of the Clínicas Doctore' Association, was arrested in Asunción. After several days in incommunicado detention in police headquarters he was transferred to Tacumbú National Prison and charged with violation of Law 209. Dr Filizzola had previously been arrested on 2 May and held under the state of siege provisions until his release on 23 May, after the intervention on his behalf of the Archbishop of Asunción. More arrests followed in December. Among those detained were Elsa Mereles, President of the Clínicas Nurses' Association, and Héctor Lacognata, President of the Central de Estudiantes de Medicina, the medical students' union attached to the Clínicas Hospital. Although all the Clínicas staff were conditionally released by the end of legal proceedings against them had not been formally closed.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of the torture of both political prisoners and criminal suspects in the custody of security forces. Many of the victims were peasants involved in land disputes who, during 1986, were increasingly subject to arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment or death.
In August Amnesty International appealed to the government to initiate an independent inquiry into the deaths of Francisco Martinez and Aurelio Silvero. The two were allegedly shot and killed by soldiers from the military base at Juan E. O'Leary, Alto Paraná Department, during an attempt to evict a group of 30 families from land they had occupied in Barrero 6, Alto Paraná Department. Later in the month a joint forces operation involving 300 military and police personnel returned to the community with a judicial eviction order. According to reports about 20 men were detained during the eviction.
196	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
They were reportedly beaten by members of the security forces in the presence of their families before being taken to a temporary military camp established on the disputed land. The detainees were tied to trees and beaten with clubs and sticks several times a day; from time to time water or dirt was thrown over them. While several of the peasants were released the following day, five remained tied to trees for at least four days before being transferred to Tacumbu National Prison and charged with trespass, land invasion, cattle theft and issuing death threats. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern about reports of torture and its belief that peasants involved in land disputes appeared to be denied the full protection of the law. Legal proceedings resulted in all five being released by November and the charges against them were reportedly dropped.
In July Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concems in Paraguay to the UN under the confidential procedure for reviewing human rights violations (the so-called "1503 Procedure").
