Korea (Republic
of)
Amnesty International was concerned about a marked increase in the number of prisoners of conscience who faced long terms of imprisonment for alleged pro-communist activities, were detained for short periods or were placed under house arrest. Twenty-five prisoners of conscience arrested between 1971 and 1982 remained imprisoned. Reports of the ill-treatment and torture of prisoners continued to be received, including reports of three deaths in custody reportedly as a result of ill-treatment. Two students were sentenced to death for anti-government activities and espionage and 13 people convicted of criminal offences were executed.
On 11 June Amnesty Intemational published South Korea, Violations of Human Rights. This report described the cases of 25 prisoners of conscience arrested between 1971 and 1982 who were convicted under the National Security Law of pro-communist activities or espionage for North Korea. Two remained in detention under the Public Security Law after completing their sentences because they reftised to sign a statement that they had been "converted" to "anti-communism". The report also described the use of other laws to detain prisoners of conscience for shorter periods, such as the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations, the Minor Offences Punishment Act and Article 104(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure on "insulting and slandering the state". Analyzing several political cases, it pointed out fi-equent procedural irregularities such as arrests without warrant and prolonged pre-trial incommunicado detention and the use of confessions allegedly obtained under torture as evidence. Prisoners' testimonies of torture were reproduced and conditions conducive to ill-treatment and torture of prisoners identified. The report also described the use of the death penalty. It was submitted in the form of a memorandum to the South Korean Govemment in August 1985. The govemment told Amnesty International's visiting delegates in November that it was committed to protecting human rights but did not reply to the specific points in
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	245
the memorandum. On 10 June Prime Minister Lho Shin-young told the National Assembly that his govemment would try to stop human rights abuses but that it could not be sure of preventing "acts of atrocity" at "grassroots level".
According to official statistics over 3,400 people were charged with political offences in 1986, many more than in 1985. Over 80 per cent were students; the others were workers, clergymen, Buddhist monks, members of political organizations, joumalists, teachers and politicians. Some 1,500 were still in detention at the end of 1986. The rest were released with a waming or served sentences of up to 29 days in police custody under the Minor Offences Punishment Act. The majority of those held for longer periods were charged either under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations with participation in illegal demonstrations (which usually carried sentences of 18 months to three years' imprisonment) or under the National Security Law with pro-communist activities (which usually carried sentences of five or seven years). Student protests often involved violence, and Amnesty International was not able to establish in most cases whether the individual students arrested had used or advocated violence.
Between January and June several hundred people, mostly students, were arrested for calling for a revision of the constitution to allow presidential elections by direct suffrage instead of by an electoral college. From 12 to 24 Febmary over 100 members of the Council for the Promotion of Democracy (CPD), a body chaired jointly by opposition leaders Kim Dae-jung and Kim Young-sam, and supporters of the opposition New Korea Democratic Party (NKDP) were briefly detained or placed under house arrest in Seoul and other cities to prevent a petition campaign demanding direct presidential elections. Amnesty Intemational called for the release of all those who had peacefully called for constitutional revision.
On 3 May violent clashes between police and demonstrators in Inchon prevented a rally organized by the NKDP from taking place. Five student and dissident organizations were accused of having organized the violence to foment a popular uprising and overthrow the govemment. The NKDP stated that the violence had been started by agents provocateurs. The dissident organizations accused were part of Mintongnyon, the United Minjung Movement for Democracy and Unification (UMMDU), an umbrella organization of 23 dissident groups. Its Chairman, Reverend Moon Ik-kwan, previously adopted as a prisoner of conscience on three occasions, was arrested on 21 May, the day after he spoke at a rally at Seoul National University, during which a student burned himself to death in an act of protest against the government. The Reverend Moon Ik-kwan was charged
246	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
with inciting campus unrest and with having ordered UMMDU members to prepare anti-government leaflets for the rally in Inchon on 3 May which, the authorities said, contributed to the rioting. On 4 November the Reverend Moon Ik-kwan, who had boycotted his trial, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment. Amnesty International again adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Throughout 1986 people were arrested for possessing books the authorities considered subversive. Among them were 12 people connected with three unlicensed publication groups in Seoul who were arrested on 25 March. Nine of them, including Koh Kyung-dae, Kim Sang-bok and Kang Woo-keun, were sentenced to up to four years' imprisonment under the National Security Law for "giving ideological support to radical students". Amnesty International sought details of the books they had published and believed that they might be prisoners of conscience.
Following the appearance on university campuses of wall-posters allegedly reproducing North Korean propaganda in mid-October, the government announced that it would act against all dissident groups it regarded as pro-communist and radical. At least 130 people were subsequently arrested and charged under the National Security Law with pro-communist activities. Among them were several prisoners of conscience for whose release Amnesty Intemational campaigned. Yu Sung-hwan, an opposition member of the National Assembly, was arrested on 17 October for distributing the text of a speech before the Assembly in which he said that the government should stress Korean unification rather than anti-communism. Sagong Jun and Sohn Man-ho were arrested for giving him publications he reportedly used to draft his speech. On 8 November Han Kwang-ok, spokesperson of the CPD, was arrested for distributing a press statement questioning the authorities' claim that the students involved in a protest at Konkuk University between 28 and 31 October were communists. Between 10 and 15 December three journalists were arrested for publishing in Mai (The Word), an underground publication, specific government instmctions to the media on the reporting of certain news items, including items about political arrests and torture.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to carry out impartial and thorough investigations into reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and reiterated its recommendations for measures to prevent such abuses. Koh Kyung-dae, Kim Sang-bok and Kang Woo-keun, who were arrested on 25 March for publishing books the authorities considered subversive, were held incommunicado at the Anti-Communist Bureau of the National Police in Namyoung-dong, Seoul, for up to a week. They were reportedly beaten, and one of them subjected to electric shocks. On 13 April Hong Jung-sun, a
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	247
television drama writer, was reportedly beaten by officers of the Agency for National Security Planning who suspected him of hiding a dissident wanted by the |X)lice. Several members of the Seoul Federation of Labour Movement were reportedly held for a week at the Songpa military security centre, south of Seoul, in May. One of them, Kim Min-su, was reportedly beaten, twice subjected to electric shocks, and forced five times to drink water to which chilli had been added. The others also claimed that they had been tortured.
Chang Mi-kyong, a factory worker and union activist, filed a complaint against the police in which she claimed to have been beaten and given electric shocks after her arrest in late April for distributing leaflets demanding a pay increase. Wide publicity was given to the case of Kwon In-suk, a student expelled from university because of her political activities. She was arrested on 4 June for using false identification papers in order to obtain work in a factory. She claimed that during the three days of her interrogation in Puchon police station she was beaten and sexually abused for refusing to give information on former students wanted by the police. The prosecution authorities which investigated her complaint against a police officer found that she had been subjected to physical and verbal abuse but concluded that her claims of sexual abuse were a "fabrication". The police officer was dismissed but no charges were brought against him. A group of 166 lawyers, supported by the Korean Federation of Bar Associations, challenged the prosecution authorities' conclusions but on 2 November the Seoul High Court turned down their application. Paik Ki-wan, a leader of the UMMDU, was arrested on 7 November for making a speech on 19 July in which he accused the govemment of covering up the sexual abuse of Kwon In-suk. Amnesty International called for his release and was particularly concerned about his health which had been poor since he was tortured in 1979.
In four separate trials, eight people were acquitted of murder or other criminal offences after the courts found that their convictions were based on false confessions obtained under torture. Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to investigate 18 incidents which occurred between March and October in 10 different prisons where prisoners were reportedly ill-treated after they protested about their conditions of detention. Amnesty International received reports that the prisoners were beaten, confined to punishment cells too small for them to lie down, and that some, who were on hunger-strike, were bmtally forcibly fed.
The authorities did not reply to Amnesty International's requests for information about the outcome of their investigations into three deaths in detention. Chang Yi-kee died in late March and Kang
248	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Ho-keun on 25 April, reportedly after being beaten when they objected to political indoctrination during their military training. Shin Ho-su was found dead in a cave in Chollanamdo eight days after he had been taken away by officers of the Anti-Communist Bureau of Inchon on II July. People who saw his body reported that his arms were tied behind his back and that there were bruises on his ankles and wrists, and challenged the official announcement that he had committed suicide.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to commute the death sentences on Yang Dong-hwa and Kim Song-man who were convicted on 20 January 1986 of anti-government activities and espionage for North Korea. The Supreme Court confirmed their sentences on 23 September. They had reportedly been tortured when held incommunicado in July and August 1985. Amnesty Intemational also appealed for the commutation of the death sentence on Kim Song-chol for a series of offences including murder and robbery, which was upheld by the Supreme Court on 25 Febmary. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern to the authorities about the execution on 26 and 27 May of 13 people convicted of criminal offences.
