Indonesia and East Timor
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of hundreds of political detainees, including prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, whom it believed may have been unfairly tried. The prisoners included Muslim activists and govemment critics in Java, suspected supporters of independence movements in Irian Jaya and East Timor, and people arrested in connection with a coup attempt in 1%5, many of whom had been associated with the banned Partai Komunis Indonesia (PKI), Indonesian Communist Party. Amnesty Intemational continued to receive re|X)rts of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, often during interrogation immediately following arrest, and of extrajudicial executions, particularly in Irian Jaya. Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the use of the death penalty. Ten executions, of a Muslim activist and nine former PKI members, were carried out, and Amnesty Intemational knew of 23 prisoners under sentence of death.
234	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
On 25 June Amnesty International published a report Indonesia: Muslim Prisoners of Conscience which documented the cases of over 100 prisoners detained after a violent demonstration in Tanjung Priok, Jakarta, in September 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985 and J986). The report described in detail the cases of 15 prisoners of conscience detained for protesting about the government's handling of the Tanjung Priok incident or for criticizing government policies which they believed violated Islamic teachings. Many prisoners were reportedly ill-treated while held in incommunicado detention after their arrest. In a letter of 19 June to President Suharto, forwarding a copy of the report before publication. Amnesty International expressed concern that the trial of these prisoners might not have been fair. In many cases, the organization noted, access to counsel was limited, the time to prepare a defence was short and considered inadequate by defence lawyers, the right of the defence to call witnesses was restricted, and evidence alleged to have been obtained illegally was accepted in court.
At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was working on behalf of 14 Muslim activist prisoners of conscience, all of whom had been convicted of subversion under Presidential Decree 11/1%3, the so-called anti-subversion law. The rights guaranteed to criminal suspects under the country's Criminal Procedure Code, such as limits on pre-trial detention, do not apply to p)eople charged with subversion. Amnesty International urged the government to review the anti-subversion law with a view to similarly protecting the rights of people arrested and detained under it.
Sentences imposed on prisoners of conscience were often heavy. In January Lieutenant General Dharsono, who had signed an open letter calling for a fact-finding commission into the Tanjung Priok incident, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, reduced on appeal in May to seven years. Other prisoners, however, had their sentences increased on appeal by the prosecution. Andi Sukisno, a Muslim student tried in Malang on subversion charges in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986) and adopted as a prisoner of conscience in 1986, had his sentence raised from eight to 15 years on appeal to the East Java High Court. Another prisoner of conscience adopted during 1986 was Dr Oesmany A1 Hamidy, a 72-year-old disabled professor at an Islamic college in Tanjung Priok. Arrested in September 1984, he was sentenced in March to eight years' imprisonment on subversion charges for having given sermons criticizing alleged official corruption and govemment policies, particularly a draft law which would require Muslim organizations to accept Pancasila, the state ideology, as their sole ideological foundation.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	235
Dozens of Muslim activists accused of subversion were tried during 1986. Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of 16 Muslim religious teachers and lecturers arrested in January in Solo, Karan-ganyar, Boyolali, Surakarta and Klaten in central Java, who were accused of attempting to set up an Islamic state in Indonesia. Their trials began in July. The defendants were members of a network of village-based groups, known as Usroh, which, they claimed, was designed to develop closer ties among Muslims through religious study. All 16 denied the charges against them, but all were convicted and sentenced to between five and 11 years' imprisonment. In October, Amnesty Intemational requested detailed information on the charges against these prisoners from the Attomey General and local government officials. By the end of the year no response had been received, and available press reports gave no indication that any evidence was produced during their trials to show that they had used or advocated violence. The trials of other prisoners accused of involvement in Usroh groups in Yogyakarta, Karanganyar, Bantul and Brebes in central Java, were still in progress at the end of 1986.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about reports that suspected supporters of the Organisasi Papua Merdeka (OPM), the Free Papua Movement, which had been waging an armed struggle since the mid 1960s to establish an independent state of West Papua in Irian Jaya, were being held without charge or trial in military detention centres in Sorong, Merauke and Jayapura. One prisoner, Nabot Wanma, was reported to have been heid since June 1985 and to have been tortured (see Amnesty International Report 1986). At the end of 1986, he was reported to be still detained at the military police headquarters in Kloofkamp Bawah, Jayapura. In December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice expressing concern that these prisoners were not brought before judicial authorities after their arrest and given a fair trial within a reasonable time, in accordance with intemationally recognized standards. Several trials of political prisoners in Irian Jaya were reported to have taken place during 1986, including those of seven out of 12 men deported from Papua New Guinea in October 1985 (see Amnesty international Report 1986).
In response to inquiries from Amnesty International about the possibility of sending observers to attend trials of political prisoners in Java, Irian Jaya and East Timor, the govemment stated in December that their attendance at court proceedings would constitute interference in its internal affairs and would not be tolerated.
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about approximately 100 prisoners still in detention after having been convicted of involvement in an attempted coup in 1965. It continued to appeal for
236	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
the release of three prisoners who it believed had been accused of involvement solely because of their non-violent activities in the PKl and associated organizations. One was Pudjo Prasetio, who had been a full-time worker for the PKI in Bali. He had been arrested in 1%7 but was only brought to trial in 1979, when he was sentenced to life imprisonment. He was held in Grobogan prison, Bali.
In other cases there were prolonged delays in appeal hearings. In October Amnesty Intemational highlighted the case of a "forgotten" prisoner of conscience, Manan Effendi bin Tjokrohardjo, vice-chairman of the PKI for East Kalimantan, who had been arrested in October 1965, a few days after the coup attempt, and sentenced to death in 1967. He lodged an immediate appeal against his sentence, but it was not heard by the high court until April 1982, over 14 years later. The high court stated that it had only received the relevant papers from the district court in January 1982 and then commuted the sentence to life imprisonment.
Torture and ill-treatment by both military and police personnel continued to be reported. In July Amnesty International appealed for an investigation into the death in custody in Jakarta of Muhammad Djabir on 25 January. The day before his death he had told his nephew that he was being beaten to force him to make a statement accusing a former cabinet minister, Haji Mohammad Sanusi, of plotting to assassinate the President. His family claimed to have seen marks of torture on him both when they visited him in prison and when his body was returned to them after his death. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed at reports of the deaths of a number of detainees held for alleged criminal offences in police stations, where their relatives believed they died as a result of ill-treatment. In September it app>ealed for independent investigations into five such deaths in police custody between June and August.
Amnesty International made public in September reports of the ill-treatment of a number of people who had been briefly detained on suspicion of supporting independence for the South Moluccas. About 30 people were reported to have been arrested following the raising of a South Moluccan flag between Partu and Haria on Sapama island on 25 April. All these detainees were released by the end of May, but many claimed to have been beaten and ill-treated.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that Indonesian security forces had carried out extrajudicial executions during 1986 in the areas of Kiwirok, Merauke, Sarmi and Paniai in Irian Jaya. Amnesty Intemational urged the Minister of Justice in December to investigate reports that Yunus Firtar, Roby Tanjau and Wilhemus Inday had been killed in custody by members of the Indonesian military.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	237
Reports of torture, arbitrary arrest and unfair trials of political prisoners suspected of supix)rting the Frente Revolucionaria de Timor teste Independente (Fretilin) continued to be received from the Indonesian-occupied territory of East Timor. People arrested and interrogated by the Indonesian security forces in district and sub-district military commands, such as those in Baucau and Lospalos, appeared to be especially at risk. Amnesty International was also concerned about the fairness of trials of political prisoners in East Timor. Amnesty International learned of 10 further trials which took place in 1986, bringing the total number of prisoners tried to well over 200 since they began in December 1983. As all of the defendants pleaded guilty and none lodged an appeal. Amnesty International was concerned that the trials may not have been fair. The defendants reportedly had no choice of counsel other than a government-appointed defence team.
More than 600 people continued to be held without charge or trial on Atauro island off the coast of East Timor. Although the Indonesian Government referred to these people as "temporarily displaced persons". Amnesty Intemational was concemed that they were being forced to stay on the island as part of a policy to break up suspected Fretilin support networks.
In a statement of its concems in East Timor before the UN Special Committee on Decolonization on 15 August, Amnesty Intemational noted the failure of the Indonesian Govemment to conduct investigations into reports of extrajudicial executions or "disappearances" reportedly carried out in previous years by military personnel. Amnesty Intemational stated that it believed the absence of such investigations by the Indonesian authorities increased the likelihood that such grave violations could occur again.
Amnesty International was concemed about the increased use of the death penalty during 1986. Ten executions, all involving political prisoners, were confirmed by the govemment. On 12 September Maman Kusmayadi, a Muslim activist was executed. He had been convicted of involvement in the storming of a police station in Bandung in 1981, allegedly to obtain weapons for the establishment of an Islamic state. On 2 October Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Suharto expressing concem about the execution and outlining the reasons for its unconditional opposition to the death penalty.
In October the govemment announced that nine former members of the PKI had been executed in the last week of September and first week of October, on the anniversary of the coup attempt in 1%5. All of them had been held under sentence of death for over 15 years. They had all been tried by special military courts which allowed them
238	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
no right of appeal to a higher court, in contravention of intemational standards.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed for the commutation of all outstanding death sentences. The organization learned of two death sentences imposed during 1986, both for murder. Among those under sentence of death at the end of 1986 were 16 prisoners convicted of involvement in the 1965 coup attempt, three Muslim activists, and seven prisoners convicted of ordinary criminal offences. In November Amnesty International renewed its app>eals for the abolition of the death penalty.
