Philippines
Before Corazon Aquino assumed the presidency on 25 Febmary, Amnesty Intemational had been concemed about the indefinite detention of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience under emergency legislation which the government of President Ferdinand Marcos had retained from the martial law period (1972 to 1981). The organization had also been concerned about widespread reports that members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and paramilitary groups under their command had tortured political prisoners and had been responsible for "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions of opposition figures and suspected supporters of the New People's Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines. Amnesty Intemational had also been concemed about the continued imposition of death sentences, although no judicial executions had been carried out since 1976.
Reports of human rights violations increased during the campaign preceding the presidential election on 7 February. Amid accusations of electoral fraud, the National Assembly declared President Marcos the winner on 14 Febmary. Corazon Aquino, his opponent, also claimed victory and called for a campaign of civil disobedience. On 22 February Acting Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces Fidel Ramos and Minister of National Defence Juan Ponce Enrile withdrew support from Ferdinand Marcos, and over the next four days tens of thousands of people went into the streets in support of Corazon Aquino and the rebel officers. On 25 Febmary Corazon Aquino was swom in as President and Ferdinand Marcos fled into exile.
The new govemment came to ix)wer with a stated commitment to the protection of human rights. On 27 Febmary President Aquino announced that all political prisoners would be released. With Executive Order No. 1, she restored the writ of habeas corpus, and with Executive Order No. 8 of 18 March, she established a Presidential Committee on Human Rights (PCHR) chaired by former Senator Jose W. Diokno. The PCHR was given a mandate to
1
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	261
investigate complaints of past and current human rights abuses and to propose safeguards to ensure that violations did not take place in the future. On 28 February and 25 March Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Aquino welcoming the initiatives her govemment had taken towards the protection of human rights.
An Amnesty Intemational mission visited the Philippines in May to hold talks with the President and other officials of the new govemment and with representatives of non-governmental organizations about the protection of human rights. Based on those discussions Amnesty Intemational sent a memorandum to the Philippines Govemment in July which outlined further safeguards for consideration by the govemment to ensure fair trials for political prisoners, eliminate torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions and abolish the death penalty. Many of these measures were already under consideration by the govemment and by the end of 1986 a number of them had been implemented. The govemment ratified two important intemational human rights standards, the UN Convention against Torture and the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in June and October respectively, and a revised Bill of Rights was included in the draft of a new constitution, prepared by a Constitutional Commission in October, which specifically prohibited torture and abolished the death penalty. A PCHR proposal which went into effect in July as Memorandum Order No. 20 required the study of human rights to be included as an "integral and indispensable" part of the education and training of all police, military and other arresting and investigating personnel. In November President Aquino repealed Presidential Decrees 1877 and 1877-A, which under the previous govemment had authorized the detention without recourse to the courts of people suspected of national security offences.
Reports of human rights violations received by Amnesty International during 1986 were far fewer than in previous years. By the close of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was not aware of any prisoners of conscience still in detention. As a result of President Aquino's directive of 27 February, over 500 political prisoners held under Presidential Commitment Orders or Preventive Detention Actions (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986) were released, among them 23 prisoners of conscience on whose behalf Amnesty International had been working. However, over 100 other prisoners whose detention may have been politically motivated but who were charged with criminal offences reportedly remained in prison at the end of 1986. A Presidential Committee on Political Prisoners/Detainees chaired by the Minister of Justice was established to review their cases, and by the end of August the Committee had developed procedures
262	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
under which such prisoners could apply for pardon. By the end of the year, 90 cases had been reviewed and 15 prisoners had been recommended for pardon.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work during 1986 on behalf of six people who "disappeared" under the govemment of President Marcos. These included Father Rudy Romano, a priest who "disappeared" in Cebu City in July 1985, and John Seva and Emilio Togonon, organizers for the National Federation of Sugar Workers who "disappeared" in Bacolod, Negros after a rally they helped to organize in March 1985. Amnesty Intemational transmitted to the PCHR its concerns about these men and about two who "disappeared" after the change in govemment, Emesto Delantes and Anastacio Magsulit, both of Negros. At the end of 1986 Emesto Delantes, who reportedly "disappeared" on 7 March after having been arrested by soldiers of the 7th Infantry Battalion in Kabankalan, Negros, was still missing; Anastacio Magsulit, however, who was reported to have "disappeared" on 31 May, after having been abducted by uniformed personnel ft"om the 7th Infantry Battalion and Civilian Home Defense Forces (CHDF) in Tapi, Kabankalan, was returned to his family in July.
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about reports of extrajudicial execution of suspected supporters of the NPA and of people active in organizations alleged to be linked to the National Democratic Front (NDF). In its memorandum to the Govemment of the Philippines in July Amnesty Intemational stated that intemational human rights standards required that all reports of possible extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" should be impartially and effectively investigated. In this regard, in December representatives of the organization discussed with the Minister of Justice the investigation into the November killing of trade union leader Rolando Olalia by people reportedly linked to the military. The Minister said that the Ministry of Justice was committed to strengthening the National Bureau of Investigation so that all reports of such killings could be effectively investigated.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports of abuses by the NPA including torture and killing of suspected informants, landowners and local officials. Amnesty Intemational as a matter of principle condemns the torture or execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups.
In December Amnesty Intemational representatives met the Minister of Justice and members of the PCHR to discuss the remaining political detainees and procedures for investigating reported violations. They also met representatives of human rights organizations, local government officials and regional military
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	263
commanders to discuss specific cases of reported violations in northern Luzon, Bicol and Panay as well as the human rights situation in those regions more generally.
More than 400 prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of 1986. In July Amnesty Intemational sent a memorandum recommending abolition of the death penalty to the Minister of Justice for transmission to the Constitutional Commission. In a letter to the Minister in November Amnesty International welcomed the inclusion in the draft bill of Rights of a section abolishing the death penalty. Under the draft bill, the death penalty would be abolished "unless for compelling reasons involving heinous crimes the Congress hereafter provides for it."
