El Salvador
Amnesty international continued to be concerned about widespread torture of people from all sectors of Salvadorian society detained without trial on suspicion of subversive activities. Although still of concem, there appeared in 1986 to have been fewer "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions of opponents of the govemment by the Salvadorian military and police forces. However, the collection of information on human rights abuses was hindered by a wave of arrests of human rights workers and by interference in the work of joumalists. The number of occasions on which human rights violations were attributed to the so-called "death squads" also fell substantially during 1986. Further
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	161
evidence emerged that these groups were not extremist groups of the left and right, as successive administrations had maintained, but were customarily made up of regular police and military personnel, acting in plain clothes but under the orders of higher officials. By contrast, the number of acknowledged arrests, both short and long-term, rose in 1986. By the close of 1986 the combined political prisoner population at La Esperanza, Mariona, men's prison and the Centro de Reorientación Femenina, Women's Reorientation Centre, at Ilopango, where most known political detainees were held, was estimated at more than 1,000, apparently leading to problems of over-crowding.
Detainees were held under Decree 50 of February 1984, governing penal proceedings against people accused of offences against the state, while constitutional guarantees were susp)ended under the state of siege originally declared in March 1980. Although the government stated that it allowed visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) after eight days of detention under Decree 50, this was not always the practice. Under the decree, detainees could be held incommunicado for up to 15 days. It was during this period — before their detentions were officially acknowledged and before detainees were placed under the jurisdiction of the special military tribunals established by Decree 50 and transferred from military or police custody to prison — that torture was most frequently reported. According to many detailed testimonies obtained by Amnesty International, prisoners were subjected to both physical and mental torture and ill-treatment to press them to sign extrajudicial statements which they had often not read, and sometimes signed while blindfold. Some prisoners were presented on Salvadorian television as they signed such statements, which the government then described as proof that they were guilty of the allegations against them.
The torture methods reported to Amnesty International suggested an increasing reliance on methods such as prolonged sleep deprivation, threats against relatives and the use of drugs, but also included beatings, electric shocks and the use of the ^'capucha" (hood impregnated with lime), and sexual threats and abuse, particularly of women prisoners. Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to President José Napoleon Duarte and other officials to investigate torture allegations and bring those responsible to justice.
Amnesty International also expressed concern that even after their detention had been acknowledged, detainees held under Decree 50 were not dealt with within the time limits established by the decree. At the close of 1986, many hundreds of political prisoners had been in detention for four or five years; an estimated 90 per cent had not been tried.
162	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
These and other abuses occurred in the context of continuing civil conflict in the country. Amnesty International also received reports that armed opposition groups were responsible for abuses including summary executions and kidnappings of government officials, business people and others they believed to be government spies. Amnesty International condemns the torture and execution of captives by anyone. The available information did not appear to confirm other charges that the opposition (and to a lesser extent the military) were using landmines against targeted groups of civilians.
A number of local human rights workers were arrested in an apparent effort to disrupt their work of collecting information on human rights abuses and their humanitarian assistance to displaced people in contested zones. Joaquin Antonio Cáceres Hernández, Press and Information Secretary and long-standing board member of the independent Comisión de Derechos Humanos de El Salvador, no-gubernamental (CDHES), non-govemmental Human Rights Commission of El Salvador, was arrested in November 1985. Then in May and June 1986 a further eight people working with the CDHES and other Salvadorian human rights groups were arrested. At a series of government-organized news conferences one of the detainees stated that she had placed herself voluntarily in the hands of the authorities. She described the alleged infiltration of Salvadorian human rights groups by the armed opposition, and said that her information had led to the other arrests. She also made allegations, which she later withdrew, of links between foreign and local church and humanitarian assistance organizations, local human rights groups and the armed opposition. Amnesty Intemational twice asked the government, in May and again in October, to assure the physical integrity of the human rights workers and to investigate allegations that some had been forced under torture to sign medical certificates that they had not been ill-treated. The organization also asked several intemational bodies, including the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States (OAS), to call on the Salvadorian authorities to release the human rights workers if they had been detained because of their human rights activities.
By the end of 1986 several of the human rights workers had been released, including Maria Teresa Tula de Canales of the Co-madres, Mothers' Committee. She was reportedly abducted on 6 May by men in plain clothes, and stabbed and raped before being abandoned two days later in a park in San Salvador. She was seized again on 28 May, once more by men in plain clothes. This time her detention was acknowledged by the Treasury Police. Freed on 23 September, reportedly on the personal orders of President Duarte, she told him
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	163
in the presence of journalists who had been summoned to witness her release that she had been tortured in official custody. In June Amnesty International had asked for her to receive medical attention for the wounds suffered at the time of her first, unattributed abduction.
Amnesty International also appealed on behalf of a number of other church, refugee and relief workers reportedly detained and tortured because they had participated in discussions and public events to promote a peace dialogue in the country or because of their work with displaced people and those made homeless by the earthquake which struck the country in October.
In January Amnesty International called for inquiries into 52 separate incidents in which trade unionists had been arrested, tortured, had "disapf)eared" or had been killed, apparently because of their trade union activities. Among the victims were José Humberto Centeno Najarro and his sons José Vladimir and Jaime Ernesto, aged 21 and 18, who were arrested on 25 November 1985, allegedly in reprisal for their father's activities as leader of the Salvadorian telecommunications union. The brothers were still in custody at the end of 1986. In December Amnesty International renewed appeals for an inquiry into their sworn statements that they had been drugged and tortured to force them to sign confessions implicating them in the 1985 kidnapping of a government official.
Among the many other trade unionists on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational app>ealed in 1986 were Febé Elizabeth Velásquez, who was arrested in July after addressing mass demonstrations in the capital on behalf of the trade union confederation which she represented, and four transport union workers arrested in March and April. Febé Velasquez was released four days after her arrest, reportedly after the personal intervention of President Duarte. In July Amnesty International sought assurances that the others, who were in Mariona prison and had reportedly been tortured during interrogation by the National Guard, would receive medical treatment.
Students and teachers continued to be arrested and detained. For example, Rufino Antonio Ouesada, President of the Asociación General de Estudiantes Universitarios Salvadoreños (AGEUS), General Association of Salvadorian Students, was held briefly in March. He had been involved in the Jornada por el diálogo y la Paz, Day of Peace and Dialogue, held by students and professors of the University of El Salvador in December 1985.
Amnesty International also appealed in November on behalf of a number of peasants from San José Las Flores, Chalatenango, seized by soldiers of the first Infantry Brigade. They had spoken about their
164	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
lives in a zone of conflict between the opposition and the Salvadorian military on tapes which had been confiscated from three foreign joumalists arrested in September and forced to leave the country. The peasants were subsequently released.
Steps were announced during the year to improve judicial procedures, including setting up a forensic science laboratory and training programs for judicial personnel. However, despite fresh evidence uncovered by human rights groups in recent years, there was little progress in the official inquiries periodically promised by President Duarte into specific cases of human rights abuse. These cases included a number of mass killings of non-combatant civilians by the military, as well as individual "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, among them the murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero in March 1980. In the two cases in which lower level security pereonnel were convicted of killings, both of which involved US citizens, efforts by US human ri^ts groups to have the higher-ranking officials who they believed ordered the murders prosecuted were reportedly hampered by the authorities.
Investigations were announced, however, into the alleged involvement of senior military officials in a kidnapping ring. About 20 people were arrested in April on suspicion of involvement in the kidnappings, but as far as Amnesty Intemational was aware no one was convicted. Three of those arrested died in suspicious circumstances (two of them in police custody) and some 15 others were released. One of the people initially detained had been accused of having organized the murders in January 1981 of two US labour advisers and the head of the Salvadorian Agrarian Reform Institute.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to follow closely the situation of the many thousands of Salvadorians who in previous years had fled from army sweeps through their areas or from attacks upon their families to seek asylum abroad. Particularly in view of discussions about large-scale repatriation from Honduras, Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that returned refugees were viewed by the Salvadorian authorities as a potential source of support for the opposition, and were therefore in danger. In November Amnesty Intemational submitted to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees lists of Salvadorian refugees who had reportedly been detained or "disappeared" in El Salvador after repatriation, both voluntary and involuntary, from Honduras.
In view of its continuing concems in the country. Amnesty Intemational informed the government in August that it wanted to visit the country in December to discuss these matters. It received no definite response to its proposal until shortly before the delegation planned to leave for El Salvador, when it was informed that the
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	165
October earthquake had made the planned date "inconvenient". The Salvadorian authorities proposed March 1987 instead, but by the end of 1986 had not confirmed this new date.
Amnesty International also submitted information on its concerns to relevant international organizations including the UN special representative on El Salvador, its Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and its Special Rapporteurs on summary or arbitrary executions and on torture, and to the lACHR of the OAS. In its 1986 Annual Report, the lACHR found that, in El Salvador, threats to the right to life continued and that Decree 50 continued to have a negative effect on judicial guarantees for due process and prompt administration of justice. Resolution 41/157 passed by the UN General Assembly in December 1986 stated that despite the efforts of the government to reform the administration of justice, the judicial system in the country continued to be "notoriously" unsatisfactory, and serious and numerous violations of human rights continued to take place. The resolution committed the UN to keeping under consideration the human rights situation in the country.
