Sierra Leone
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of ordinary criminal prisoners in conditions reported to be so harsh that they amounted to cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment and caused many deaths. Amnesty International was also concemed about the use of the death penalty; at least two people were sentenced to death but it was not known if there were any executions.
Throughout 1986 Amnesty Intemational received reports from diverse sources that criminal prisoners and suspects held on remand in Pademba Road Prison in Freetown were subject to grossly inadequate conditions. In particular, prisoners were reported to be denied adequate food and medical attention. As a result, the mortality rate among such prisoners was reported to be high and Amnesty International considered that their conditions constituted cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Amnesty international wrote to President Joseph Saidu Momoh in December calling for urgent government action to improve prison conditions. In doing so. Amnesty Intemational stated that it had received no suggestion that prisoners had been starved as a matter of deliberate policy, but rather had suffered because of an apparent lack of resources at the prison. Amnesty Intemational maintained, however, that the government had a responsibility to ensure that sufficient resources were made
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
95
available to ensure that all prisoners were treated in accordance with standards laid down by the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Amnesty International cited the cases of a number of prisoners reported to have died in prison in 1985 and 1986, including four prisoners who died on one particular day, 30 June 1986. Amnesty International asked for confirmation from the government of this information and for details of what measures were being taken to correct the situation.
Amnesty International learned of two death sentences passed in 1986, one passed in June for murder and one passed on a police officer convicted of murder in November. Amnesty International appealed for clemency in both cases. The organization did not learn of any executions. There were believed to be a number of prisoners on "death row" in Pademba Road Prison and other prisons outside the capital.
