Mexico

Amnesty International's concerns included rejwrts of political killings, torture, ® ..	arbitrary arrest of political opponents and
.. ^	the use in evidence of confessions
obtained under duress. Amnesty International was also concerned about "disappearances" in previous years which have never been satisfactorily clarified by the authorities. In the course of the year Amnesty International received detailed documents from the Mexican Govemment in response to its concerns.
On 14 May Amnesty International published Mexico: Human Rights in Rural Areas — Exchange of Documents with the Mexican Government on Human Rights Violations in Oaxaca and Chiapas. This included the text of a memorandum submitted on 22 November 1985 to the govemment of President Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado, and the Mexican Govemment's reply. TTie memorandum presented the conclusions of extended research by Amnesty International into human rights violations in the two southeastern states. On 15 May the Mexican Govemment expressed the view that its replies had not been taken into consideration sufficiently and on 6 October it provided updated information on the cases raised by Amnesty International.
One was that of Elpidio Vázquez Vázquez, killed in Villa de las Rosas, Chiapas, on 9 September 1979. According to an eye-witness who was wounded in the attack, the assailants arrived outside the home of another man, Eleazar Grajales, a local peasant leader, in a municipal tmck and deliberately opened fire on him and his companions, killing Elpidio Vázquez. Two people, including the mayor of the town, were said to have been arrested on suspicion of involvement in the killing but later released. According to information provided by the Mexican Government on 6 January and included in Amnesty International's May report, the killing had not been officially reported, no suspects were identified and no investigation undertaken. The new information subsequently provided by the government corrected this; one of the assailants had been convicted and received a one-month prison sentence. The government also stated that the mayor had been charged with concealing the crime but that this charge had later been dropped. Another of the assailants, charged with the murder of Elpidio Vázquez, was never detained, despite an order for his arrest. Amnesty Intemational replied on
184	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
31 December asking for more information about this and several other cases.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of killings, detentions and torture in the states of Chiapas and Oaxaca, the majority in connection with land disputes. Violent evictions from farmland were reported in May in Chiapas. On 12 May eight people were reported killed and nine wounded when state security police entered the community of El Ambar, Jitotal, to evict the inhabitants. Seven other peasants were reported killed on the same day in Francisco Villa, Bochil, when houses were burned and peasants beaten. In some of the incidents, armed civilians were reported to have accompanied state security police. Numerous peasants were reportedly ill-treated during the evictions. Some of the communities affected maintained that they held legal land titles and others were negotiating their claims under an official state land-distribution program. Amnesty International appealed for a full, impartial inquiry into the killings.
On 31 December Amnesty Intemational addressed the state government of Oaxaca about reported killings of Triqui Indians in the San Juan Cópala area. Hilario Francisco Hernández was reportedly killed on 26 August, Manuel Martinez Garcia and Juan Francisco Martinez on 8 September and Marcelino de Jesús López, Manuel Vázquez Martínez and Martinicio Martínez on 9 September. Amnesty International had been concerned for several years about reports of human rights violations, including killings, from this region in the context of land disputes. In the last five named cases troops were reported to have accompanied civilian gunmen in perpetrating the kilHngs. Amnesty Intemational called for an impartial investigation and for those responsible to be brought to justice.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience seven men detained in Chiapias on 14 May. Some had taken part in a large demonstration by peasant farmers near Cintalapa for a higher price for their produce. After a large number of soldiers and police moved in, the demonstrators withdrew peacefully and, with the agreement of the state government, a delegation was named to go to the state capital to negotiate with officials. Twenty-nine people were arrested on the day of the protest, including the negotiators. Twenty-two were later released, but at the end of 1986 Jorge Enrique Hernández Aguilar, Manuel Hemández Gómez, Germán Jiménez Gómez, Jesús López Constantino, José Jacobo Nazar Morales and Julián Nazar Morales remained in Cerro Hueco prison being tried on charges including conspiracy, riotous assembly and terrorism. All seven later said they had been beaten and threatened to force them to confess to crimes they had not committed. Some of the 22 who were released
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	185
said they had been forced to incriminate the seven and later withdrew their statements. Amnesty Intemational believed that the seven had been accused of crimes because of their role in supporting peasant organizations.
During 1986 Amnesty International worked on behalf of 26 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience in Chiapas, Guerrero, Oaxaca, San Luis Potosí and Veracruz. 2^imo Hernández Ramírez, a bilingual teacher of Nahua Indian origin, was detained in Huistipán, Ilamatlán, Veracruz, in June 1985. He had been an active supp)orter of peasants, almost all Nahua Indians, who had been involved in disputes with local landowning families over land which they claimed belonged to their community. He was transferred to Jalapa where he claimed he was tortured for six days to try to make him confess to crimes, including murder, of which he was innocent. In July 1985 he was transferred to HuayacocotI prison and committed for trial. Until December 1985 there was a legal dispute over where he should be held, ending with a decision by a state court that he should remain in HuayacocotI. During this time there was no progress in the trial proceedings against him. In April 1986 he was transferred without warning to the prison of Perote and a week later to Pacho Viejo, Coatepec. On 19 May he was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment for murder, wounding and damage to property, and at the end of 1986 remained in prison awaiting the result of an appeal. Another Nahua Indian teacher whose case concerned Amnesty International was Guadalupe del Angel Antonia. At the time of his detention in May 1984 he was working as a primary school teacher in the community of Hueseo, Tampacán, in the Huasteca region of the state of San Luis Potosí. The community had for several years been involved in a dispute with a landowning family over land claimed by the village, and he was active in support of the community. He was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment on charges including kidnapping, breaking and entering and wounding. Amnesty International believed both he and Zósimo Hernández may have been accused of criminal acts because of their non-violent activities in their communities, and continued to investigate their cases.
In May Amnesty International appealed on behalf of five prisoners from Huitzilan de Serdán, Puebla, and urged investigations into killings committed there. Those killed belonged to the Unión Campesina Independiente (UCI), Independent Peasant Union, which is affiliated to the Coordinadora Nacional Plan de Ayala (CNPA), the National Plan de Ayala Coordinating Body, an umbrella organization of independent peasant organizations. Since February 1984 a rival peasant organization known as Antorcha Campesina, Peasant Torch, was alleged to have been responsible for numerous killings in
186	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Huitzilan de Serdán. In many of the incidents reported, state poUce officers were said to have accompanied Antorcha Campesina members. Juan Cabrera Pasión was shot dead in his home on 14 May 1984 in an incident reportedly involving 12 members of Antorcha Campesina accompanied by 10 uniformed state police agents. Manuel Peralta Cabanas and his 17-year-old son Martin Peralta Velazquez were killed on 22 April 1984, reportedly by four membere of Antorcha Campesina accompanied by 12 uniformed state police agents. In both cases, formal depositions were made by eye-witnesses naming the civilians alleged responsible. On 6 October 1986 the Mexican Government sent Amnesty International information on these cases. It stated that inquiries had been opened on the basis of these depositions, but that the police investigation had produced no result in either case. The government also provided information on the five prisoners whose cases Amnesty International had raised. There were serious allegations of torture and of irregularities in the trials of these prisoners, who belonged to a peasant organization opposed to Antorcha Campesina. One of them, Martin Melchi Lira, a 23-year-old peasant farmer, had been arrested on 5 June 1985 and was awaiting sentence on charges of murder and robbery. The evidence against him appeared to consist of statements by three other prisoners, who all maintained that they had been tortured to force them to sign statements incriminating themselves and others, including Martin Melchi. The information provided by the government indicated that the charges had been dismissed, and at the end of 1986 Amnesty International was seeking confirmation of his release.
Amnesty International continued to work on the cases of 27 people who "disappeared" after arrest, and took up a further 24 such cases. All these "disappearances" look place between 1972 and 1983, but Amnesty International was concerned that the government had not provided a satisfactory explanation of the fate of the prisoners following their arrests. Many of the "disappearances" took place in the context of police and army intelligence operations against armed opposition organizations in the 1970s. The official information given to relatives in many cases was that the victim had been killed in an armed confrontation with the security forces, had gone into hiding, or had died as a result of conflict between rival guerrilla factions. Victor Arias de la Cruz and Jorge Carrasco Gutiérrez were arrested in Guadalajara, Jalisco, on 28 February 1977. Neighbours who witnessed the arrest said that federal security police threw tear-gas bombs into the house they were in and the two gave themselves up, unhurt. On 1 March 1977 the Mexico City newspaper Novedades reported that they had been detained and had confessed to murder. Since then their families have been unable to ascertain their whereabouts or fate.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	187
The authorities stated that both men escaped after the confrontation, and that Jorge Carrasco subsequently died from injuries received.
In January Mexico ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In mid-June the Federal Law to Prevent and Punish Torture came into force. It obliged any authority aware of torture to report it immediately and prescribed up to 10 years' imprisonment for those in public office found guilty of torture. By the end of 1986 Amnesty International had received no information about trials or convictions under the law. Nevertheless, it continued to receive reports of torture of detainees. Juan Nicolás Hernández, a peasant farmer and leader of the Organización Independiente de Pueblos Unidos de las Huastecas, Independent Organization of the United Peoples of the Huastecas, a regional peasant organization, was arrested on 16 June in Huejutla, Hidalgo. He was reportedly taken into custody by armed men in plain clothes who identified themselves as federal judicial police officers, and later transferred to an army barracks. There he was reportedly left naked in a damp room for almost three days, then tortured while being interrogated; according to reports he was repeatedly beaten and kicked, liquid was forced up his nostrils, and when he lost consciousness, bottles of what he took to be urine were poured over his head. After several days of this treatment Juan Nicolás Hernández signed some documents, reportedly without knowing what they contained. On about 16 July he was handed over to the state judicial police. While in their custody his physical condition deteriorated sharply and he had an emergency operation in the civilian hospital. His relatives were only informed of his whereabouts in the last week of July. He was subsequently told that he was free to return home as soon as he was well enough to do so.
Amnesty International submitted information on Mexico to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and in August made an oral statement to this body.
188	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
