Lebanon
Amnesty International's concems in 1986 were the wide^read arbitrary arrest and detention without trial of political detainees; abductions and "disappearances"; ill-treatment and torture of prisoners and extrajudicial executions of prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about human rights violations committed in Lebanon by the forces of the Govemment of Lebanon, which appeared to be no longer in effective control of any part of the country, by the Govemment of Syria, whose forces controlled the eastem and northem regions of the country, and were deployed in West Beirut and by the Government of Israel. Amnesty
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	357
Intemational was also concemed about human rights abuses committed by the four main militias controlling territory, namely: the Lebanese Forces (LF), a coalition of Christian militias which controlled East Beimt and the region to the north as far as Barbara; Amal, a mainly Shi'a Muslim-based militia which controlled West Beimt, the area surrounding the Palestinian refugee camps in South Beimt, and parts of south Lebanon; the Progressive Socialist Party (PSP), a mainly Druze party which administered the Shouf mountains and agisted Amal in controlling West Beimt; and the South Lebanon Army (SLA), a mainly Christian militia, which since June 1985 had assisted the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) in controlling the "security zone" along the south Lebanon border. Amnesty Intemational also received numerous reports of abductions of Lebanese and foreign nationals and ill-treatment and killings of captives by many other militias, including Hizbollah and the Islamic Jihad. Amnesty Intemational as a matter of principle condemns the execution and torture of prisoners by anyone including opposition groups. However, Amnesty Intemational considers that governments, as the originators and guarantors of intemational human rights standards, bear responsibility for their implementation. The organization believed that the four main militias had governmental attributes, such as effective control of territory, and therefore had the means and the responsibility to protect human rights.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that all four militias arrested and detained political opponents, members of rival factions held as hostages and members of their own militia held for disciplinary reasons. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that detainees were denied their rights to a normal legal process, and to regular access to their families, and were not allowed the protection of the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Amnesty Intemational was concemed that many had "disappeared" and that families often faced difficulties in establishing the whereabouts of their relatives.
The Lebanese Forces were reported to be holding at least 100 people at the end of 1986 in various detention centres in Qarantina in East Beimt, in Byblos, Amshit, Adonis and Qattara. On 15 January Samir Geagea overthrew Elie Hobeika as leader of the LF. Following this and other clashes between rival Christian factions, hundreds of suspected opponents of Samir Geagea were arrested. Most were held for short periods. The Fifth Brigade of the Lebanese Army stationed in East Beimt, which fought alongside the LF against Elie Hobeika, was also reported to have carried out arrests during 1986 and to have handed over detainees to the LF. On 24 April, 33 Muslim detainees who had reportedly been held by the LF as hostages were released.
358	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
They included Lebanese Shi'ites, Sunnis and Druze, as well as two Syrians and two Egyptians. Two of them had been "missing" for 11 years. Although the LF declared that they were no longer holding any prisoners, other sources, including the released prisoners, claimed that there were other detainees. Amnesty Intemational took up for investigation the cases of three Lebanese Muslims from Sidon who were reported to have been arrested by the LF but who were not among those released in April. Fadi El Habbel was reported to have been arrested between Beimt and Tripoli in Febmary 1983; Fadi and Khalid Shehadeh, two brothers, were reported to have been arrested near Sidon in March 1984. Former detainees had reported seeing two of them in Qarantina prison within the past year. Amnesty International appealed to the leader of the LF asking for the reasons for their continued detention, urging that they be allowed to confront any charges against them, and arguing that they should not be held solely on the grounds of their political opinions, allegiances or ethnic origins. In December Amnesty Intemational received a letter from Karim Pakradouni, Vice-President of the Executive Committee of the LF, who said that they had released all detainees in their prisons on 15 January, when Samir Geagea took over as leader of the LF, and that the two brothers were not in prison on that date. Amnesty Intemational was continuing its investigations.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the detention by Amal militiamen of hundreds of Palestinians, members of the Sunni-based Murabitun militia (which in 1985 was defeated by Amal for control of West Beimt), members of the Lebanese Communist Party, members of the SLA and Amal deserters. At any one time there were rep>ortedly several hundred prisoners in captivity, most of whom were held for short periods. Amnesty Intemational received numerous reports from a variety of sources of young Palestinian men being arbitrarily arrested at Amal checkpoints near the Palestinian refugee camps in Beimt and south Lebanon, at Amal roadblocks on the Sidon to Beimt coastal road and on the road to Beimt Intemational Airport. Large numbers were arrested during periods of armed hostilities, which broke out frequently during 1986, between Amal and the Palestinians in the camps in Beimt and south Lebanon. Those arrested at such times were usually taken to Burj al Murr prison in Beimt. Some Palestinian detainees, allegedly leading members of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), were reported to have been handed over to the Syrian forces and held in Anjar in the Beka'a valley or in Damascus in Syria. The mainly Shi'a Sixth Brigade of the Lebanese Army, which was stationed in West Beimt and fought alongside Amal, also made arrests and held detainees.
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	359
The PSP were believed to be holding up to 100 detainees, including Christians held as hostages, and members of the PSP held for disciplinary reasons, but Amnesty Intemational could not verify individual cases.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about detainees held by the SLA in Khiam prison in south Lebanon. In July Amnesty Intemational received the names of over 220 people who were reported by former detainees to be held by the SLA in Khiam at that time. Among them were teenagers, women and old men. Amnesty Intemational believed that there were between 100 and 200 held at any one time in Khiam, mostly Lebanese suspected of carrying out military operations against the SLA or the Israeli Defence Forces.
In August Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Syrian Government on behalf of over 30 Lebanese arrested by Syrian forces in Tripoli between Febmary and June and transferred to Damascus for interrogation. Some were reportedly tortured. (See Syria entry.)
Amnesty Intemational received many allegations of ill-treatment and torture from former detainees held by Amal, the LF and the SLA. The widespread practice of incommunicado detention and the absence of any safeguards meant that all detainees held by the militias were at risk. Families often faced difficulties in discovering a detainee's whereabouts and obtaining permission to visit. The ICRC was allowed access to only a few of the detainees held by the militias: to some of those held by the LF and by Amal. In July it resumed visits, after more than two years, to PSP-held prisoners but was not permitted access to SLA-held prisoners in lOiiam.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees held by Amal continued. Many of these reports concemed Palestinians arrested at Amal checkpoints, who were beaten before being released. Palestinian combatants and suspected combatants arrested during hostilities were reportedly taken to Burj al Murr for interrogation. One former detainee interviewed by Amnesty Intemational, who had been arrested in June and taken to Burj al Murr, said that during interrogation he was hung from the ceiling by his feet and beaten with a thick stick, and forced into a metal chair and given electric shocks. Amnesty Intemational received similar allegations from other sources. In December, following reports of the arrest of hundreds of Palestinians in Beirut and south Lebanon and of the ill-treatment of detainees, including teenagers. Amnesty Intemational sent appeals to Nabih Berri, the leader of Amal (who was also Minister of Justice in the Lebanese Govemment). The organization urged him to ensure that detainees were held in accordance with intemationally accepted standards, that no one was held in prolonged incommunicado detention and that all detainees had immediate access to an
360	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
independent humanitarian organization such as the ICRC, and that no one was ill-treated or tortured or executed. In November Amnesty Intemational made a similar appeal on behalf of an Israeli airman who was shot down in south Lebanon on 16 October and whom Amal claimed to be holding. Amnesty Intemational received no reply to either appeal.
During the first half of 1986 Amnesty Intemational received allegations that detainees held by the SLA were tortured in Khiam prison, and that this sometimes took place in the presence of, or under the supervision of, members of the IDF or the Israeli Security Service. Amnesty Intemational interviewed one former detainee arrested in early 1986 who said that for most of a week he was hooded with a thick black canvas bag and had his hands tied behind his back. According to his account he was kicked all over his body, punched and beaten with electric cable, stripped, soaked with water and subjected to electric shocks to all parts of his body, including the testicles. He said that on three separate occasions he was suspended for several hours by his wrists, which were handcuffed together from a crossbar, with his toes barely touching the ground. In September Amnesty Intemational appealed to General Lahad, head of the SLA, and to the Israeli Minister of Defence, urging a public and impartial inquiry into these allegations, and access to the prison by the ICRC. General Lahad told journalists in June that no visits would be allowed until the whereabouts of three SLA soldiers, who had been kidnapped by the pro-Iranian armed group Hizbollah, were disclosed. The Israeli Attomey General in a letter of 21 December said that "while Israel does have good relations with the South Lebanon Army, it is in no position to dictate to them how to cope with the grave threat they face".
Amnesty Intemational also received reports of detainees held by the LF being ill-treated and tortured, but was unable to obtain detailed information.
In late December Amnesty Intemational received reports that over 200 people had been killed by Syrian troops and Syrian-backed militia in Tripoli (see Syria entry).
Three people sentenced to death by a Lebanese criminal court for murder had their sentences commuted to imprisonment. Several others sentenced to death in 1982 and 1983 were believed to be still in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Amal summarily and publicly executed three people by firing-squad during 1986: one on 8 July accused of committing four murders, and two others, on 30 July and 30 November, accused of planting bombs in cars. Amnesty Intemational called on the leader of Amal to take steps to prevent any further executions. Amnesty
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	361
Intemational received numerous reports that Palestinians, and others, arbitrarily arrested by Amal militiamen at roadblocks or outside the refugee camps had been killed on the spot.
The LF was also reported to have carried out summary executions of political opponents. Following an attempt by the former leader of the LF, Elie Hobeika, to overthrow Samir Geagea on 27 September, about 250 supporters of Elie Hobeika were reported to have been arrested and to have "disappeared". On 10 October, 67 bodies were discovered in a common grave near Jounieh. Later 30 bodies were recovered from the sea. Although their identities were never publicized, they were believed to have been among those arrested earlier by the LF. Amnesty Intemational leamed the names of 50 of the people reportedly arrested in September whose fate remained unknown and sought further information about them.
