Germany, Federal Republic of
As in previous years. Amnesty In-temational's main concems were the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service, issues relating to the exercise of the right to freedom of expression, and allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners.
Although the right to conscientious objection to military service is guaranteed in the constitution, some people who apply for conscientious objector status are turned down. If they are subsequently imprisoned Amnesty International adopts them as prisoners of conscience if it believes their applications were based on grounds of conscience. The only such prisoner known to Amnesty International during 1986 was Siegfried Schierle, whose application for conscientious objector status had been rejected because it was considered to be politically motivated. He was tried on 4 April 1986 and sentenced to six months' imprisonment for "desertion" and "refusal to obey orders". He started serving his sentence on 28 October and was released on probation on 27 December.
Although Amnesty Intemational did not adopt total objectors, that is those who refused to do both military and altemative service, as prisoners of conscience, the organization was concemed that some
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	295
total objectors were apparently punished, not only for refusing to do any form of national service, but also for the non-violent expression of their beliefs. Among them was Christoph Bausenwein who had initially applied for and received recognition as a conscientious objector to military service. However, while doing alternative service he came to the conclusion that it was not genuinely outside the country's military and defence system. He consequently refused to do the remaining four months of alternative service. He wrote a book explaining his views which was published in 1984. Christoph Bausenwein was subsequently sentenced to a total of 16 months' imprisonment for deserting his duties. On appeal the Higher Regional Court upheld the sentence, stating in its judgment of 19 June 1985 that he had not changed his views and that "on the contrary, in publishing his book on total objectors he made himself a spokesman and example for total objectors. Because of the exceptional stubbornness of the accused, which is liable to undermine the discipline necessary in civilian service, a severe sentence must be imposed in order to have some effect and to deter potential imitators." The judgment did not claim that the book itself contravened the law. Christoph Bausenwein started to serve his sentence on 15 January 1986. During the year Amnesty Intemational sent a series of letters to the Minister of Justice of Bavaria expressing concern that he had been given a longer prison sentence than normal for refusing to do alternative service, apparently because he had publicized his views on total objection.
Amnesty International received reports of beatings in Rheinbach prison in Nordrhein-Westfalen, including an allegation that on one occasion a doctor had to be called in to stitch up a prisoner's head following ill-treatment by prison staff. This had been the subject of investigation by the local procuracy, which had dismissed the allegations as unfounded. In a letter to the prisoner's lawyer justifying the decision the procuracy stated that the reliability of the prisoner's evidence was questionable since he had been convicted of crimes involving violence and deception. In a letter to the procuracy dated 5 December Amnesty International pointed out that in cases of alleged ill-treatment of prisoners there were frequently no eye-witnesses other than the prisoner and the prison staff involved, and that in view of the vulnerability of prisoners it was a matter for concern that their evidence was discounted on the grounds of crimes previously committed.
During 1986 the organization also intervened with the authorities on the issue of the isolation of politically motivated prisoners. Amnesty International was concerned about two aspects in particular: the fact that prisoners suspected of terrorist crimes were initially
296	Amnesty International Report 1967 Europe
detained under special provisions expressly forbidding contact with other prisoners, and the lack of medical monitoring of politically motivated prisoners in isolation. The latter was caused by the prisoners' refusal to be examined by prison doctors and the authorities' refusal to give prisoners access to doctors of their own choice. Amnesty International believes that prisoners should have the right to consult doctors outside the prison system. In February the organization wrote to the authorities detailing its concerns.
