Central African Republic
Amnesty International was œncemed about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government and the imprisonment of one convicted prisoner of conscience. The ban on political activities which was imposed when General André Kolingba took power in September 1981 remained in force throughout 1986. However, few arrests of opposition political party supporters were reported in comparison to previous years. In November a new constitution was approved by referendum. This confirmed President Kolingba in office for a further seven years and provided for the formation of a single ruling political party, the Rassemblement du peuple centrafricain (RPC), Central African People's Alliance. The constitution also provided for a Congress of two chambers, whose members were to be elected in July 1987.
Early in 1986 Amnesty International was able to confirm that many untried political detainees had been released in December 1985. Among them were a number of people who had been arrested in the Paoua area in the northwest of the country in April 1985 on suspicion of involvement with armed opposition to the government, and held without trial.
Three former government ministers and a number of other detainees who had been imprisoned for political reasons were released during 1986 under amnesties granted by President Kolingba. On 1 September, the fifth anniversary of President Kolingba's accession to power, the release was announced of Gaston Ouedane and Jérôme Allam, who had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in July 1984 after being convicted of complicity in an attempt to overthrow the government in March 1982. They were then ministers in the government and were arrested when they failed to report to President Kolingba during the night of the coup attempt. Amnesty International had investigated their cases and believed that they had been unfairly convicted when tried before the Special Tribunal responsible for hearing all political cases (see Amnesty International Report ¡985).
Also on 1 September the sentence on another former minister, François Guéret, was reduced from 10 to five years. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience after he was convicted in July 1985 of corresponding with a representative of a
37	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
foreign power (by writing a letter to the son of President Mitterrand of France soon after his arrest) and insulting President Kolingba. He was released on 1 December, the anniversary of the establishment of the country's first autonomous government in 1958. Sixty-three other prisoners were also reported to have been released on the same day. Among them were 10 people who were tried in June 1983 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for involvement in a bomb explosion at a Bangui cinema in July 1981. Amnesty International had been concerned that they appeared to have been convicted mainly because they had been members of the political opposition group which claimed responsibility for the bombing. However, three others who were sentenced to life imprisonment at the same trial were not released. In addition, three political prisoners convicted by the Special Tribunal in May 1982 on related charges of illegal possession of explosives remained under sentence of death during 1986. It was not known how many of the others released in December were held for political reasons.
In March 1986 students at the University of Bangui went on strike to protest against changes in the system of allocating grants and against the high level of unemployment among university graduates. Twelve students, who were either members or supporters of the Association nationale des étudiants centrafricains (ANECA), National Association of Central African Students, were subsequently arrested and brought to trial before the Special Tribunal in April, accused of endangering state security, causing disturbances and acting in complicity with foreign forces. They were also accused of distributing leaflets advocating the removal of French troops from the Central African Republic, following the crash of a French army plane which killed a number of civilians in Bangui. The students were reported not to have had access to defence counsel. The tribunal acquitted three of the students. The nine others were remanded in custody pending further inquiries. These nine were apparently released on I September, without appearing in court again. In the meantime. Amnesty International had made inquiries about their cases. Following the trial, in May 1986, the presiding judge, a military assessor and two prosecuting officials were dismissed by President Kolingba, who complained that the trial judge had allowed the defendants to attract too much publicity.
At the end of October the former head of state, Jean-Bedel Bokassa, who had been living abroad since 1979, returned to the Central African Republic and was arrested on arrival. Two French citizens accompanying him were also arrested. The death sentence imposed on Jean-Bedel Bokassa in absentia in 1980 was annulled and he was referred for trial by Bangui's Criminal Court on the same
38
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
charges for which he had previously been tried. These included complicity in murder and embezzling state funds. The trial began on 26 November, but was postponed until 15 December at the prosecution's request. The trial was continuing at the end of 1986 and the court had heard evidence concerning only a few of the deaths in custody for which the prosecution claimed Jean-Bedel Bokassa had been responsible. The trial was attended by an Amnesty International observer.
Following Jean-Bedel Bokassa's return to the country, a journalist, Thomas Koazo, was reported to have been arrested after making remarks in a radio interview about an alleged meeting between Jean-Bedel Bokassa and President Kolingba. Amnesty International investigated the reasons for his arrest and believed that he might be a prisoner of conscience.
The organization was also concerned about the detention of Ruth Rolland, a former President of the country's Red Cross Society. She was arrested in November after distributing leaflets in Bangui accusing senior government officials of stealing diamonds found by private prospectors.
