Spain
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees held incommunicado under the anfi-terrorist law continued to be Amnesty International's main concern. Many of the allegations of torture and ill-treatment were made by Basques arrested in Spain after being expelled from France. Judicial proceedings were in progress in connection with allegations of torture involving many members of the security forces; in a prominent trial, three Civil Guard officers were convicted of torturing detainees. In another case the security forces refused to comply with the order of the court conducting a judicial investigation into allegations of torture. Amnesty Intemational adopted an imprisoned conscientious objector to military service as a prisoner of conscience for the first time since the introduction of new legislation on conscientious objection in December 1984.
Amnesty International considered that the widespread use of incommunicado detention under the anti-terrorist law facilitated the torture and ill-treatment of detainees. The Minister of the Interior
312	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
declared in an official statement on 17 September that 1,026 people had been held incommunicado under this law since its introduction on 26 December 1984. In the first seven months of 1986, 295 people were held incommunicado; only 30 per cent of these detainees were brought before a court. According to this statement, 90 per cent of the arrests related to Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), the armed Basque group, which was allegedly responsible for 34 killings in this period.
In December the government announced that it intended to allow certain articles of the anti-terrorist law to expire in January 1987 but the exceptional powers given to the police to hold detainees incommunicado for up to 10 days were to remain. Amnesty Intemational noted no improvements in safeguards, such as improving access to legal assistance; removing procedural restrictions in the exercise of habeas corpus under the anti-terrorist law; or increasing the effectiveness of judicial supervision or medical examination of detainees.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of torture and ill-treatment. In July, for the first time, such allegations were made by Basques expelled from France under a new policy of the French Govemment. The first two Basques arrived on 19 and 22 July and were immediately arrested under the anti-terrorist law. They were held incommunicado in the Dirección General de Seguridad (DGS), General Security Headquarters, in Madrid. After interrogation both men were charged with belonging to an armed band and transferred to Carabanchel prison. According to reports received by Amnesty International, both men made complaints to the court about their treatment. In particular, José Varona López alleged that he had been hit on the head with a telephone directory, hooded and beaten while tied down. The forensic surgeon attached to the court described in writing injuries to his wrists, feet and legs which apj>eared consistent with his allegations. On 30 July Amnesty Intemational asked the Minister of the Interior to investigate these allegations. No reply was received. A further 24 Basques were expelled from France to Spain in 1986 and numerous allegations of torture and ill-treatment were made. In all these cases, the expellees were handed over directly to the police at the frontier, transferred to Madrid and held incommunicado under the anti-terrorist law.
Juan Ramón Ruiz de Gauna was handed over to the Spanish police on 30 July. He alleged that he was beaten during his transfer from the border to Madrid and his interrogation in the DGS, where he s|>ent a night chained by the neck to a radiator. He received two medical examinations and was transferred to Carabanchel prison on 2 August where a prison doctor issued a certificate recording injuries consistent
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	313
with his allegations. In the case of Augustin Azkarate Intxaurrondo, expelled to Spain from France on 15 October, the judge of the Central Court in Madrid asked for him to be admitted to hospital after he had spent six days incommunicado in the DOS. The prisoner alleged that he had been severely beaten and given electric shocks in the police headquarters in San Sebastian before being transferred to Madrid where he was again beaten and had his head forcibly held under water.
On 29 December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of the Interior giving details of further allegations of torture and ill-treatment made by Basque refugees.
The President of the Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos, Association for Human Rights, stated when presenting the Association's annual report at the end of the year that 25 members of the police and Civil Guard had been convicted for acts of torture, ill-treatment or injuries to prisoners in 1986. An estimated 150 further trials on such charges were pending.
The Provincial Court of San Sebastian, in an important decision of 23 November, convicted three members of the Civil Guard of torturing three brothers - José Maria, Lucio and Victor Olarra — in 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984, 1985 and 1986). One was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and three years' suspension from service, and the other two to four months' imprisonment and two years' suspension each. A fourth Civil Guard was acquitted. The court also recognized that a fourth detainee had been injured but concluded that it could not establish how this had occurred. The judges found that José María Olarra had been tied to a plank allowing his head to be forced into a bucket of water. All three brothers were kicked, punched and beaten.
On 17 September the Minister of the Interior publicly announced that he had ordered Civil Guards to disregard the order of a court in Bilbao which was investigating allegations of torture. Ninety officers had been requested by the investigating judge to attend an identity parade. The Minister stated that the Minister of Justice had been consulted and the decision was made with the full support of the President of the Govemment. However, the officers did participate in the identity parades after an appeal against the order had been dismissed by the court.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Francese Alexandrí Muchart, a conscientious objector to military service whose application for conscientious objector status was rejected because it was presented after the date stipulated for his induction into the army. Such applications are inadmissible under the provisions of the 1984 law on conscientious objection. Amnesty
314	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
International has criticized this and other major features of the law (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Francesc Alexandri was imprisoned in a military barracks in May pending trial on charges of desertion and refusal to perform military service. On 10 December, following a 26-day hunger-strike, he was transferred to his home where he remained under house arrest at the end of 1986.
