United Kingdom
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the inadequacy of investigations into fatal shootings by the security forces in Northern Ireland. It continued to be concemed about judicial procedures and about allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners in Northern Ireland. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the detention pending deportation of Amanullah Khan, a Kashmiri leader in Britain, whom it believed might be a prisoner of conscience, and about allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners in Britain.
Over the years Amnesty Intemational has been concemed about incidents in Northern Ireland in which members of the security forces shot people dead in circumstances that gave rise to allegations that these killings were planned. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the government on 5 August expressing concem at the govemment's failure to deal adequately with issues raised by a series of incidents since 1982 in which unarmed individuals were shot dead by security forces (see Amnesty International Report 1986). The organization
326	Amnesty Intemational Report 1967 Middle East/N. Africa
reiterated its call for the govemment to set up an independent judicial inquiry into these issues and said that a series of trials arising from the killings, in which police officers had been charged with murder, had established that senior police officers had made efforts to conceal important evidence. Similar allegations were made in connection with an inquiry into police conduct related to the killings headed by a senior British police officer, John Stalker, who was removed from duty before his report had been completed. Amnesty Intemational said that the allegations in connection with the Stalker inquiry made the need for an independent judicial inquiry even more pressing. The govemment replied on 1 September restating its opposition to setting up such an inquiry because it believed the existing investigative procedures and laws were adequate (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986). On 30 September Amnesty Intemational made public its concerns. On 16 December it accepted an invitation from the Minister of State for Northern Ireland to meet govemment officials in the following year to discuss its concerns. By the end of 1986, the first of three parts of a report about the above-mentioned killings had been submitted to the Chief Constable of Northern Ireland by another senior British police officer, who took over the extemal inquiry from John Stalker in June 1986.
Amnesty International was concemed about judicial procedures in the special "Diplock Courts" in Northern Ireland in which cases of alleged terrorism are heard without a jury. In particular, the organization monitored those cases in which uncorroborated evidence from alleged former accomplices, commonly known as "supergrasses", formed the sole basis of the prosecution's evidence. Four appeal hearings took place in 1986, in each of which most of the convictions under appeal were quashed. In July 1986, 18 people who had been sentenced in August 1983 on the basis of evidence given by Christopher Black, a former Irish Republican Army (IRA) member, had their convictions quashed. In exchange for giving evidence, Christopher Black had been granted immunity from prosecution. The Appeal Court judges decided that he had not been a completely honest or reliable witness. In the same month, the Appeal Court quashed a further two convictions based on the evidence of another IRA informer, Kevin McGrady. In November the convictions of eight people, some of whom had been in custody for over four years, were quashed, after the judges mied that the IRA informer, Robert Quigley, was an "evasive, devious, inventive and lying witness". He too had been given immunity from prosecution. Amnesty International delegates observed the appeal hearing of 27 people convicted on the basis of evidence given by former Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) member Harry Kirkpatrick. In December, 24 of the 27
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	327
people had their convictions quashed. The judgment described Harry Kirkpatrick as a "dangerously flawed witness" whose evidence could not be relied on to sustain the convictions where there was no corroboration. In October the Director of Public Prosecutions dropped the charges against some 20 people who had been accused on the basis of testimony by a former IRA member, Angela Whoriskey.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate allegations of ill-treatment of suspects detained under the anti-terrorist legislation in Castlereagh and Gough Barracks interrogation centres. Former detainees alleged that during interrogation they had been hit, kicked and threatened with violence against themselves and their families. The organization also received reports of ill-treatment of prisoners in Crumlin Road and Magilligan prisons.
Amnesty International investigated allegations that strip-searches of women prisoners in Armagh Prison, Northern Ireland, in recent years had not been carried out solely for security purposes, but with the deliberate intention of degrading or humiliating the women. As part of its investigation, the organization wrote to the govemment on 23 February seeking clarification of the circumstances in which a number of strip-searches had taken place in Armagh Prison. Amnesty International believes that strip-searching constitutes ill-treatment when it is carried out with the deliberate intention of humiliating or degrading prisoners. Furthermore, the organization considers that the practice of strip-searching, given its nature, is oi>en to abuse and should be used only where strictly necessary. The government replied on 24 March stating that strip-searching was a routine, necessary security measure, and that there was no question of the searches being used to degrade or humiliate prisoners. In November the organization wrote again to the government to say that its concern had not been alleviated and to urge the government to reconsider its policy on strip-searching.
Amnesty International was concemed about the detention pending deportation of Amanullah Khan, a Kashmiri leader who had lived in Britain since 1977. The organization had monitored his case since his arrest in September 1985, when he was charged with possessing chemicals in order to make explosives. In September 1986 he was acquitted, but was immediately detained once again pending his deportation to Pakistan on unspecified grounds of national security. On 22 October 1986 Amnesty International wrote to the government stating that it believed that Amanullah Khan might be a prisoner of conscience, detained for his non-violent political activities in the United Kingdom in support of the independence of Kashmir. The organization asked the government to make public its reasons for
338	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
deciding to detain and deport him. On 13 November Amanullah Khan made representations to a government-appointed advisory panel, which has no binding powers. During the hearing he was not entitled to legal representation. On 17 and 19 November Amnesty Intemational again appealed to the govemment for more detailed information. It pointed out in particular that the government's statement of the reasons for deportation contained information which it claimed linked him with violent activities but which Amanullah Khan said confused his own organization with another. On 16 December Amnesty Intemational telexed the government to express disappointment at not receiving any replies to its letters. However, Amanullah Khan had been deported to Pakistan the previous day.
In recent years, a considerable volume of new evidence and information has come to light in connection with the convictions and life sentences of 10 people for bombings of pubs in Birmingham, Guildford and Woolwich in 1975. The 10 pereistently claimed that their signed confessions had been extracted by physical ill-treatment and threats of violence, while they were being held incommunicado. In December the organization requested the government to review the cases urgently with a view to establishing whether the prisoners had been fairly convicted.
Amnesty International received allegations that Ella O'Dwyer and Martina Anderson, two remand prisoners in Brixton prison, London were being strip-searched not primarily for security reasons but in order to degrade and humiliate them. On 29 May the organization wrote to the Home Secretary expressing concem at repxjrts that they had been strip-searched more often than necessary given the strict security conditions under which they were being held. On 25 June the government replied that strip-searches were only undertaken where the interests of security required that they should be, and refuted any suggestion that they had been carried out in a manner calculated to harass, humiliate or degrade the women concerned.
The report of a government-established inquiry into the interrogation of eight servicemen by the UK military police in Cypms in 1984 was published in May 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). It concluded that none of the servicemen had been subjected to cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment. However, the report also concluded that they had been, for part of the time, unlawfully held in custody during their interrogation and had been subjected to pressures, including isolation and repeated lengthy interviews, that were likely to render their statements unreliable. The government decided to compensate them fmancially for their periods of unlawful detention. By the end of 1986 no disciplinary proceedings had been brought against the military police.
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
329
