Togo
Amnesty Internationa! was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of other suspected opponents of the government. New information was received during 1986 about the torture and ill-treatment of detainees in late 1985; a commission of inquiry established after these allegations were first made appeared either to have been inadequately conducted or to have had some of its findings suppressed prior to their publication in January. Amnesty International was also concerned about the death penalty: in December, 13 people were sentenced to death, three of them in absentia, for alleged involvement in a coup attempt, but they had not been executed by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	111
In June Amnesty International published a report, Togo: Political Imprisonment and Torture, which described the long-term detention of government opponents without trial or after unfair trials. It detailed also the use of torture and cases of deaths in detention, and called for urgent government action to end human rights abuses. In particular. Amnesty International sought the release of all prisoners of conscience, the release or trial of other uncharged political detainees, and action to prevent torture - the publication of all detainees' names and places of imprisonment, impartial and thorough investigation of torture allegations and deaths in custody, and regular, independent inspection of prisons and interrogation centres. Amnesty International also called for the repeal of legislation introduced in December 1985 which empowered the police to hold people in custody for an unlimited period, on the grounds that this would facilitate torture.
On 1 January an Amnesty International delegation which had gone to Togo to seek information about the progress of the commission of inquiry was expelled from the country. Following this. Amnesty International appealed publicly to the government to publish the commission's finding. It did so on 14 January.
The day before publication of the commission's report President Gnassingbe Eyadema released several political detainees to mark the anniversary of his accession to power in 1967. They included seven prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, all of whom had been arrested in August or September 1985 as suspected opponents of the government. Some of them were reported to have been tortured following arrest and while detained incommunicado, and in October 1985 had been seen by Amnesty International delegates while still suffering injuries. It was in connection with their treatment that the commission of inquiry had been established. Among those freed were Aluka Kodjo Kokou, an agricultural engineer, who had been in hospital at the time of the Amnesty International mission in October 1985, and Alessi de Medeiros, a bailiff, who had a broken arm and broken ribs as a result of beatings inflicted in detention.
Among those who remained in detention following the 13 January releases were Komlakuma Doe and Kossi Assinyo, both of whom had been detained without trial since December 1984 and adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. In addition, a number of other detainees arrested in 1985 were still held. Three of these, Adeyinka Randolph and her brother, Ati Randolph, together with Yema Gu-Konu, a university lecturer, were sent for trial on charges of possessing or distributing subversive literature. They had been arrested in September 1985. In January Amnesty International
112	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
received information about further arrests in late 1985 in which as many as 30 people were re|X)rted to have been detained for possessing or distributing leaflets critical of the government. They included Tanko Diasso, a university lecturer, his brother, Ibrahim Adamou Diasso, and Fousseni Maman, a hotel worker. In late January Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of these detainees and subsequently adopted the Diasso brothers, Fousseni Maman and five others as prisoners of conscience. One, Kodjo Ekpe, was reported to have been released in eariy March but the others were held until July, when all seven were apparently freed.
In April the government released four other detainees whose cases had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational following their arrest in September 1985, including Yawo Sémanou Dobou, a telecommunications engineer. Thereafter, Komlakuma Doe and Kossi Assinyo were released in July, and in September the authorities freed Mensah Messanvi Biova and three others who had been held since August 1985 in connection with bomb explosions in Lomé. They were released after several other people were arrested in possession of explosives and charged with the previous year's bomb explosions. The four had been held incommunicado for several weeks in breach of the law, which required detainees to be brought before a magistrate or released within 48 hours. Amnesty International had taken up their cases for investigation in late 1985 and expressed its concern to the government about the illegality of their detention. The authorities then introduced new legislation to empower the police to hold people in custody for unlimited periods.
At the end of July Adeyinka Randolph and the two others charged with her were brought to trial before the Correctional Court in Lomé. All three were convicted of producing and distributing leaflets opposing the government. Ati Randolph and Yema Gu-Konu received five-year sentences. Amnesty International continued to appeal for their release as prisoners of conscience. Adeyinka Randolph received a three-year sentence but was freed on 31 July, the day after the trial, on President Eyadéma's orders. After charges were brought against the three defendants. Amnesty Intemational told the government that it wished to send an observer to their trial. In resp>onse, however, the government stated that no such observer from Amnesty International would be permitted.
During the trial Ati Randolph made detailed allegations of torture following his arrest in late 1985. From the report of the commission of inquiry published on 14 January it was not clear whether he had been interviewed or his treatment investigated by the commission. The report, as published, did not give the number or identities of detainees interviewed and provided few details concerning the
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	113
proceedings and the conduct of the inquiry.
The commission of inquiry did not report that detainees had been tortured but criticized the detention of susf)ects beyond the 48-hour legal limit and the standards of hygiene in places of detention. It concluded that the death in custody of Aka Adote in September 1985 was the result of natural causes. However, it apparently failed to order an autopsy and did not appear to have investigated thoroughly allegations that Aka Adote had been severely tortured shortly before his death.
The commission's findings did not accord with information received by Amnesty Intemational in 1985. Nor did it accord with the findings of another non-governmental organization and two French lawyers who inquired into the use of torture and made public their findings in January. The two lawyers, who had been commissioned by two French organizations, alleged that detainees had been systematically tortured with electric shocks; the Association des juristes africains, the African Jurists Association, which had visited Togo at the govemment's request, reported that several detainees had been severely beaten in police custody and criticized the detention of suspects beyond the 48-hour limit. Amnesty International received information suggesting that some of the commission of inquiry's findings had been suppressed by the authorities between the completion of the commission's report in November 1985 and its publication on 14 January, but it was not possible to confirm this.
Thirteen people were sentenced to death in December after a trial before the State Security Court. This trial arose out of an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the govemment on 23/24 September in which a number of people were killed. In all, 35 people were charged, including several nationals of neighbouring states, but 10 of them were tried in absentia. Of the defendants in court, 10 were sentenced to death, seven were sentenced to life imprisonment, five received sentences of up to one year's imprisonment, and three were acquitted. Following the trial Amnesty International appealed to President Eyadema to extend clemency to those under sentence of death and expressed concern that defendants tried by the State Security Court were denied the right of appeal to a higher court. None of those sentenced to death had been executed by the end of 1986.
In July Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in Togo to the UN under its procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
Amnesty International Report 1967 Africa
