Kenya
Amnesty International was concerned about a large number of political arrests during 1986; it was investigating whether those arrested were prisoners of conscience. Over 200 i>eople were arrested for alleged opposition to the government, many of whom were accused of having links with a clandestine opposition organization, Mwakenya {Muungano wa Wazalendo wa Kukuomboa Kenya — Union of Nationalists for the Liberation of Kenya). Amnesty International was concerned that many "disappeared" after being arrested by unidentified security officers: they were held in custody for several days or weeks without official acknowledgement or explanation. Subsequently, nine were formally detained under the Preservation of Public Security Act, 50 were convicted of political offences in trials which appeared to be unfair, and the remainder were released without charge. Amnesty International was concerned about allegations that many were tortured or ill-treated. Amnesty International was also concerned about the imprisonment since 1982 of three prisoners of conscience, one of whom was released in December. The organization was concerned about the death penalty.
In early March Ngotho Kariuki, a former university lecturer, Kariuki Gathitu and Joseph Kamonye Manje, both lecturers, Oyangi Mbaja, a businessman, and three other men were arrested — apparently for p>olitical reasons — and held without explanation of the grounds of arrest or why they were not brought to court within the normal 24-hour limit. Amnesty International inquired about their
61	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
legal status, their whereabouts in custody, and the grounds for their arrests, and urged the authorities to charge or release them. The organization appealed for them to be given immediate access to legal representatives, their families and doctors. A habeas corpus application by Ngotho Kariuki's family on 21 March led to the disclosure by the authorities that he had been detained four days earlier under the Preservation of Public Security Act, which permits detention for an indefinite period without charge or trial. Kariuki Gathitu's detention under this act was admitted two weeks later. Under the act detainees must be given a written statement of the grounds for detention within five days. A Detention Review Tribunal reviews the case within one month and then every six months. Detainees have the right to legal representation at the tribunal hearing, which is secret. The tribunal's findings are also kept secret and are not binding.
Between 25 and 27 March Joseph Kamonye Manje, Oyangi Mbaja and the three other prisoners, one of whom had apparently been held secretly since January, were brought to court and charged with sedition. They all pleaded guilty and two were sentenced to 18 and 30 months' imprisonment for "neglecting to report a felony" (namely, the existence of an anti-government organization producing seditious publications) and three received prison terms of four and a half or five years for possession of a seditious publication. The publication, Mpatanishi ("The Unifier"), which was published by Mwakenya, was said to criticize the government and to advocate socialism in Kenya, although its contents were not disclosed in court. Amnesty International asked the authorities about their trials, in particular about whether the defendants had been allowed legal representation and whether any of the documents advocated violence or merely criticized the government. No reply was received.
At least six other people were arrested in early April and held incommunicado for a prolonged period without legal basis or official acknowledgement. Among them were Mukaru Ng'ang'a, a former prisoner of conscience detained from 1982 to 1984, and Julius Mwandawiro Mghanga, a former student leader previously imprisoned in 1985. Mukaru Ng'ang'a was detained under the Preservation of Public Security Act on 11 July after three months' unlawful detention. Julius Mwandawiro Mghanga was brought to court on 29 April and sentenced to five years' imprisonment after pleading guilty to possession of a seditious publication.
By the end of 1986 over 2(X) people had reportedly been arrested in similar circumstances. They were illegally held for several days or weeks without official acknowledgement in incommunicado detention before being released without charge, tried, or formally detained under the Preservation of Public Security Act. Among those formally
62	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
detained under the Preservation of Public Security Act were Wanyiri Kihoro and Mirugi Kariuki, both lawyers, Katama Mkangi, a lecturer, and a businessman and two university students. A total of 50 prisoners were tried and convicted of political offences and imprisoned for periods ranging from 15 months to seven years. TTiey included students, teachers, businessmen, civil servants and farmers. They pleaded guilty to offences such as the possession or distribution of seditious publications, neglecting to report a felony, or taking an unlawful oath (to join the Mwakenya organization). Several were alleged by the prosecution to be members of Mwakenya but this did not form part of the charges against them. Three former university students pleaded guilty in July to damaging a railway line on the instructions of Mwakenya, and were imprisoned for seven years.
There was particular concern at the "disapp)earance" of Kiboi Kariuki, former chairman of the Railways Union, after his arrest on 22 October. It was reix)rted to Amnesty International that he was held secretly by the Special Branch in Nairobi and was being tortured. Urgent appeals were made to the government and his "disappearance" was reported to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. He was released at the end of December, seriously ill as a result of torture.
Amnesty International was investigating whether some of the detained or convicted prisoners might be prisoners of conscience, although it recognized that at least one of the Mwakenya publications named in court advocated violence. Amnesty International was also inquiring into whether those taken to court received fair trials, in view of the apparent denial of access to legal representatives. There were also allegations that "confessions" and guilty pleas had been extracted through torture.
Many of those arrested were reportedly tortured by Special Branch police officers in Nairobi to make them "confess" and plead guilty in court. Some prisoners were allegedly held naked in water-flooded cells for periods ranging from two days to a week at a time, beaten with slicks, deprived of food for several days, held in dimly-lit underground cells and denied medical treatment. Amnesty International's appeals to the authorities to ensure that prisoners were protected from torture received no response.
In December an Amnesty International delegate visited Kenya to investigate these trials. The delegate met the Attorney General and other officials and observed two trials of people charged with taking an unlawful oath to join Mwakenya. A report was in preparation at the end of 1986.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of three prisoners of conscience held since 1982. Otieno Mak'Onyango, a
63	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
newspaper editor, and Raila Odinga, a civil servant, were both detained indefinitely without trial under the Preservation of Public Security Act. Maina wa Kinyatti, a lecturer, was serving a six-year prison sentence for possession of a seditious document. Otieno Mak'Onyango was reported to be in persistent ill-health and to have been denied adequate medical treatment. Amnesty International welcomed his release by presidential order on 12 December, Independence Day, but renewed its appeals for the release of Raila Odinga and Maina wa Kinyatti, who were still imprisoned at the end of 1986. A legal action by Raila Odinga in February seeking an order for his release and complaining about ill-treatment had been unsuccessful. Maina wa Kinyatti was reportedly denied proper medical treatment for several medical complaints including one which was endangering his eye-sight. He was also denied the one-third remission of sentence for which he became eligible in October.
Six of the university students sentenced in 1982 and 1983 to prison terms of between five and 10 years for sedition (see Amnesty International Report 1986) were released during 1985 after being granted remission of their sentences.
Amnesty International was concerned about the poor conditions in which untried political detainees and convicted p>olitical prisoners were held. Medical treatment was inadequate, diet was poor, and prisoners slept on the cement floors of their cells with only blankets and a mat. Convicted prisoners were allowed monthly visits and regular correspondence with relatives but political detainees' contact with their families was severely restricted. Raila Odinga and Maina wa Kinyatti were held in permanent solitary confinement.
By the end of 1986 there were believed to be up to 200 prisoners held under sentence of death for murder or robbery with violence, including more than 25 convicted of these offences during the year. At least eight executions were believed to have taken place during 1986, although without official announcement.
64
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
