Syria
The main concems of Amnesty Intemational continued to be the detention without charge or trial of thousands of political prisoners under Syria's state of emergency legislation; the imprisonment of 275 prisoners of conscience; the long-term detention without trial of most political detainees and the detention of political prisoners after the expiry of their sentences; the routine use of torture by the security forces; "disappearances"; extrajudicial executions; and the death penalty. The authorities did not respond to any of Amnesty Intemational's appeals in 1986.
During 1986 Amnesty International worked for the release of 275 adopted prisoners of conscience and was investigating the cases of 181 possible prisoners of conscience. The majority continued to be held without trial, some for over 16 years. It leamed of the release of 67 prisoners on whose behalf it was working, of whom 66 were adopted prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International learned of the release in May of Haitham Kamel Mustafa, a 20-year-old student detained without trial for six years. He was arrested for his involvement in establishing a prohibited organization, Ittihad al-Nidal al-Shuyu'i, Union for Communist Struggle (see Amnesty International Report 1986). He was reported to be in poor health upon release. In November 10 adopted prisoners of conscience were released. They were among a number of lawyers arrested in April and May 1980 after a one-day strike by the Syrian Bar Association on 31 March 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1984). However, Amnesty Internationa! remained concerned about three lawyers from this group, 'Abd al-Majid Manjouneh, Salim 'Aqil and Thuraya 'Abd al-Karim, who continued to be held without trial. Amnesty Intemational also continued to investigate the cases of over 150 doctors and engineers detained since 1980 because of their support for the strike.
Amnesty Intemational learned that 56 members of the banned Communist Party Political Bureau (CPPB), had been released, three of them during 1986. Among them was the novelist Wadi' Ismandar who was freed in October. The organization continued to call for the release of 88 other party members held without trial since their arrest, some for over seven years.
Amnesty International continued to seek the release of 100 members of the banned Party for Communist Action (PCA), arrested at various times since 1980, none of whom had been charged or tried.
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	371
In 1986 several people suspected of involvement with the PCA were arrested, some of whom were arrested as hostages. Shafiqa al-'Ali was arrested on 28 April instead of her husband Faraj Birqadar, who had been wanted since 1984 because of his PCA membership.
Between February and June, over 180 Palestinians and Syrians were arrested by the security forces in Damascus and other cities, of whom 82 remained in detention without trial at the end of 1986. Among them were members of the PCA and several Palestinian groups, including Fatah al-lntifadah (Abu Musa's group) and the Palestine Liberation Front — Provisional Command. Several of the detainees were said to have been tortured, and one reportedly died in custody as a result. Among the detainees were whole families arrested as hostages: for example, the mother, three sisters, wife and sister-in-law of Samir al-Hassan, a Palestinian journalist, were arrested on 30 March. His mother was released when he was arrested on 1 April, and his other relatives were released in June.
In August Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on behalf of three members of a Jewish family held incommunicado without trial for over eight months. Shehade Besso and his sons Salim and Jacques were arrested in December 1985, reportedly because one of their relatives failed to return to Syria in accordance with guarantees given to the authorities. According to reports the three men were ill-treated during detention and the health of 70-year-old Shehade Besso had deteriorated seriously as a result. In October Amnesty International learned that they had been released.
Amnesty International sought further details about over 150 people detained without trial in the custody of al-Amn al Siyassi, the political security force. Most were arrested in September on suspicion of involvement with the prohibited al-Tanzim al-Sha'bi al-Nasiri, Popular Nasserist Organization. Among them were doctors, engineers and lawyers, several of whom were reportedly tortured.
In August Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 33 Lebanese nationals arrested by Syrian forces in Tripoli, Lebanon, between February and June. They were among a group of 38 people, five of whom were released in mid-1986, said to have been arrested in their homes at night and transferred to Damascus for interrogation. Some were reportedly tortured during detention, among them Tareq Marhaba, a teacher who reportedly had a heart attack as a result. He was released in December. At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational leamed that 12 detainees from this group had been released, but that 14 other Lebanese nationals had been arrested in Tripoli and Beirut and taken to Damascus.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in the custody of the security forces.
372	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
among them adopted prisoners of conscience. In April the organization appealed on behalf of two adopted prisoners of conscience — Faisal Tahhan and Mufid Mi'mari — who were reportedly tortured to force them to sign declarations renouncing their political affiliations.
In August Amnesty International called on the govemment to investigate reports of the death under torture of Sulaiman Mustafa Ghaibur, a Syrian soldier from Hama, while in the custody of al-Mukhabarat al-'Askariyya, Military Intelligence. He died on 1 May and a coffin bearing his body was retumed on the same day to his family, who were told that he had committed suicide and were instmcted to bury the coffin immediately without opening it. According to Amnesty International's information, the coffin was opened and his body had bmises on the wrists and bullet wounds in the neck. It was alleged that he had been shot after his death under torture in order to simulate suicide.
In August and December Amnesty Intemational also called for investigations into reports of the torture of four other detainees in the custody of al-Mukhabarat al-'Askariyya: Amina 'Omar, Mazin Rabi' and 'Ali al-Rifa'i, all Palestinians, and Karim 'Akkari, a Syrian. Two of them allegedly attempted to commit suicide after being tortured.
A number of appeals were issued during 1986 on behalf of detainees who were reportedly seriously ill and being denied adequate medical care. Among them was Mahmud Jalbut, a Palestinian clerk who was said to be in a critical condition as a result of a stomach haemorrhage. Appeals were also sent on behalf of four prisoners reported to be suffering from various ailments, including diabetes, inflammation of the oesophagus and kidney stones. The four — Husain Zaidan, Mustafa Fallah, Mahmud al-Fayyad and Jalal al-Din Mirhij — had been detained without trial since May 1985 when their 15-year sentences expired (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Amnesty International sought official clarification of the legal basis of their continued detention and urged their immediate release unless they were charged with a criminal offence.
In November Amnesty Intemational leamed that Tawfiq Draq al-Siba'i, a neurologist who "disappeared" following his arrest in May 1980, was alive and was being held in al-Mezze Military Prison, reportedly for involvement in matters affecting state security. In 1984 Amnesty International had received unconfirmed reports that he had been killed in a massacre at Tadmur Prison on 27 June 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Another prisoner, Khalil Brayez, "disappeared" two months after the expiry of his 15-year sentence in October 1985. He had not been released from prison. A former captain and intelligence officer in the Syrian army whose case the organization has been investigating since 1978, Khalil Brayez was
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	373
last known to have been detained in al-Hassakeh Prison.
At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information about reports of the killing of over 200 people by Syrian troops and Syrian-backed militia in Tripoli, Lebanon, in the third week of December. Some of those who died were said to have been killed during armed clashes between Syrian troops and militiamen of Harakat al-Tawhid al-Islami, Islamic Unification Movement. However, Amnesty Intemational's information indicated that many of the victims were unarmed civilians summarily executed shortly after arrest. Hundreds of other p>eople were reported to have been arrested in the Tripoli area by Syrian troops or to have "disappeared".
Amnesty Intemational learned of eight officially confirmed executions in 1986. The victims had been convicted of crimes such as espionage and premeditated murder. During 1986 Amnesty Intemational sent numerous appeals reiterating its unconditional opposition to the death penalty.
