Seychelles
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, all but one of whom had been released by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to call for the release of Royce Dias who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience after he had received a prison sentence in 1985 on criminal charges that appeared to have been fabricated for political reasons (see Amnesty International Report 1986). However, three other prisoners of concern to Amnesty International were released on 24 June. Jean Dingwall, also adopted as a prisoner of conscience, had been held since September 1984; Joachim and Robin Sullivan, two brothers, had been in prison since mid-1985. All three had been detained without trial under the Preservation of Public Security (Emergency Powers) Regulations. Under the regulations the President is emp>owered to order the indefinite detention without trial of any person "concerned in acts which might ... be prejudicial to the public safety and the maintenance of public order". A detainee does not have the right to challenge the grounds for detention in a
94
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
court of law. A Review Tribunal exists to consider each detainee's case within a month of detention and thereafter every six months. However, this tribunal sits in camera and its recommendations are not binding upon the President.
There were new politically motivated arrests in early June. Several known critics of the government of President France-Albert René, including Richard Ponwaye and Philip d'Offay, both businessmen, and Philip Boule, a lawyer, were alleged to have endangered state security. They were reportedly held incommunicado at Victoria Central Police Station but no formal charges were brought against them. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Attorney General in July seeking clarification of their status but received no reply. However, all those arrested were released uncharged in October.
