HONDURAS
Campesinos (peasants) arrested in the context of land conflicts were among many political detainees allegedly tortured under police or army interrogation. Five unarmed campesinos involved in a land dispute were shot dead in May by members of the military in Atlántida, in circumstances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed. An army colonel and a captain were prosecuted for the murder of a student. There were at least three other apparently politically motivated killings in circumstances suggesting the collusion of the security forces. An amnesty law introduced in July further obstructed investigations into past extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". Despite govemment pledges, few steps were taken to clarify the fate of the "disappeared".
The exiled leaders of several armed
HONDURAS
opposition groups returned in January, after President Rafael Leonardo Callejas guaranteed their safety in exchange for a commitment to abandon armed struggle. Most armed opposition groups made this commitment and formed a coalition political party in March. The Frente Patriótico Morazanista (fpm), Morazanist Patriotic Front, did not join in these moves; it claimed responsibility for a bomb attack on a United Nations office in Tegucigalpa in July and for the killing of a right-wing student leader in October.
A law introduced in July granted a "broad and unconditional amnesty" to those prosecuted or liable to prosecution for certain political crimes or common crimes linked to them, including murder, torture and unlawful arrest committed by police and military personnel. The amnesty law created an additional barrier to investigation and prosecution of past human rights violations and reinforced the sense that such abuses could continue to be committed with impunity.
Thirteen detainees accused of arms trafficking in 1989 and 1990 were released following the amnesty decree. The evidence against them had been based largely on statements obtained under torture. Some had been denied access to legal counsel for several months. Scores of campesinos imprisoned for land invasions were also released.
Violent police and military actions aimed at ending land occupations by landless campesinos often resulted in the arrest and torture or ill-treatment of those forcibly evicted. Other detainees arrested in connection with "terrorist" offences also alleged they were tortured while under police or army interrogation. Torture was facilitated by the holding of suspects beyond the 24 hours permitted by law without being brought before a judge. Some of the detainees were interrogated in military bases by personnel without law-enforcement responsibilities. The effective use of habeas corpus was limited because members of the security forces frequently refused to comply with the judges' orders and the judiciary failed to punish those responsible for unlawful arrests.
Two campesinos were reportedly beaten in January when police removed around 300 campesinos occupying land in El Quebracho, Comayagua. Angel Maria Bonilla Donaires, a member of the Confederación
Nacional de Trabajadores del Campo (cNTc), National Confederation of Rural Workers, was arrested in February during a land eviction by police in Comayagua. He alleged that he was beaten savagely with a rifle butt, kicked and forced to icneel on an anthill.
Brothers Victor Manuel and José Leónidas Ramírez, arrested by police and military in February and accused of being members of the armed opposition group Cinchoneros, stated that they were beaten and kicked in the ribs on arrest, then held blindfolded and incommunicado for three days without food or water by the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (dni), the investigative branch of the Fuerza de Seguridad Pública (fusep), the Public Security Force, in Danli, El Paraíso. Only on the fourth day of their detention were relatives and the lawyer dealing with the habeas corpus petition allowed to visit them, and on the same day they were taken before a judge. Victor Manuel Ramirez sustained two fractured ribs and a broken tooth.
Torture was also used against criminal suspects. In June, a week after the head of the fuse? announced that torture was prohibited in criminal investigation procedures, fusep agents arrested José Armando Andino Lobo, a public health ministry employee, in Tegucigalpa's Barrio Morazán. Accusing him of a petty crime, fusep agents reportedly kicked him in the face, beat him with cudgels and threatened to disfigure his face. He was released the following day. but warned not to report what had happened to him.
Five imarmed campesinos of the El Caral cooperative in Agua Caliente, department of Atlántida, were shot dead and seven others injured during a dawn attack on the cooperative by military personnel on 3 May. The massacre was allegedly ordered by a local army colonel who disputed the campesinos' ownership of the land. Sixty-year-old Felipe Huete Pedrano tried to negotiate with the attackers but was shot dead with a roxmd of machine-gun fire. His son, Ciriaco Huete Castro, was shot and killed when he went to help him. Two commissions, one military and one within the National Congress, were appointed to investigate the incident. The colonel was subsequently detained and proceedings against him were initiated in a military court. Human rights groups
HONDURAS
challenged the constitutionality of military jurisdiction in this case, but their appeal had not been resolved by the Supreme Court at the end of the year. Four people, including two minors aged 16 and 17, were also arrested in connection with the killings. The two youths claimed they were tortured by the fusep in La Ceiba to make them confess to involvement in the killings. Trial proceedings against the foiu accused were continuing in a civilian court at the end of the year.
A claim of military jurisdiction' also obstructed investigations into the killing of 17-year-old student Riccy Mabel Martinez. On 13 July Riccy Martinez went to visit her boyfriend, who had been forcibly recruited by the First Communications Battalion in El Ocotal. She was refused permission to visit by a colonel and she was last seen being driven away from the barracks in a military truck. Her mutilated body was found on 15 July in Barrio Chile, Tegucigalpa, with signs of having been raped and beaten. On 19 July a low-ranking soldier confessed to the crime before a criminal court, but retracted his confession two days later, claiming he had been coerced by the dni to confess. The court issued a warrant for the arrest of the colonel and a captain from the First Communications Battalion. The police, however, refused to carry out the arrest stating that the matter should be handled by a military court, which also issued an arrest warrant for the two suspects. Only after the colonel and captain were honourably discharged in September were they taken before a civilian court. Proceedings had not concluded by the end of the year and further forensic evidence was due to be presented to the coiut.
Two recently returned political exiles were killed in disputed circumstances. Carlos Alvarenga, a former leader of an armed opposition group, was mxudered in Olan-cho in March. In July human rights worker Marco Tulio López was shot dead in Tegucigalpa. Official investigations attributed both killings to personal feuds, but family members alleged that circumstantial evidence pointing to the involvement of the security forces had not been thoroughly investigated.
Indigenous leader Vicente Matute Cruz, president of the Federación de Tribus Xicaques de Yoro (fetrixy). Federation of Xicaques Tribes of Yoro, and his colleague Francisco Guevara, were shot dead in
September in Plan Grande, Yoro, by armed men believed to be at the service of local landowners. Vicente Matute had received death threats from the landowners after declaring publicly in May that civilians, members of the military and government personnel had unlawfully seized land belonging to indigenous communities. President Callejas expressed sorrow at the murder and ordered an investigation. Victor Matute was reportedly the ninth fetrixy leader to have been murdered since 1987; none of those responsible had been brought to justice.
In August the Procurator General published a report compiled in 1984 by an Armed Forces Special Military Commission mandated to investigate the fate of over 100 people alleged to have "disappeared" following arrest between 1981 and 1984. The publication of the report, the contents of which had first been made public in 1985, again drew attention to the lack of thoroughness and impartiality that characterized the military investigation (see Amnesty International Reports 1985 and 1986). The report did not give detailed information about steps taken to investigate individual cases reported to the Commission, yet concluded that there was insufficient evidence to link the "disappearances" to the armed forces. Despite repeated pledges by the government since December 1990 that investigations into these cases would be reopened, no concrete measiues were taken.
Amnesty International sent a memoran-diun to President Callejas in May, outlining the organization's concerns and recommendations relating to torture and official failures to investigate possible extrajudicial executions and past "disappearances". The concerns raised in the memorandum were made public in June in an Amnesty International report, Honduras: Persistence of Human Rights Violations. Amnesty International wrote to the government again in July requesting detailed information about members of the armed forces convicted of human rights abuses and inquiring about recent statements by the Procurator General regarding investigations into the fate of the "disappeared". Following the approval of the amnesty law by the Legislative Chamber in July, Amnesty International urged President Callejas not to ratify any measure which would allow blanket immunity from prosecution to military and
HONDURAS/HONG KONG
police personnel responsible for himian rights abuses.
The governmental Comisión Interinsti-tucional de Derechos Humanos (cidh), Inter-Institutional Human Rights Commission, replied in August that case concerns raised in the memorandum had been passed on to the appropriate authorities. The cidh said 234 military personnel were in prison for alleged hmnan rights violations, although it did not provide further details. It gave information about reforms to the police and judiciary, but did not address Anmesty International's concerns regarding the amnesty law. At the end of the year no further response had been received from the authorities concerning the cases raised in the memorandum.
