TAIWAN
One prisoner of conscience continued to serve a 10-year sentence imposed in 1989. About a dozen people were arrested for advocating an independent Taiwan state or for entering Taiwan in defiance of a government ban on their return. Some of them were prisoners of conscience. Fifty executions were reported.
An extraordinary session of the National Assembly in April voted to repeal emergency provisions which since 1948 had permitted the government to ignore certain provisions of the Constitution. President Lee Teng-hui rescinded the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion on 1 May. Later that month he repealed the Statute for the Punishment of Sedition and the Statute Governing the Prosecution and Elimination of Communist Spies. Since 1949 hundreds of political prisoners had been executed or imprisoned under these laws.
The Legislative Yuan (Council) debated whether to revise or repeal Article 100 of the Criminal Code, which punishes acts which aim to "destroy the organization of the State, seize State territory, by illegal means change the Constitution, or overthrow the Government". No decision had been taken by the end of the year.
Huang Hua, a prisoner of conscience and a leading opposition activist convicted of promoting the creation of an independent Taiwan state, remained in prison serving a lO-year sentence imposed in December 1989. As a repeat offender, serving his fourth term of imprisonment for political reasons, he was excluded from the 1 January 1991 presidential amnesty (see
Amnesty International Report 1991).
About a dozen people, some of them prisoners of conscience, were arrested and tried under Article 100 of the Criminal Code for activities supporting the creation of an independent Taiwan state and for rejecting the government's goal of reunification with China. Among them were five people accused of belonging to the banned Tokyo-based Association for an Independent Taiwan, charges which they denied. Four of them were arrested on 9 May but released on bail one week later after a series of public demonstrations protesting against their arrests. Their trial concluded in December: Chen Cheng-ran and Wang Hsiu-hui were sentenced to two years' imprisonment; Lin Yin-fu was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment; the other two were released, one on a suspended sentence, the other after his acquittal.
Four leading members of the United States chapter of the World United For-mosans for Independence (wufi) were arrested in the second half of the year on charges of illegally entering the country and promoting the creation of an independent Taiwan state. Three of them - Kuo Pei-hung, Lee Ying-yuan and Wang Kang-lu - were prisoners of conscience. The fourth, Chang Tsan-Lung. was accused of involvement in terrorist activities and Amnesty International was investigating his case. Three local members of wufi were also arrested for their pro-independence views and activities. The trials of all seven had not been completed by the end of the year.
Fifty people convicted of criminal offences were reported by the press to have been executed but no official figures were available. An unknown number of prisoners had their death sentences commuted under the January presidential amnesty. Amnesty International was concerned that physicians were participating in executions since legislation was introduced in 1990 permitting the organs of executed prisoners to be used for research and transplants.
Amnesty International urged the government to release Huang Hua and other prisoners of conscience and called for an end to executions. An Airmesty International representative who visited Taiwan in March met Ministry of Justice officials and others to express concern about the use of the death penalty. In response to the
TAIWAN/TANZANIA
organization's concerns about the use of organs of executed prisoners, the authorities stressed that the written consent of the prisoners was required.
