DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Two detainees died añer reported beatings by the security forces. One political prisoner remained in prison despite two judicial orders in 1989 for his release.
On 13 Jime President Joaquin Balaguer ordered the deportation of all foreigners aged under 16 or over 60 who worked in the sugar cane industry. The decree followed increasing international criticism of the government's treatment of Haitian
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC/ECUADOR
workers on the state-run sugar plantations. By August over 5,000 Haitians had been deported. Many of them were reportedly beaten or robbed by the armed forces during execution of the deportation orders. Thousands more returned voluntarily to Haiti.
Two detainees died following reported severe beatings by members of the security forces. Haitian citizen Joubert Pierre was arrested on 20 April and taken to a police station in Boca Chica, accused of theft. On 24 April he told visitors that he had been severely tortured and his face and chest reportedly showed injuries. A few days later his body was identified at a morgue by his mother and a Haitian Embassy official. Following an internal police inquiry a member of the National Police was reportedly discharged and the case referred to the judiciary. However, to Amnesty International's knowledge, no judicial proceedings had been initiated by the end of the year.
In February Julio 0osé) Samboy died while being taken by the security forces to the National Drugs Control Office in Santo Domingo. He had reportedly been arrested by a combined patrol of police and armed forces in Barahona for alleged drug-trafficking. An investigating commission, made up of an army general, a police general and a navy admiral, found that he had died as a result of beatings. The commission recommended that an army and a police officer be dismissed and that legal proceedings be initiated against them. However, reports indicated that no one had been brought to trial by the end of the year in connection with the case.
No one had been charged by the end of the year for the killing in September 1990 of Jesús Diplán Martínez. He was allegedly shot by members of the security forces after being arrested (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1991).
Luis Lizardo Cabrera, arrested in May 1989 for alleged involvement in a bombing, remained in detention at the end of 1991 (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). Judges had ordered his release on two separate occasions in 1989, but the police continued to refuse to comply with these orders. In early 1991 the office of the Presidency and the Attorney General urged the Chief of Police to release Luis Lizardo.
In May Amnesty International appealed for an investigation into the allegations of
torture and subsequent death of Joubert Pierre. The organization continued to seek clarification firom the government about the imprisonment of Luis Lizardo Cabrera and urged that he be released if no legal basis existed for his detention. No response was received,
