EGYPT
Thousands of people, particularly suspec> ted members and sympathizers of Islamic groups, were detained without charge or trial under state of emergency legislation. Among them were prisoners of conscience. There were numerous reports that political detainees were tortured in security police custody. At least 11 people were sentenced to death and four executed.
In May the People's Assembly approved the extension of the state of emergency for a further three years. It had been in force without interruption since October 1981 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Emergency legislation empowers the Minister of the Interior, as the President's delegate, to order the administrative detention without charge or trial of political suspects and to contest coiut decisions to release untried political detainees. Other emergency provisions allowing prolonged incommunicado detention have facilitated the torture of political detainees.
Thousands of people were arrested for political reasons under the emergency legislation, including scores of journalists, students, lawyers, and others who were detained for opposing the government's policy in the Gulf following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. Suspected members or sympathizers of Islamic groups, Palestinians, Iraqis and other Arab nationals were partic-
ularly targeted for arrest. The majority were released uncharged after weeks or months in detention; some of them alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated in custody.
For example, Magdy Ahmed Hussein, a joiunalist and deputy secretary general of the opposition Labour Party, was arrested on 25 January shortly after he had spoken against the Gulf War in a Cairo mosque. He was released on 21 February. Also arrested in January in connection with the war and later released without trial were two medical doctors, whose publishing company was planning to issue a statement on the Gulf War by the Egyptian Medical Sjoidi-cate. Others detained in February in connection with the war and later released included engineers, medical doctors, students and Mohammad 'Afifi Matar, a poet, who was reported to have been severely tortured in custody.
Sporadic arrests continued throughout the year of members and sympathizers of Islamic groups. Reports were also received of the arrest and detention of relatives when certain alleged opposition activists could not be found by the police. For example, following the escape on 19 April of a detainee, Safwat Ahmed 'Abd al-Ghani, during his transfer to a prison in Minya, about six of his relatives were arrested and detained without charge for up to several weeks, apparently to coerce him into giving himself up. Safwat Ahmed Abd al-Ghani was accused of complicity in the assassination of Dr Rifa'at al-Mahgoub (see below). Those held included his mother, sister, wife and two-month-old baby, He was eventually rearrested in July.
At the end of October more than 200 alleged members and sjonpathizers of the Muslim Brothers were arrested throughout the country shortly before Middle East peace talks began in Madrid. More than 60 were reported to have been held in connection with putting up posters or distributing leaflets which criticized the talks. They included students, office workers, trade unionists and former members of parliament. Most, if not all, were believed to be prisoners of conscience. A number of them had been released by the end of the year.
Three Christian converts - Mustafa Mohammad Sa'id al-Sharqawi, Mohammad Hussein Ibrahim Sallam and Hassan Mohaimnad Isma'il Mohammad - who had been held as prisoners of conscience since
EGYPT
October 1990, were released in July (see Amnesty International Report 1991). However, charges against them were not dropped and they could still face trial.
Some of those arrested in previous years were tried before (Emergency) Supreme State Seciu'ity Courts. Under emergency legislation, verdicts of these courts are not considered final until approved by the Prime Minister, who is also empowered to reduce sentences or reject the judgment entirely and order a retrial. There is no right of appeal against conviction or sentence, nor any recourse to review before the Court of Cassation.
The trial of 20 alleged members of the Egypt Revolution Organization ended in April. Charges against them included the killing of two Israeli Embassy officials in 1985 and 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Some had been held in prolonged solitary confinement following their arrest in 1987. The (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court in Cairo sentenced the group's leader, former intelligence officer and diplomat Mahmoud Nour al-Din, to life imprisonment with hard labour. Others were given sentences of between 15 years' imprisonment with hard labour and six months' imprisonment. Five defendants were acquitted, including Dr Khalid 'Abd al-Nasser,. son of the former president. Those sentenced to prison terms remained in prison pending approval of the judgment.
In June the trial began in the (Emergency) Supreme State Secmity Court of 25 people accused of assassinating the former speaker of the People's Assembly, Dr Rifa'at al-Mahgoub, in October 1990. About half of the accused were being tried in absentia. Defendants claimed they had been tortured while held inconummicado following their arrest in October 1990. Mamdouh 'Ali Youssef said that he had been beaten and punched, had cigarettes stubbed out on his chest, been suspended by his wrists bound behind his back, and had electric shocks applied to the genitals and other sensitive parts of his body. A forensic doctor who examined him later in the year said he was "in a state of extreme prostration, unable to stand upright or sit on a chair". The doctor observed that small scars around his genitals were consistent with having been caused by electrically charged instruments. The trial was "Still in progress at the end of the year.
On 25 December the writer 'Ala' Hamed was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for writing a novel which was considered blasphemous to Islam. The (Emergency) State Security Court was also reported to have sentenced both his publisher, Fathi Fadhel, and the distributor of the novel, Mohammad Madbuli, to eight years in prison. The verdict had not been approved by the end of the year.
Many political prisoners were subjected to physical and psychological torture. The most common forms of torture reported were beatings, suspension, burning with cigarettes and electric shocks, often accompanied by threats. In many cases victims were stripped naked or to their underclothes, and also blindfolded so that they were unable to identify their tortmers. The majority of victims were political detainees held in inconununicado detention without access to lawyers, relatives or doctors by members of the State Security Intelligence Police (ssip) under emergency legislation. Most were alleged members or sympathizers of Islamic groups, or their relatives.
In February the authorities informed Amnesty International that investigations had been carried out into the alleged torture of six detainees in 1990, including Khalid al-Sharif (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The investigations concluded that in each case no torture had taken place. The authorities gave no further details of how these conclusions were reached. Amnesty International requested that the procedures followed, as well as the findings, be made public, particularly since some of the alleged victims and their lawyers were neither interviewed nor informed that any investigation had been initiated.
On 8 February Dr Mohammad Man-dour, a psychiatrist and member of the Board of Trustees of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (eohr), was arrested. Like many other political detainees, he was taken to the ssip Directorate at Lazoghly Square, Cairo, where he said he was severely tortured. He was released without charge two weeks later. Official complaints of torture were filed on his behalf with the authorities by the eohr. In May Amnesty International was told by the Egyptian authorities that an investigation had been conducted into the case and had concluded that his allegations were unfounded. However, Dr Mandour and
EGYPT/EL SALVADOR
the EOHR were not contacted during the investigation, nor informed officially that an investigation had taken place, and it was unclear what evidence had justified the authorities' conclusions.
In August Mohammad al-Sayyid al-Sayyid Higazy, an Arabic teacher, was arrested under state of emergency provisions. He was held incommunicado for several weeks in the custody of the ssip in Doqqi and then at the Lazoghly Square headquarters. During this time he was reportedly subjected to various forms of tortiue, including electric shocks, suspension in contorted positions and beating. He had been arrested several times previously for alleged involvement with Islamic groups.
At least 11 people were sentenced to death. One was convicted of smuggling heroin into the country. All the others had been convicted of murder and other charges. Four members of the same family - 'Abd al-Rahman 'Ali, Saj^id, Mohammad and 'Abd al-Nasser 'Amayra - were hanged in Asyut prison in February after being convicted of 12 murders.
Amnesty International appealed on several occasions to President Hosni Mubarak to commute death sentences. Responding to queries from Amnesty International, the authorities said that all had benefited from the right to appeal against conviction or sentence and to a review by the Coiut of Cassation.
In January Amnesty International v^rote to the Minister of the Interior about a number of suspected extrajudicial executions, including the killing of Dr 'Ala' Muhy al-Din 'Ashour in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991), and called for a thorough and impartial investigation to be carried out in all instances.
In May Amnesty International submitted further information about the case of Mustafa Mohammad 'Abd al-Hamid 'Othman (see Amnesty International Report 1991), a student from Qina who "disappeared" in Zagazig in 1989, to the United Nations (un) Working Group on Enforced or Involvmtary Disappearances, following the Egyptian Government's response that he had been released from prison on 28 December 1989. Amnesty International stated that this failed to take into account the testimony of friends who reported that he had been held with them in ssip custody in January 1990; it
remained imclear that he had ever been released from custody.
In October Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns regarding the systematic use of torture in Egypt to the un Committee against Tortiu-e, pursuant to Article 20 of the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhmnan or Degrading Punishment.
During the year Amnesty International received replies from the government about a number of human rights issues, including a seven-page response to Amnesty International's October 1990 report about torture and arbitrary detention in Egypt (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In October the organization issued Egypt: Ten Years of Torture, explaining how a pattern of torture became established after the state of emergency was declared in 1981, and referring both to individual cases and to the government's failure to take action to prevent torture. The report included the government's response to earlier communications from Amnesty International about torture.
