GUYANA
Several people were reportedly tortured or ill-treated in police custody. A human rights worker was reportedly kidnapped briefly and threatened by unidentified men. At least four people were sentenced to death for murder and around 22 people were under sentence of death at the end of the year. However, no executions were carried out.
General elections, due to take place before the end of the year, were postponed because of concern tjiat the voters' list was seriously flawed. The elections and the drawing up of a new electoral register were being monitored by the Carter Center (an organization headed by former United States president Jimmy Carter) at the invitation of the government.
There were a number of reports of
GUYANA
torture or ill-treatment by the police. Two male teenagers arrested at a party were allegedly beaten with bull-whips and subjected to electric shocks while held on 16 and 17 June at Vigilance police station. In another case, two men alleged that they were beaten by police at Providence station on 19 July: they had been taken into custody after the car in which they were passengers was stopped by the police. One alleged that he was beaten with a cricket bat after being forced to strip to his under-shorts. Their lawyer reported seeing injuries on both men while they were in custody and said that the police refused his request for the men to receive medical attention. Both men were released on 20 July after the lawyer appealed to the Divisional Commander. The Commissioner of Police was reported to be investigating both incidents, the results of which were not known at the end of the year.
In August a 17-year-old inmate of a reform school run by the Guyana National Service (gns) was allegedly beaten severely on the buttocks with a hose-pipe. He was then locked in a cell for six days. The outcome of an investigation reportedly being held into these allegations was not known at the end of the year.
On 23 October an executive member of the Guyana Human 'Rights Association i (ghra), Shirley Howells, was reportedly seized by two masked men in a car with no number plates near the town of Linden. According to her statement, she lost consciousness briefly when a rag was placed over her face; she was then threatened with a knife and questioned about her connections with Guyanese Action for Reform and Democracy (guard), a political reform movement supported by her husband. They also allegedly questioned her about a recent meeting between the ghra and members of the Carter Center. Some three weeks later there were two attempted break-ins at Shirley Howells' home and several threatening notes were left on the premises. The police were investigating the incidents, but the results were not known at the end of the year.
No executions were carried out during the year. This contrasted with previous years when there had been an increase in executions following a 15-year moratorium which ended in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
The trial was still pending in the case of
six people charged with treason, which carries a mandatory death penalty on conviction (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In January Amnesty International wrote to President Desmond Hoyte expressing concern that trials of prisoners sentenced to death appeared to have fallen short of international standards for fair trial. Amnesty Intemational noted that many convictions were based solely on uncorroborated confessions which the accused alleged they had signed as a result of being beaten, threatened or subjected to other forms of dvuess. Amnesty Intemational said that, in cases it had examined, suspects accused of capital crimes were routinely held incommunicado for prolonged periods in police custody and subjected to various forms of ill-treatment and duress, including being denied food and drink. In one case, a suspect's entire family was held in custody until a confession was signed.
Amnesty Intemational pointed out that intemational standards require that capital punishment be imposed only after a legal process which gives all possible safeguards to ensure a fair trial, and that statements obtained as a result of ill-treatment must never be used as evidence against a defendant.
Amnesty International urged the government to take steps to abolish the death penalty. Pending ¿lis, Amnesty International urged that intemational standards be observed in capital cases and that all existing death sentences be commuted.
Amnesty Intemational expressed con-cem to the government about the allegations of ill-treatment of suspects at Vigilance and Providence police stations and of a youth at the gns reform school. It urged that each of the incidents be thoroughly investigated and that those found responsible be brought to justice.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Hoyte about the alleged kidnapping of Shirley Howells, urging that the perpetrators be brought to justice.
