KUWAIT
Hundreds of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained following the withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait in February and held without charge or trial for several months. More than 100 were prosecuted before Martial Law Courts and convicted after unfair trials of "collaboration" with Iraqi forces during the occupation or other offences. Of these, 72 received prison sentences and 29 were sentenced to death, including 16 in absentia: their sentences were later commuted to life imprisonment. At least 84 others were awaiting trial before the State Security Court. Torture of political detainees was routine and widespread, and at least 80 Iraqis and
KUWAIT
Palestinians "disappeared" in custody. Scores of extrajudicial executions were reported and at least 400 people were reported to have been forcibly expelled to Iraq despite fears for their safety there.
On 26 February Iraqi forces withdrew from Kuwait following their defeat in the Gulf War (see Iraq entry). The same day the returning Kuwaiti authorities declared martial law for a three-month period: it was not lifted, however, until 26 June. The Martial Law Regulations permitted the arrest and indefinite detention without charge or trial of anyone suspected of having "collaborated" with the Iraqi occupation forces, and established special coiuls to try such suspected "collaborators". In June the Amir, Sheikh Jaber al-Ahmad al-Sabah, announced that parliamentary elections would be held in October 1992.
In June an amnesty was declared for all people convicted of crimes before 2 August 1990, excluding premeditated murder. The amnesty benefited hundreds of prisoners who had escaped from Kuwait's prisons after Iraq's invasion, including at least 65 political prisoners. In July the 1969 State Security Law was amended, introducing the right of appeal on points of law only, ending the practice of indefinite detention and giving detainees the right to a periodic review of their pre-trial detention before a chamber of the State Security Court.
Hundreds of people were arrested by the armed forces, police and armed Kuwaiti civilians, the majority of them between late February and May. Most of the detainees were Palestinians, Jordanians, Sudanese, Iraqis and members of the "bidun" community (stateless Arabs) suspected of "collaboration" with fraqi forces during the occupation. Some were arrested
apparently on account of their nationality, among them Kuwaitis mistaken for Palestinians. The majority were held incommunicado in secret detention centres for several months. In April the authorities acknowledged holding some 600 detainees, but the actual number of those held was believed to be significantly higher. Scores of detainees died as a result of torture or were victims of extrajudicial killings, while others "disappeared" in custody.
In May and Jime, 164 people were publicly tried before Martial Law Com*ts, the majority on charges relating to "collaboration with the enemy". The proceedings at these trials fell far short of international standards for fair trial. Lawyers often were either denied access to defendants or given insufficient time to prepare their defence, and many defendants were not permitted to see the evidence against them or to cross-examine prosecution witnesses, Some defendants were convicted solely on the basis of "confessions" reportedly extracted under torture and none of those appearing before Martial Law Courts was permitted a right of appeal. In all, 29 defendants were sentenced to death; 72 received prison sentences ranging between one year and life; 15 received non-custodial sentences; three had their cases referred to other coiuls; and 45 were acquitted.
By mid-November, 115 untried detainees accused of state security offences were said to have been discharged following a judicial review of their cases. However, many reportedly remained in detention pending deportation, According to the government, 84 others facing similar charges were awaiting trial before the State Security Court, but by December no dates for their trials had been announced.
Testimonies from former detainees, often supported by medical evidence, indicated that tortiue was routine and widespread, particularly during the period of martial law. Victims were beaten all over the body, burned with cigarettes or acid, given electric shocks, subjected to mock executions and had their skin slashed with knives. Most victims were Palestinian, Jordanian, fraqi, Sudanese or "bidun" males, among them both boys and men aged over 70, John Äthan, a Sudanese medical technician, was detained for two days in March. According to a forensic pathologist's report, he was subjected to "very extensive repetitive beating ... and cigarette
KUWAIT
bums". Haidar Kadhim 'Abdallah, an Iraqi national, testified that while in detention in May, he was repeatedly beaten with rifle butts, kicked and subjected to electric shocks. Scores of victims required intensive medical care in hospital as a result of torture and some reportedly died.
At least 80 Iraqis and Palestinians reportedly "disappeared" in custody, mostly between the end of February and May: it was feared that many of them had been extrajudicially executed, although this was not confirmed and the fate and whereabouts of all those concerned remained unknown at the end of the year. They included Jamil al-Kadhimi, an Iraqi businessman, who "disappeared" in March; Khaled Rashid Agha Mir, an Iraqi Kurd who "disappeared" in April; and Bassam Ibrahim Musa, a Palestinian civil engineer who "disappeared" in June.
Other detainees were reported to have been extrajudicially executed, in some cases after being mutilated: some were said to have had their eyes gouged out or their limbs severed. Nazmi Khurshid, a Palestinian doctor, reportedly died in custody in March following severe beatings. Khalil Bahhur, a Jordanian whose relatives found his body at al-'Addan Hospital in April, 10 days after his arrest, had apparently suffered multiple stab wounds. His face had also been mutilated.
Scores of extrajudicial killings were carried out by the Kuwaiti armed forces and armed civilians during the martial law period. Most victims were killed while held in secret incommunicado detention, their bodies being dumped in the streets or buried in mass graves in al-Rigga Cemetery. The victims included Muhammad Shawkat Yusuf, a Palestinian, whose body was discovered on 25 May in a rubbish dump in the district of al-Jabiriyya. His eyes had been gouged out and there was a bullet hole in his cheek. A 13-year-old Palestinian boy, 'lyad 'Aqrabawi, "disappeared" following his arrest in the first week of March. His body was foxmd in al-Khaldiyya district several days later; he had been beaten and shot in the head.
In Jime, 29 death sentences were passed by Martial Law Courts, 16 of them in absentia. Six of those sentenced were accused of "collaboration" as employees of the Iraqi occupation newspaper, al-Nida' (The Call). Among them was Ibtisam al-Dakhil, a Kuwaiti woman. All 29 death
sentences were commuted to life imprisonment on 26 June.
In April the government refused to admit into Kuwait any of the estimated 15,000 Iraqi civilian refugees gathered in the Iraqi town of Safwan on the border with Kuwait. The refugees, mostly Shi'a Muslim Arabs from southern Iraq, were fleeing widespread human rights violations perpetrated by Iraqi government forces following the crushing of a mass uprising by Arab Shi'a Muslims and Kiurds in Iraq (see Iraq entry). Most were subsequently transferred to camps in Iran and Saudi Arabia. By late May, an estimated 400 people had reportedly been forcibly expelled from Kuwait to Iraq, despite the risk that they would be subject to grave human rights violations there. It was believed that among them were opponents of the Iraqi Government, whose fate and whereabouts remained unknown at the end of the year. From early June, however, those due to be expelled ft'om Kuwait were said to have been permitted interviews with delegates from the International Committee of the Red Cross to determine whether or not they were willing to be sent to Iraq.
Amnesty International publicly urged the goverrunent to investigate allegations of widespread human rights violations committed after the withdrawal of Iraqi forces, including arbitrary arrests, torture and extrajudicial killings. Following a factfinding visit to Kuwait by an Amnesty International delegation in March and April, the organization publicly appealed to the Amir "to intervene personally to end the wave of arbitrary arrests, torture and killings". The organization also appealed to the government in April to grant protection to refugees and asylum-seekers fleeing ft'om Iraq. In May and June an Amnesty International observer attended trial proceedings at Martial Law Courts, and discussed the organization's concerns with government officials. Amnesty International detailed its criticisms of the trials in a memorandum to the government in June and urged, among other things, that all trials be halted until they complied with international standards for fair trial. It also urged a review of all sentences already passed, including death sentences. Amnesty International later welcomed the commutation of the death sentences.
In June Amnesty International appealed to the government to halt the forcible
KUWATTAAOS
expulsion to Iraq of Iraqis and others at risk of serious human rights violations there, and to establish a fair procedure to identify those at risk. Amnesty International wrote to the Amir in October to reiterate its concern about xmfair trials and to urge an official investigation into 35 specific cases involving tortme or extrajudicial execution. It backed up these calls by sending a further delegation to Kuwait in November. The authorities provided information about four of the 35 cases which had been submitted, but denied any knowledge of the remainder.
Earlier in the year the government had acknowledged that human rights violations had been perpetrated immediately after the withdrawal of Iraqi forces, attributing this to the chaotic situation in the country and stressing that those responsible were not government officials. In May officials denied that violations were continuing, and said that several of the suspected perpetrators had been arrested and would be charged, but no further details had been provided by the end of the year. In an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Kuwait.
