UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
At least 32 members of the United States (us) armed forces were held as prisoners of conscience during the year for refusing to participate in the Gulf conflict. More than 2,500 people were under sentence of death in 34 states and 14 prisoners were executed. There were new appeals in the cases of two prisoners who alleged that their prosecutions were politically motivated. There were complaints of torture and ill-treatment in custody of asylum-seekers and criminal suspects.
At least 32 members of the US armed forces were imprisoned for refusing to obey orders to serve in the Gulf conflict on grounds of conscience. Most were reservists from the army, air force or marine corps who had become opposed to war (or to the Gulf conflict in particular) as
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
a result of conscientiously held beliefs developed after they enlisted, us law recognizes the right to discharge from the army on grounds of conscientious objection. However, directives issued during the Gulf conflict made conscientious objector (co) status more difficult to obtain. Objectors whose units were placed on active service duty were told that they could not apply for co status until after their units had been deployed, usually to Saudi Arabia. Most of the imprisoned conscientious objectors were tried by court-martial on charges of desertion or "missing movement" (failing to report for active duty) and sentences ranged from four to 30 months' imprisonment. Twenty-five were released during the year.
Foiu*teen prisoners were executed under state laws, bringing the number of executions since 1977 to 157. Five executions were carried out in Texas; two in Florida; two in Virginia; and one each in Georgia, Louisiana, Missoiuri, North Carolina and South Carolina.
Jerry Bird suffered a stroke eight days before he was executed in Texas in June. He was treated in hospital but according to reports was still partially paralysed at the time of his execution. Appeals to commute the death sentence or postpone the execution on humanitarian grounds were rejected.
Warren McCleskey was executed in Georgia on 25 September. His lawyers learned nine years after his trial that the state's key witness was a police informer who had been offered favourable treatment in return for testifying against Warren McCleskey, who was convicted of murdering a police officer. However, in April the US Supreme Court narrowly denied his appeal on the technical ground that this information was submitted too late. Two members of the trial jiuy later told the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles that they would not have sentenced him to death had they known about this evidence. Warren McCleskey's 1987 appeal to the us Supreme Coiut - which argued that the appUcation of the death penalty in Georgia discriminated on the basis of race - had been denied by a majority of one vote (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Before leaving office in January, Governor Richard Celeste commuted the death sentences of eight prisoners in Ohio. He said that strong racial bias had put a
disproportionate number of black people on Ohio's death row.
In February Governor Douglas Wilder of Virginia commuted Joseph Giarratano's death sentence. Doubts had been raised about the evidence used to convict him and about his mental competence during his trial in 1979.
In Jime a motion for a new trial was filed in the case of former Black Panther Party (bpp) leader (Elmer) Geronimo Pratt, convicted of murder in 1972 and serving a life sentence in California. Geronimo Pratt had long claimed that he was "framed" as a result of a Federal Bureau of Investigation (fbi) covert counter-intelligence program against domestic political groups (see Amnesty International Reports 1982, 1986 and 1989). The motion was based on new evidence that the key prosecution witness had been an fbi and state police informer, as well as witness testimony supporting Geronimo Pratt's contention that he was at a bpp meeting 400 miles away when the miu-der took place. The Superior Court of San Francisco issued an order requiring the State of California to respond to the new evidence. However, the state successfully applied for the case to be transferred to a court in Los Angeles, where the petition for a new trial was summarily dismissed in August. An appeal against this decision was pending at the end of the year.
In November a federal magistrate dismissed an appeal for a retrial in the case of Leonard Peltier, a leader of the American Indian Movement convicted in 1977 of the murder of two fbi agents during a gunfight in 1975 (see Amnesty International Reports 1985, 1986, 1987 and 1990). Lawyers for Leonard Peltier had argued that his conviction should be overturned because the government had now abandoned the theory it had presented at his trial. An Amnesty International observer attended the court hearing in October.
There were developments in two other cases of concern to Amnesty International. In December the Louisiana Board of Pardons unanimously recommended that Gary Tyler, convicted of murder in 1975, should have his sentence reduced to 50 years and his parole eligibility restored (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). An appeal in the case of David Rice was dismissed in January (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
An Haitian asylum-seeker alleged that
UNfTED STATES OF AMERICA
she was raped by an Immigration and Nat-m-alization Service (ins) guard in January while she was detained at the Krome North Service Processing Center in Miami, Florida. The allegation was forwarded to the Civil Rights Division of the us Department of Justice which was also investigating complaints of abuses of inmates by guards at the Krome centre in 1989 and early 1990.
The alleged beating of an Haitian asylum-seeker by ins Border Patrol guards in July was referred to the fbi for investigation.
In April the fbi told Amnesty Intemational that its investigation into allegations of ill-treatment in two Harrison County institutions in Mississippi had been completed and the findings sent to the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department for final determination (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The results were not known by the end of the year.
An Independent Commission on the Los Angeles Police Department (lapd) was formed after a black motorist was seen on a videotape being beaten by three lapd officers in March while other officers watched. In its report published in July, the Commission found that a significant minority of lapd officers repeatedly used excessive physical force and that procedures for investigating complaints and disciplinary measures against officers guilty of misconduct were inadequate. The Commission made a number of recommendations which were under consideration by the Los Angeles City Coimcil at the end of the year. Four officers were due to be tried in Febm-^ 1992 for assault and other charges arising from the March incident.
There were also allegations that suspects were subjected to excessive force, including physical ill-treatment and shootings, by members of the Los Angeles Sheriffs Department. A court action on behalf of more than 70 alleged victims of ill-treatment by sheriffs deputies from the Lynwood station in 1990 and 1991 was pending at the end of the year.
The Chicago police department's Office of Professional Standards recommended the dismissal of three police officers after reinvestigating allegations that a murder suspect was tortured at the Area 2 police station in 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. The three officers were suspended without pay; a hearing before the
Police Board was pending at the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational appealed for clemency on behalf of prisoners sentenced to death. In October it published a report. United States of America: The Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, and launched a campaign to combat the use of the death penalty against people who were aged under 18 at the time of the offence. Thirty-one juvenile offenders were under sentence of death in mid-1991.
The report described Amnesty International's findings in the cases of 23 juvenile offenders sentenced to death, and suggested that safeguards in capital punishment law had not been met in many cases. The majority of juvenile offenders on death row came from acutely deprived backgrounds. Many had been seriously physically or sexually abused. Most were of below-average intelligence and many also suffered from mental illness or brain damage.
Amnesty Intemational called on the 24 us states which permit the execution of 15-to 17-year-old offenders to bring their legislation into line with intemational standards which stipulate that no one may be executed for crimes committed below the age of 18.
In December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Attorney General of Pennsylvania about apparent unfairness in a 1982 sentencing hearing in which Mumia Abu-Jamal was sentenced to death and urging a review of the case.
In November Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Louisiana Board of Pardons, reiterating its concems about the case of Gary Tyler and urging that his petition for pardon be granted.
In letters to the us Justice Department and the ins Commissioner, Amnesty International urged that an investigation be conducted into the allegations of ill-treatment of asylum-seekers in the Krome centre. Amnesty Intemational also expressed con-cem that undocxunented Haitian asylum-seekers were frequently detained for prolonged periods without adequate judicial review. The us Justice Department replied in June that the allegations of ill-treatment were under investigation.
In September an Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Los Angeles to research allegations of ill-treatment of suspects by police officers and sheriffs deputies. The delegation met officials and lawyers
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAA)RUGUAY
representing complainants.
In February Amnesty International expressed concern to the federal Bureau of Prisons (bop) that a proposed transfer of Dr Alan Berkman to a maximum security penitentiary in Marion, Illinois, could be detrimental to his health in the light of conditions there and medical recommendations regarding his treatment for cancer (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The bop replied that Dr Berkman would remain at the Federal Medical Center at Rochester. Minnesota.
Amnesty International wrote to the Oklahoma Department of Corrections in December about conditions in Unit H Block, a new unit of the Oklahoma State Penitentiary at McAlester. The imit was built virtually underground, with small, windowless concrete cells allowing no natural air or light, which could have a detrimental effect on the physical and mental health of prisoners. The Correction Department replied, denying that the prison provided an inhumane environment.
In April Amnesty International wrote to the us Attorney General to express concern that the government had relied in part on foreign policy considerations in denying Joseph Doherty (an alleged member of the Irish Republican Army convicted of murder in the United Kingdom) a hearing on the merits of his claim for political asylum. An appeals coiul had ordered that Joseph Doherty was entitled to such a hearing but the us Government had appealed against this decision to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court's ruling was still pending at the end of the year.
