BOLIVIA
Dozens of trade unionists wete detained for short periods and some were allegedly tortured. One peasant was reportedly beaten and killed during a police raid. No official investigations were carried out into the alleged torture during 1989 and 1990 of political detainees by security forces. Allegations of possible extrajudicial executions during a December 1990 joint operation by military and police were not investigated. Prosecution lawyers in a major ongoing trial concerning past human rights violations continued to be threatened and harassed.
Demonstrations and strikes by trade unionists during the first part of the year, in protest against high prices and the government's privatization policy, were forcibly disbanded by police. Dozens of participants were detained and released shortly afterwards without charge.
The Central Obrera Boliviana (cob), Bolivian Trade Union Confederation, denounced the tortm-e of six miners allegedly by members of the security forces. The men were arrested in March during a demonstration in the capital. La Paz. They were taken in a vehicle said to have been used by the security forces to an imiden-tified place where they were interrogated and reportedly tortured. According to reports, during their interrogation the six miners were kept hooded, subjected to electric shocks and beaten. They were all released shortly after.
There were reports of human rights abuses committed by members of Unidad Móvil de Patrulla Rural (umopar). Mobile Rural Patrol, a specialized narcotics branch of the Bolivian police force, during anti-narcotics operations to eradicate coca crops. On 22 March Alejandro Velasco, a coca leaf grower, was allegedly beaten and killed in front of his family dining a raid by members of umopar in the area of Isiboro Sécure, Cochabamba Department. No investigation into the killing was known to have been carried out.
No investigation was known to have been carried out into alleged torture by intelligence agents of men arrested in 1989 in connection with the killing of two Mormon missionaries from the United States of America (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). In 1990 the murder charges against the detainees, who denied any participation in the killings, had been changed to armed uprising, terrorism and criminal association. Lawyers representing the men alleged that the trial continued to be subjected to undue delays and the proceedings were plagued with irregularities. The men's statements, reportedly obtained under torture, had been submitted as evidence by the Public Ministry.
Evidence emerged that several people detained in November and December 1990 in connection with the activities of the armed group Comisión Néstor Paz Zamora-Ejército de Liberación Nacional (cnpz-eln), Néstor Paz Zamora Commission-National Liberation Army, had been tortured or ill-treated while held incommunicado in La Paz. Among those arrested were four university students: Roberto Ibarguen, Carlos Pacajes. Elvis Vargas and Mercedes Nava Morales. The three men were reportedly beaten and subjected to electric shocks and submarino (repeated immersion in water) while in the custody of the Centro Especial de Investigaciones Policiales (ceip). Police Intelligence Service and the Army's Second Section. Mercedes Nava Morales was denied special medication and medical attention that she required owing to a recent road accident. Roberto Ibarguen was released about four days after arrest and left the city in fear of his safety. At the end of the year, the other three remained in detention awaiting trial. No investigation into the reports of torture was known to have been carried out.
BOLIVIA/BRAZIL
A police investigation was carried out into the December 1990 killing of Alejandro Escobar Gutierrez (subsequently identified as Evaristo Salazar], a Peruvian citizen who allegedly had been a member of the cnpz-eln (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Allegations that his body showed clear signs of torture were not known to have been investigated. Two police officers charged with the killing, who were released on bail and suspended from active duty, were awaiting trial at the end of the year.
No independent investigation was known to have been carried out into the killing of two members of the cnpz-eln, despite evidence strongly suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed during a joint military-police operation in December 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991] in which a third cnpz-eln member was also killed. The operation had been carried out to release a Bolivian businessman kidnapped by the cnpz-eln, but the businessman as well as the cnpz-eln members were killed. Following public outrage at the circumstances surrounding the killings. President Jaime Paz Zamora had promised a thorough report on the incident.
Lawyers acting for the prosecution in the Juicio de Responsabilidades (responsibilities trial) continued to receive death threats and be subjected to harassment. The trial against former president Luis Garcia Meza and 54 co-defendants, which started in 1984, continued. The charges against them included killing and torturing government opponents between 1980 and 1981 (see Amnesty International Reports 1981 to 1983).
During a research visit in September, Amnesty International discussed its concerns with the Minister of the Interior. In November the Ministry of the Interior virrote to Amnesty International dismissing ail allegations of torture and ill-treatment.
