THAILAND
Two prisoners of conscience imprisoned for "lese majesty" were released but a third apparently remained imprisoned. More than 50 people arrested after a military coup, or for violating subsequent martial law restrictions on civil liberties, were prisoners of conscience, but all were released within a few months. Police allegedly toriured or otherwise ill-treated Thai criminal suspects and refugees from Myanmar (Burma). A Thai labour leader "disappeared", and two Burmese refugees
were the victims of possible extrajudicial executions. Seven people were sentenced to death, but there were no reported executions. Burmese refugees were detained for "illegal immigration" and forcibly returned to Myanmar where they were at risk of serious human rights violations.
On 23 February the military overthrew the elected government of Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan, accusing it of establishing a "parliamentary dictatorship" and of corruption. The military abolished the Constitution, imposed martial law and banned political gatherings of more than five people and activities by political parties. The military proclaimed an interim constitution and appointed an interim government in March. Martial law and restrictions on civil liberties were lifted in May. The interim constitution empowered the authorities to detain without charge or trial and to execute summarily anyone deemed to "undermine national peace and secm-ity", but these powers were not exercised.
At the time of the coup the military detained deposed Prime Minister Chatichai and several of his ministers and aides without charge or trial. Some of them were apparently held to prevent them from speaking out against the military's seizure of power. All were released by early March. In late February and March, 15 students, other young people and a trade union activist were detained for peacefully protesting against the coup. Also in March, 42 farmers were arrested for continuing to stage peaceful gatherings begun before the coup demanding better compensation for land that was to be affected by a govem-ment irrigation project. Legal proceedings against these 58 people for violating martial law were dropped in May when martial law was lifted.
Montrii Aksora-in and Sanit Jand-uangsri, who had been arrested in 1988 for criticizing the Royal Family (see Amnesty International Report 1989), were released in May, but Ghana Srikiatsak, a third prisoner of conscience who had been arrested with them, was apparently still being held at the end of 1991. In September a warrant was issued for the arrest of prominent social critic. Sulak Sivaraksa, on charges of "lese majesty" after a speech in which he described members of the Royal Family as "ordinary people". He fled the country.
Eighty members of the Santi-Asoke religious congregation remained on trial for
THAILAND/TOGO
practising what they believe is the correct form of Buddhism. They would be considered prisoners of conscience if convicted and imprisoned (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Also still on trial were about 30 people arrested in connection with pohtical demonstrations in 1989 and 1990 and later released on bail (see Amnesty International Report 1991). At least one of them, Prasert Sapsunthom, would be considered a prisoner of conscience if convicted and imprisoned.
Some of the 20 political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years for "communistic activities" and Muslim separatism remained in prison but the precise number was not known.
In at least 10 different incidents involving more than 20 reported victims, police officers and detention centre guards were accused of ill-treating Thais detained on criminal charges and Bmmese "illegal immigrants", At least two people, Tongtod Yuenyong and Somsak Wongnatee, were said to have died as a result of severe beatings.
In June Thanong Po-am, President of the Labour Congress of Thailand, "disappeared" after criticizing the military for dissolving unions in state-owned enterprises. By the end of the year, his whereabouts had not been established and there were fears that he may have died from untreated diabetes while illegally detained by the military.
In August a Burmese asylum-seeker was shot dead in suspicious circiunstances: police said he was attempting to escape from their custody. In November police allegedly beat and shot dead another Burmese refugee. Ye Soe Aung. He was arrested in a village on the Thai side of the Myanmar border and his body was discovered dumped nearby shortly after.
At least seven people were sentenced to death: four Thais convicted of murder and three Nigerians convicted of drug-trafficking. One of these death sentences and one imposed in 1990 were commuted to life imprisonment. There were no reports of death sentences being finalized by the Supreme Court or of any executions being scheduled or carried out.
On at least six occasions during the year, the Thai authorities forcibly returned Burmese refugees and asylum-seekers to Myanmar despite fears that they would be at risk of serious human rights violations
there. At least five of those retimied were detained on arrival by the Myanmar authorities. At the end of 1991 more than 100 Burmese recognized as refugees by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees were being detained in Thailand for "illegal inunigration".
In February and March Amnesty International urged the authorities to release all prisoners of conscience arrested after the coup and to release other political prisoners unless they were to be promptly charged with recognizably criminal offences and given fair trials. It also urged the authorities not to use the provisions of the interim constitution to detain prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners without charge or trial or to summarily execute anyone. Amnesty International urged the authorities to drop charges against two members of the Santi-Asoke religious congregation, Prasert Sapsunthom and Sulak Sivarksa, to prevent them becoming prisoners of conscience. It welcomed the releases of Montrii Aksom-in and Sanit Janduangsri, and continued to urge the release of Ghana Srikiatsak. Amnesty International also called for all allegations of torture and killings of prisoners to be investigated, and for those responsible to be brought to justice. It urged that Burmese asylum-seekers not be forcibly returned to Myanmar. and expressed concern at the practice of detaining them for "illegal immigration".
