INDIA
At least 23,000 political prisoners, including some prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial under special or preventive detention laws. Torture and ill-treatment continued to be widespread and systematic, resulting in scores of deaths in custody. Hundreds of people "disappeared" or were extrajudicially exe-cuted in "encounters" staged by the police or security forces. The security forces deliberately killed unarmed civilians suspected of supporting insurgents. At least six people were judicially executed.
The minority government led by Prime Minister Chandra Shekar of the Janata Dal (Socialist) party resigned in March. During the subsequent election campaign, former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, the Congress (I) Party leader, was assassinated. P.V. Narasimha Rao became Prime Minister following the Congress (I) Party election victory in June, heading a coalition with the National Front Alliance. The Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party formed the official opposition and won control of the
state assemblies in four northern states, including Uttar Pradesh.
In areas where the government faced violent opposition from armed separatist groups - notably Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and Assam - grave and persistent human rights violations by the police and security forces continued to be widely reported. Torture during interrogation was routine and thousands of suspected separatists and their relatives were arbitrarily arrested. Scores of unarmed civilians were extrajudicially executed, many in retaliation for opposition attacks on the security forces.
In Punjab armed separatists killed several thousand government officials, soldiers and civilians during the year. In Assam and Jammu and Kashmir, separatists killed hundreds of government ofiicials and kidnapped dozens of officials and civilians and killed some of them. In Kashmir, for example, one of these groups kidnapped Tassaduq Dev, the brother-in-law of a government minister, cut off one of his thimibs and sent it in October to the Press Trust of India. The group said it would kill Tassaduq Dev unless one of its members was released ft'om detention. Amnesty International condemned the taking of hostages and deplored the threats against them issued by several armed groups, which in one case sought an inquiry by Amnesty International in Kashmir. The organization emphasized that it neither participated in prisoner exchanges and hostage negotiations, nor authorized anyone else to do so on its behalf.
Many thousands of political prisoners throughout India were held under preventive detention laws - the National Security Act (nsa) and the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act - or under special "anti-terrorist" laws, notably the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (tada) and the Arms Act.
The Minister of State for Home Affairs said in December that the largest number of arrests imder the tada over the past three years, some 9,569, had been made in Gujarat, although "no violent opposition activities in the state had been reported. In neighbouring Rajasthan those detained without charge or trial under the tada had included members of the Muslim minority arrested after communal rioting, among them children under 16 years old. Some of the 228 tada detainees held in the state as
INDIA
of October had been held without trial since November 1989. In Tamil Nadu state those detained under the tada reportedly included a lawyer representing suspects arrested in cormection with the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi.
Although the Indian Government seldom issues relevant statistics on the number of people detained or imprisoned for political reasons, official sources suggested in May that 11,000 Sikhs were being held for political reasons in Punjab alone. Thousands of other detainees were held in Jammu and Kashmir: the state Governor said in October that 5,000 "militants" and 2,500 "accomplices" were being held but civil liberties groups suggested that the actual total could be 15,000. Legal safeguards against unacknowledged detention were routinely ignored and prisoners remained in illegal detention for weeks or sometimes months.
Few political prisoners were brought to trial and such cases were frequently delayed. Four "Naxalite" (Maoist) political prisoners in West Bengal (see Amnesty International Report 1991] had been denied the right to prompt and fair trial for over 10 years.
Torture continued to be endemic. Criminal suspects were routinely tortmed to extract confessions or other information. They came predominantly from the most underprivileged groups: the rural and urban poor, tribal peoples, the scheduled castes, minority groups, landless labourers and children. Some people were arrested on false charges and tortured by police serving the interests of landlords or politicians.
In areas where armed opposition was active, the security forces used torture to gather information, to punish suspected supporters of separatist groups and in retaliation for attacks by armed groups. The most frequently reported methods were beatings, rape and electric shocks, with women and children among the victims.
In one reported incident in February, at least 23 women and girls, possibly more, were allegedly raped by soldiers who raided the village of Kunan Poshpora during counter-insurgency operations in Jammu and Kashmir. One 21-year-oId pregnant woman was reportedly raped by seven soldiers. Men living in the village were also allegedly tortured. Several inquiries into the incident were initiated: a district
magistrate and the divisional commissioner both recommended that a comprehensive inquiry be held but an internal army investigation dismissed the rape allegations as "malicious and untrue". Two representatives of the Press Council of India who visited the village with military officials in June also expressed doubts about some of the rape allegations, but medical evidence contained in their report was not made public. Despite the gravity of the allegations, no judicial or comprehensive, impartial inquiry had been initiated by the end of the year.
Rape of women by soldiers in northeastern India was so persistent that the Guwa-hati High Court, which has jurisdiction over all seven northeast states, ruled in March that women should no longer be taken to or held at army camps for interrogation. In July the Supreme Court ordered the army to take special measures in the northeast to protect women from torture or harassment during military operations.
In exceptional cases the courts acted to prevent tortme. In July the Guwahati High Court suspended five Tripura police officers accused of torturing detainees, and instructed the Director General of Police to initiate proceedings against them. The court also ordered the immediate transfer of the officer in charge of the police station where the tortxrre occurred and directed the state government not to confine any prisoners there.
Other victims of torture or ill-treatment included tribal peoples, including some of those involved in political campaigns seeking compensation for lost land or greater autonomy for tribal regions. Such campaigns, while largely peaceful, have been supported by "Naxalites" and others involved in violent opposition to the government, leading the police to accuse many tribal people of supporting the armed opposition. Many himdreds were detained in 1991 as suspected supporters of the Naxalites and tortured or ill-treated.
Scores of people, mainly the poor and underprivileged, died in police or military custody allegedly as a result of torture. Many were said by the authorities to have died from natural causes or suicide but few such deaths were known to have been officially investigated as required by law. In Assam soldiers delivered the battered body of Dhruvajyoti Gogoi to local police in March, saying that he had died of
INDIA
epilepsy. Both his arms had been broken, there were wounds on his legs and he had been stabbed. An autopsy foimd that he had a perforated hver and 28 other injuries consistent with tortiure. However, there was no official investigation into his death and no steps were taken to bring those responsible to justice.
The scale of the problem of custodial deaths was discussed in August, when the Minister of State for Home Affairs told parliament that the government was "determined to take deterrent action against those exceeding or abusing their powers". He also announced that an inquest into the death in police custody of 50-year-old Jairam Singh in Delhi on 19 August was in progress and that three police officers had already been charged with his murder. The outcome of the inquest was not known by the end of the year.
In Punjab suspected supporters of Sikh militant groups advocating a separate Sikh state were reported to have "disappeared" in custody or to be held in unacknowledged detention. Some detainees who were deliberately killed in custody were officially said to have died in "encounters" with the police or to have "escaped".
Hundreds of people "disappeared" or were extrajudicially executed. In February, for instance, witnesses saw Atamjit Singh and Mohan Singh, both students, being arrested in Ludhiana, apparently by two officers of the Central Investigation Agency. The police denied all knowledge of their arrests and their whereabouts remained unknown at the end of the year.
In Jammu and Kashmir the security forces reportedly committed extrajudicial executions and other human rights violations. In March, for example. Central Reserve Police Force (crpf) personnel opened fire in Srinagar, killing three men and seriously injuring a lO-year-old boy, apparently in retaliation for the death of a ca^F officer in an ambush. It was not known whether any action was taken by the authorities against those responsible. In June, 24 people, including children, were shot dead in central Srinagar when soldiers fired indiscriminately at people in the streets.
In July police officers near Pilibhit, Uttar Pradesh, stopped a tourist bus and arrested 10 young men who had been on a pilgrimage to Sikh holy places. Local villagers said that police held the men
overnight, then took them to a nearby forest and shot them dead. The police claimed that the 10 were militants, who had been tracked down in forest hideouts and killed in "encounters" with the police. The Uttar Pradesh government ordered a judicial inquiry into the incident, the findings of which had not been released by the end of the year. In the interim, the Indian Supreme Court ordered the state government to pay compensation to the families of the 10 victims.
Police officers reportedly joined upper-caste Hindus in brutal attacks on members of the scheduled castes. In August more than 20 scheduled-caste residents of Chun-dur village in the Guntiu* district of Andhra Pradesh were murdered by upper-caste Hindus. Survivors alleged that the police took part in the killings. Police sources admitted that a large contingent of police officers present in the village had failed to prevent the attack, but denied allegations of police participation. An investigation into the incident resulted in the suspension of at least five police constables but no criminal charges were known to have been brought against them.
At least six people were executed. One of them, K. Gumsamy, had spent 10 years in prison, seven of them in solitary confinement, after being convicted of murder. At least two people were hanged in West Bengal, the first executions in the state for over 25 years.
In May Amnesty International released a report, India: Human Rights Violations in Punjab: Use and Abuse of the Law. This dociunented a seven-year history of rampant human rights violations in Punjab. The Indian Govermnent responded by providing information about 24 of the 42 cases of torture and other human rights violations cited in the report, in most cases denying that the violations had occurred. Amnesty International provided further evidence to the government in August backing up its conclusion that the government's response had not invalidated the organization's findings.
Throughout tie year Amnesty International investigated the detention of scores of political prisoners in Jammu and Kashmir. It urged the government to investigate allegations of extrajudicial killings and torture in that state as well as in Punjab and Andhra Pradesh, and appealed for clemency for those whose executions were
INDIA/INDONESIA-EAST TIMOR
imminent. It also mged the government to change laws that grant immunity from prosecution to the security forces and facilitate violations of human rights.
In July the Indian Government refused to grant entry visas to an Amnesty International delegation scheduled to visit three southern states, and failed throughout the year to respond to outstanding requests from Amnesty International to visit Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir and the northeast states. Successive Indian governments have refused Amnesty International access to the country for research purposes for over 10 years.
