MALI
Hundreds of people were arrested and over 150 killed by the security forces during demonstrations and unrest before the
overthrow of President Moussa Traor^'s government in March. Detainees arrested in this period, including children, were tortured and ill-treated. Dozens of members of the Tuareg ethnic group were detained and extrajudicially executed by the army after attacks by armed rebel groups throughout the year.
Large pro-democracy demonstrations took place in Bamako, the capital, and towns throughout Mali in the first months of the year. They were violently suppressed by the security forces. On 26 March the government of President Moussa Traoré, who had ruled Mali for 23 years, was overthrown by army officers.
The new government, the Comité de transition pour le salut du peuple, Transitional Committee for the Salvation of the People, was headed by Lieutenant-Colonel Amadou Toumani Touré. It promised to hold elections and named both military and civilian interim ministers to run the country. A National Conference of government, political and commxmity leaders agreed a draft constitution and a multiparty political system.
Conflict between the government and armed Tuareg rebels continued throughout the year. In January a peace accord was signed at Tamanrasset in Algeria by the Malian Government and two of the rebel groups seeking autonomy for Tuareg and other peoples of northern Mali. Prisoners were released by both sides and in February a state of emergency in force in the north was lifted. However, armed Tuareg groups continued to attack and loot towns and villages in northern and central Mali, killing government officials and civilians and taking prisoners. Government forces and local people retaliated and some
MALI
members of the Tuareg and Moor communities were extrajudicially executed. Thousands of Tuareg and Moors then fled to neighbouring countries, primarily Mauritania and Algeria. In December rebel and government representatives started peace negotiations again, but further Tuareg attacks were reported.
Soldiers and civilians were taken hostage in attacks by insurgent Tuareg groups. In August one group, the Front populaire de libération de l'Azaouad (fpla). Popular Front for the Liberation of Azawad. said it was holding over 150 prisoners. In November Tuareg rebels named nine prisoners they were holding, including captured government officials.
The demonstrations and unrest that preceded the March coup were accompanied by hundreds of arrests. In January over 200 people were arrested in Bamako. Most were held incommunicado without charge for 10 days and some for longer, in violation of Malian law. In late February, 34 remaining detainees were charged and released provisionally.
Several members of pro-democracy organizations were briefly detained in February and March. Two leading members of the Comité national d'initiative démocratique (gnid). National Democratic Initiative Committee, were arrested on 23 March along with at least 20 other people. They were held without charge until after the coup.
Following the March coup. President Traoré, his wife, children and grandson were arrested, together with a number of former ministers and officials in his government, and army officers. In all they numbered at least 60. In late May and early June all except the children were charged with criminal offences, including conspiracy to murder, corruption and illicit enrichment, and remanded in custody. The conspiracy to murder charges related to extrajudicial executions of demonstrators in March 1991. In October a coiut action was brought on behalf of President Traoré's five children and six-year-old grandson, held without charge under house arrest since March. The outcome of the court action was not known by the end of the year but the children remained in detention.
In June, 15 Tuareg were reportedly arrested near Ménaka after an attack by armed Tuareg rebels. On 15 July the new
authorities announced that a conspiracy to overthrow the government had been thwarted: Major Lamine Diabira, Minister of the Interior, and seven other army officers were arrested. All 23 were reportedly still detained incommunicado and without charge or trial in December.
Detainees arrested in the weeks before the March coup were tortmed or ill-treated by police while held incommunicado. They included children under 12 arrested in January. Many of the 200 men, women and children detained at this time were reported to have been severely beaten, others left outside for long periods in the full heat of the sun and denied water. They were reported to have been held in one large cell without toilet or washing facilities.
Eight prisoners who had been under sentence of death since at least 1988 had their sentences commuted to terms of imprisonment in September. They had all been sentenced between 1980 and 1988 by the Special State Security Court. Established in 1976, this had been empowered to impose the death penalty for embezzlement of state funds or threatening the security of the state, and had done so at least 57 times. The coiul was formally abolished in October.
Over 200 people were killed and more than 1,000 injured by the security forces in January and in the weeks preceding the March coup. Many of those killed were said to have been shot in the back.
Over 40 people were killed in Bamako on 22 March after a student demonstration was stopped by the security forces and rioting broke out. A state of emergency was declared but at least a further 40 people were killed the next day. Some were shot dead when thousands of women protesting against the killings tried to march on President Traore's residence. Up to 65 protesters were reported to have been burned to death in a shopping centre in which they were seeking refuge when the security forces set fire to it. Soldiers also shot at mourners burying the dead at two cemeteries in Bamako.
According to the authorities, 150 soldiers were killed by Tuareg rebels between June 1990 and August 1991. The army responded to rebel attacks on towns and villages in northern Mali by arresting, torturing and killing members of the Tuareg and Moor communities. Most of
MALI/MAURITANIA
the victims were traders and community leaders not involved in the attacks, who were apparently killed solely because of their ethnic origin.
On 12 May about 50 Moors were arrested and taken to a military camp in Timbuktu where fom were allegedly shot dead the same day. A further 19 were reported to have died in the following days, either by being shot or suffocating to death, or as a result of their harsh conditions of detention. They were reportedly kept for several days without food or water, in extreme heat and cramped conditions without ventilation. Twenty-five were transferred to Timbuktu prison on 20 May; although they were charged with threatening the secmity of the state and criminal association, they were later discharged for lack of evidence and released.
On 20 May at least 35 men, mostly Tuareg, were killed by soldiers in or near Lere, southwest of Timbuktu. Some were shot after being arrested and taken to a military camp. Others were reportedly shot at their homes, including Alhousseiny Ag Mohamed Elmehdi, a community leader, and his eight brothers.
Further killings were reported throughout the year. In late July, soldiers at Agouny Well were reported to have fired indiscriminately on vehicles containing Tuareg civilians, killing at least 15 and possibly as many as 50 people including children. In November and December over 20 Tuareg civilians were reportedly killed by soldiers in reprisal for armed attacks by Tuareg rebels.
Before the coup, Amnesty International called on President Traore's government to investigate reports of tortinre, to take action to stop the killings, and to release all prisoners of conscience. Later in the year it called on the new government to halt extrajudicial executions by the security forces, to safeguard detainees from ill-treatment and to establish an independent investigation into the killings. In response, the new government said that armed forces officers had been removed from their posts and punished in connection with the killings in Timbuktu and L6r6, although no details were made available. Amnesty International also made inquiries about further killings and about detainees arrested after the March coup and expressed concern at the detention without charge of President Traore's children and grandson.
