ARGENTINA
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the police continued, resulting in one case in a detainee's death. The authorities failed to clarify the fate of three people who reportedly "disappeared" in 1990. Human rights workers, critics of the government, judges and journalists were the target of death threats and attacks by unidentified groups. Investigations were not completed into allegations that people in custody had been extrajudicially executed, "disappeared" and tortured after an attack on La Tablada Barracks in 1989. President Carlos Menem restated his intention to reintroduce the death penalty.
ARGENTINA
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by police persisted during the year. On 16 March Pedro Molina Toledo was detained by police in Mendoza city, in connection with a fraud investigation. He was taken for questioning to the Economic Crimes Office at the Central Police Station. Pedro Molina Toledo was allegedly severely beaten while in police custody and died on the same day from his injuries. Two police officers were charged with manslaughter but at the end of the year remained on duty pending trial.
New information was published about ill-treatment in previous years. According to the National Human Rights Directorate of the Ministry of the Interior, between 1984 and 1986 there were 698 complaints of "unlawful coercion", which would include ill-treatment of detainees by the police, in different police units in the federal capital. Buenos Aires. Despite corroborating medical evidence showing that injuries had been sustained in 267 cases, no one was convicted. There were reportedly 879 further complaints of unlawful coercion in 1989 and 870 in 1990, but no information on the number of convictions was available. The National Human Rights Directorate criticized the judiciary and public prosecutors for their reluctance to investigate fully the allegations and concluded that the lack of convictions showed that impunity was rooted in the judicial system.
The authorities failed to clarify the fate of three people who reportedly "disappeared" in 1990. On 28 April 1990 Adolfo Argentino Garrido and Raúl Baigorria were allegedly detained by uniformed police in General San Martin Park, Mendoza. The car in which the two had been travelling was found two days later in a police dis-
trict (Number Five) in Mendoza and returned to their relatives, but the whereabouts of the two men remained unknown. The police denied arresting the men or having any record of their detention and the seizure of their vehicle. The third "disappearance" was that of Andrés Alberto Niíñez (see Amnesty International Report 1991). He "disappeared" in September 1990 after reportedly being taken into custody by the Investigations Force of La Plata, Buenos Aires province.
Human rights workers, critics of the government, judges and joimialists were subjected to death threats, attacks and other forms of intimidation. Hebe de Bonafini, President of the human rights organization Madres de Plaza de Mayo, Mothers of Plaza de Mayo, received telephone death threats in February, after she and other members of the organization were labelled "traitors to the motherland" by President Menem. This accusation followed a strongly worded attack by Hebe de Bonafini on the President's December 1990 decision to pardon members of the former military government for crimes, including gross human rights violations, committed during the period of military rule.
Between March and June the headquarters of the Mothers of Plaza de Mayo in central Buenos Aires were broken into four times. Money, recording equipment and confidential written material were among the items reportedly stolen.
On 22 May film director Fernando Solanas was shot and wounded by an unidentified assailant in Olivos, near Buenos Aires. The shooting took place three days after the publication in the newspaper Página 12 of an interview in which Fernando Solanas publicly criticized President Menem. After the interview, President Menem filed a legal complaint against Fernando Solanas for slander. Apparently the police initially treated the shooting as a case of attempted robbery, but subsequently Interior Ministry officials acknowledged that the attempt on Fernando Solanas' life had been politically motivated.
In June and July Appeal Coxut Judges Jorge Casanova and Horacio Catani received death threats. The judges were both members of the Excelentísima Cámara Nacional de Apelaciones en lo Criminal y Correccional Federal, National Federal Criminal and Correctional Appeal Court.
ARGENTINA/AUSTRALIA
They were presiding over the appeal hearings of army officers sentenced by a military court for a failed military uprising in December 1990.
In July several journalists and foreign correspondents working in Argentina also received anonymous written death threats, On 6 August a parcel containing a fake explosive device was delivered to the house of Néstor Ibarra, an Argentine journalist from Radio Mitre. That morning Néstor Ibarra had conducted an interview with an opposition deputy who asserted that a secret group was disseminating government propaganda and defaming the opposition. A senior government official later issued a statement stressing the government's determination to uphold the freedom of the press.
More than two years after they began, investigations were still not completed into alleged abuses in 1989 of members of the Movimiento Todos por la Patria (mtp), All for the Fatherland Movement, who were involved in an armed attack on an army barracks at La Tablada, Buenos Aires province (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1990 and 1991). Significant evidence had supported allegations that two mtp prisoners were extrajudicially executed after they siuxendered and that three others "disappeared" after giving themselves up to military personnel. There was also evidence that several mtp prisoners were tortured and ill-treated in military, police and prison custody.
In September President Menem reaffirmed his intention to reintroduce the death penalty. Following the kidnapping of a well-knovm businessman, President Menem declared his decision to send draft legislation to Congress to reintroduce the death penalty for certain crimes, including kidnapping resulting in death and drug-trafficking. However, after reported opposition to this initiative within his own cabinet, President Menem announced that any decision on the subject would be postponed until after a plebiscite in 1993.
Diuing the year Amnesty International wrote to various government officials calling for thorough and impartial investigations into reports of "disappearances", torture and ill-treatment. In February Amnesty International wrote to President Menem expressing concern at a presidential pardon granted in 1990 to former General Carlos Suárez Mason before the
end of judicial proceedings against him (see Amnesty International Report 1991). He had been awaiting trial on 39 murder charges relating to human rights violations committed during the period of military rule. The organization stated that by pardoning him before conviction, the government had failed to demonstrate its commitment to preventing a recurrence of human rights violations.
In March Amnesty International published a report entitled Criminal Investigations into the Attack on the Third Infantry Regiment of La Tablada, which updated a previous Amnesty International report on the subject. It expressed concern that the failure to complete the investigations might indicate a lack of government determination to bring to justice members of the armed forces responsible for human rights violations.
In August Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate the death threats and attacks on human rights workers, journalists, judges and critics of the government. It called on the authorities to ensure the safety of those threatened and to bring to justice those responsible. The organization stated that although no evidence directly linked the government or security forces to these incidents, a pattern appeared to be emerging in which individuals and organizations critical of the government were subjected to death threats and harassment.
