GUINEA
Dozens of supporters of an opposition organization and some trade unionists, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested during the year. At least three demonstrators were killed by police in October. New information emerged about 63 people who "disappeared" in custody in the mid-1980s.
Following a referendum at the end of 1990 which endorsed a new constitution to end military rule, the military government was officially dissolved on 16 January. It was replaced by a transitional government, the Conseil transitoire de redressement national (ctrn). Transitional Council for National Regeneration, whose members, mostly members of the outgoing government, were appointed by President Lansana Conté. Under the new Constitution the government is empowered to limit the number of political parties and defer elections for up to five years. However, in October the authorities announced that a law permitting political parties would be introduced in April 1992 to prepare the way for national elections in the following 12 months, and it appeared that an unlimited number of political parties would be allowed.
Despite this, dozens of people were arrested for supporting the Rassemblement du peuple guinéen (r^g), Guinean People's Rally, an opposition organization. Five rpg members were briefly detained in May for organizing a public meeting at which the rpg's Secretary General, Alpha Condé, who had just returned from more than 30 years abroad, was due to speak. The meeting was forcibly dispersed by the security forces
and a jonmalist and press photographer were also briefly detained,
About 60 other rpg supporters were arrested in June at Alpha Condé's house in Conakry. Most were held only briefly, but Alpha Condé's brother, Malick Condé, and nine others were tried at the end of the month. Malick Condé was charged with illegal possession of arms and the others with harbouring criminals, destroying public property and failing to obey orders. Malick Condé was fined but the others were all acquitted.
Togba Traoré, who had been briefly detained in 1989 for supporting the rpg, was rearrested twice and held for a few days.
In October seven workers from Kamsar were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for hindering freedom to work after they tried to organize a strike. They had already been held for two months awaiting trial and were released pending the outcome of an appeal.
At least three demonstrators, possibly as many as seven, died in October when a pro-democracy march in Kankan was forcibly broken up by the police. The government issued a warning against further political meetings in public, and later stated that it would investigate the killings. There was no fuiiher news about an inquiry which the government said it would establish into the killings of at least five students in late 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
New information emerged about people arrested in 1984 and 1985 who "disappeared" in custody (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Former prisoners provided details about secret extrajudicial executions in July and August 1985. Thirty-nine prisoners were reported to have been executed in July 1985. Six others, including former government minister Kabassan Keita, an army commander at the time of his arrest, were reportedly executed on 19 August 1985 after they had been told they were to be released. Several others died as a result of torture. A year after their executions, the prisoners were sentenced to terms of imprisonment or death in secret trials held between July and September 1986.
In December Amnesty International published a report, Republic of Guinea: Amnesty International's concerns since April 1984, which detailed human rights
GUINEA/GUINEA-BISSAU
violations under the government of General Lansana Conté. The report urged the new government to take steps to promote the rule of law and prevent violations of human rights by reviewing trial procedures before the State Security Court, safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention, tor-tiue and ill-treatment. Amnesty International reiterated its call for an independent investigation into all cases of "disappearance" and deaths in custody.
