RWANDA
Several thousand political detainees were held without trial until April, when most were released. Dozens of members of the minority Tutsi ethnic group, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested. At least 12 journalists, apparently prisoners of conscience, were detained. Twenty people were convicted of political offences after unfair trials, and eight of them were sentenced to death. There were
reports of torture and "disappearances". Hundreds of extrajudicial executions by members of the security forces and vigilante groups were reported. All death sentences were commuted in April.
Fighting continued throughout the year between government troops, drawn predominantly from the majority Hutu population, and the Front patriotique rwandais (fpr), Rwandese Patriotic Front, an armed opposition group dominated by members of the Tutsi minority. A cease-fire agreed in March between the government and the fpr was largely ignored. Both the fpr and government forces were said to have abused human rights, including by killing captives.
An agreement reached with neighbouring countries in February allowed Rwandese refugees to return home.
The Constitution was amended in June to introduce a multi-party system in place of the one-party state. Nine new political parties were formed and elections were scheduled for 1992. A state of siege, declared after the fpr attempted to overthrow the government in October 1990. remained in force throughout the year; there was a night-time curfew and travel between regions was restricted.
About 4,000 suspected fpr supporters, mostly Tutsi, were being detained without charge or trial at the beginning of the year. Many appeared to be prisoners of conscience held on account of their ethnic origin, although they also included Hutu critics of the government. About 300 Ugandans were being held on account of their nationality. They and others had been arrested following an fpr incursion into Rwanda ft-om Uganda in October 1990 (see Amnesty Internationai Report 1991).
Dozens of further arrests, mostly of Tutsi, occiured in Gisenyi and Ruhengeri regions, after the fpr briefly occupied Ruhengeri town on 23 January. Those arrested were accused of being fpr supporters but they appeared to be prisoners of conscience arrested because of their ethnic origin. They were reportedly beaten in custody and denied medical treatment and visits.
In May five journalists were arrested and charged with defamation or endangering the security of the state. One was Vincent Rwabukwisi, who had been sentenced in 1990 to 15 years' imprisonment but released in early May pending his appeal
RWANDA
(see Amnesty International Report 1991). In July two of them were convicted in the High Court of defaming government officials: one was sentenced to one year's imprisonment, but remained free pending appeal. The sentence was confirmed in December by the Kigali Court of Appeal but suspended for three years. The other, François-Xavier Hangimana, a former prisoner of conscience, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment. However, he was released in September pending appeal. The other three journalists had also been freed by September but the charges against them were not dropped. At least seven journalists were detained for short periods in December because they had written articles critical of government policy or officials. One of them, Jean-Pierre Mugabe, was arrested on 31 December.
In March the government began a program of mass releases which saw around 4,000 political detainees released by mid-April. Others released included several sentenced political prisoners, among them Innocent Ndayambaje, a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Those still held at the end of the year included at least 30 civilians and several dozen soldiers who the authorities said were to face charges, and 15 captured insurgents. In December the government approved a law authorizing an amnesty for all political prisoners arrested before mid-December but no prisoners were released as a result.
Two trials of civilians accused of supporting the fpr took place before the State Security Court. At the first, on 3 January, 12 of the 13 defendants, including a 16-year-old youth, faced capital charges, but none was assisted by legal counsel. The trial, which lasted less than five hours, was attended by an Amnesty International observer, and was grossly unfair. All but one of the defendants were convicted although no prosecution witnesses were produced and several of the accused alleged that they had been beaten or threatened in pre-trial custody to force them to confess. The court did not investigate these allegations. Its five judges were serving military officers and senior civil servants, One defendant was convicted of being an fpr agent and sentenced to death. Nine were convicted of allowing themselves to be trained to use firearms and sentenced to prison terms of between 15 and 20 years.
Two - including the 16-year-old - were sentenced to shorter prison sentences.
In a second trial which ended on 1 February, the 12 defendants were allowed defence counsel, but not to call witnesses. The court did not permit a doctor to testify in support of allegations that the defendants had been tortured in pre-trial detention. Two defence lawyers withdrew from this case after receiving death threats. Eight of the defendants were convicted of being members or accomplices of the fpr: seven were sentenced to death and one to 10 years' imprisonment. All eight lodged appeals but they were turned down,
No further political trials took place before the mass releases in March and April. However, in mid-1991 government soldiers, some accused of treason, were reportedly secretly tried by courts-martial. Few details of the trials were available, but they did not appear to meet international standards for fair trial. Major François Sabakunzi, for example, was tried by a court-martial in July and acquitted, but kept in custody on the grounds that he also had to be tried by the State Security Court. He was released in September when all charges against him were dropped.
Torture, which was widespread in the aftermath of the mass arrests of October 1990, continued to be reported. Detainees held by the Service central de renseignements (scr), Central Intelligence Service, and at the gendarmerie detention centres and the armed forces' headquarters, both in Kigali, were reportedly beaten with electric wire, hoe handles and other implements, given electric shocks and made to drink urine and eat vomit. Prisoners in military custody were also reportedly tied in a deliberately painful and sometimes permanently damaging position, with the arms tied tightly together above the elbows, behind the back.
Political prisoners reportedly continued to be held in unlit cells (known as cachots noirs, black cells) in Ruhengeri prison and in small, poorly lit punishment cells in Kigali Central Prison.
The situation of at least eight people reportedly arrested in Nyamata, Kanzenze district, for political reasons in October was unclear at the end of the year. The authorities said two of them had joined the fpr and others had returned to their homes, outside Kanzenze district, but there was no independent confirmation of the releases
RWANDVST VINCENT WJD THE GRENADINES
and it was feared that they may have "disappeared".
Many extrajudicial executions reportedly followed the fpr's brief occupation of Ruhengeri town in January. Hundreds of Tutsi, mostly members of the Bagogwe clan, were killed by government soldiers or Hutu assisting them. Government appeals to the civilian population to prevent fpr attacks appeared to be interpreted by some Hutu as a call to attack any Tutsi suspected of supporting the fpr. Dozens of people were killed by soldiers. Fourteen people from four families were reportedly killed at Gisenyi barracks on 4 February, and then buried in a mass grave nearby.
Members of the security forces were reported to have extrajudicially executed former prisoners after their release. For example, Jean Munyakazi, a driver, cind Apolinnaire Niyonzima, an agronomist, were released from Kigali prison on 27 February. However, they were apparently rearrested shortly afterwards and clandestinely killed at Kanombe barracks near Kigali.
President Juv6nal Habyarimana commuted all death sentences in April, including the eight passed by the State Security Court in January and February. It was not clear how many prisoners benefited from the amnesty but it was believed to be dozens.
Amnesty International urged the release of all prisoners of conscience and the fair trial or release of other political prisoners. It welcomed the releases early in the year and the commutation of all death sentences in April. The organization continued, however, to press for an impartial investigation into alleged extrajudicial executions and other human rights violations, and called for the introduction of safeguards to prevent their recurrence.
In June an Amnesty International delegation visited Rwanda and met the Minister of Justice and other government officials. The delegation expressed concern about recent arbitrary arrests and detentions. torture, unfair trials and extrajudicial executions. In response, officials denied the use of torture and attributed the killings in the northwest to civilians, not the security forces. Senior officials of the Procuracy said no inquiries had been initiated into reported human rights violations but in August the Minister of Justice told Amnesty International that the procuracy
had begun to investigate alleged extrajudicial executions. By the end of 1991 no findings had been made public and it was not clear whether any independent investigations were taking place.
