AFGHANISTAN
Hundreds of political detainees, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial. Hundreds more political prisoners were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials by special tribunals. Torture of detainees continued to be reported.
Armed conflict continued between the government, headed by President Najibul-lah, and several armed opposition groups -collectively known as the Mujahideen. The government retained control of the capital, Kabul, and other major cities, but the Mujahideen effectively controlled some rural areas and four provincial cities. Mujahideen groups held hundreds of captives and were responsible for torture and arbitrary killings. In May United Nations Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar appealed to all parties involved in the conflict to begin a political dialogue "leading to the establishment of a broad-based government". The proposal was accepted by the Kabul government and by some but not all Mujahideen groups, and by foreign governments supporting the various parties to the conflict.
Hundreds of political detainees, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial in interrogation centres and segregated prison blocks administered by the Ministry of State Security. Some had been held for as long as nine years. Mohammad Zahir Ofoq, who had been arrested following a March 1990 coup attempt, was one of the possible prisoners of conscience who remained in detention without charge or trial.
Political prisoners, whether suspected
of involvement in armed opposition or of non-violent anti-government activity, were held incommunicado in isolation cells during their initial interrogation, which often lasted several months. Many were then moved to detention centres run by the Ministry of State Security within certain prisons, and held indefinitely without trial. More than 1,000 such detainees were reportedly being held in Blocks 1 and 2 of Pul-e-Charkhi Prison near Kabul.
Hundreds of other suspected opponents of the government were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials by the Special Court of National Security and its predecessor, the Special Revolutionary Court. Amin Yusufzai and Haji Abdul Qudous Kaderi, two possible prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1990], were released in October. However, those who continued to be held included Seyed Abdul Samad and Moharrunad Nazar, both serving 16-year sentences (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Most trials before special courts reportedly lasted only a few minutes, with defendants being denied legal counsel. Trials were usually held in camera before judges who lacked legal training but belonged to the ruling party. Defendants had no right of appeal. Sentences, including the death penalty, only required confirmation by the President.
President Najibullah announced in March that the Special Court of National Security was no longer in existence. However, he gave no information as to how those accused of political offences would be tried in future or any indication that those already imprisoned would have their sentences reviewed.
Tortiue of political detainees continued to be reported, although on a lesser scale than in previous years. Methods reported included electric shocks, sleep deprivation and beatings.
There was no further information about prisoners reported to have "disappeared" in previous years.
More evidence emerged about dozens of extrajudicial executions carried out by Ministry of State Security staff after a failed coup attempt in March 1990. Four generals - Asif Shour, Kabir Kawyani, Japar Sar Tir and Mohammad Pirooz - were among those reported to have been sxmimarily executed at the Riasat-e-Panj interrogation centre in Kabul.
AFGHANISTAN/ALBANIA
The authorities announced in January that President Najihullah had commuted 48 death sentences. However, more than 90 people sentenced to death for alleged involvement in the March 1990 coup attempt were later said to be awaiting the President's decision on their appeals for commutation. It was not known if there were any executions.
Seyed Hamza, who had been sentenced to death in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1991], was among Muja-hideen prisoners exchanged for a Soviet prisoner held by a Mujahideen group.
In September President Najibullah was reported to have set up a legal commission to review the use of the death penalty, but no further information was available by the end of the year.
Mujahideen groups were also responsible for abusing human rights. They held hundreds of captives and were reported to have tortured and killed people suspected of links with the government or rival Mujahideen groups. After the fall of the city of Khost on 31 March, about 2,500 Afghan soldiers and scores of civilians suspected of supporting the Kabul government were taken captive. They were feared to be at risk of torture or execution: Mujahideen groups had reportedly shot dead a number of soldiers and unarmed civilians after capturing Tarin Kot in October 1990. In the Mujahideen-controlled area of Spin Bul-dak, an Islamic court was reported in April to have ordered the execution of one man for murder and the amputation of the right hand of his accomplice for theft. The sentences were reportedly carried out.
Mujahideen groups were also reported to have abducted and killed Afghan opposition figures living in Pakistan. Abdul Rahim Chinzai, a former senior Afghan government official living as a refugee in Peshawar, Pakistan, was abducted by armed men on 9 July. He was reported in October to be held by members of Hezb-e-Islami (Hekmatyar), a Mujahideen group based in Pakistan. There was no further information about two aid workers abducted in 1989 ft'om Peikistan by Mujahideen groups (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In March Amnesty International published a report, Afghanistan: Reports of Torture and Long-Term Detention without Trial, and called publicly for an end to prolonged incommunicado detention and
other human rights violations. Amnesty International published a further report in August, Afghanistan: Unfair Trials by Special Tribunals, citing reports that over 8,000 people had been executed between 1980 and 1988 after being sentenced to death by special courts. Amnesty International called on the government to review the cases of all prisoners sentenced by special courts and to ensure that political prisoners received prompt and fair trials, After the announcement that the Special Court of National Security was no longer in existence, Amnesty International wrote to the government asking for information about what judicial process or body had replaced it, but received no reply.
Amnesty International also wrote to the President of the Afghan Interim Government - an alliance of Mujahideen groups in Pakistan - calling for all possible action to be taken to ensure that those tciken captive at Khost were not tortured or executed.
