SIERRA LEONE
Up to 130 captured insurgents and their suspected supporters were detained. Others were extrajudicially executed, some afler torture or ill-treatment. Several possible prisoners of conscience were detained without charge or trial. Two death sentences were passed but no executions were reported.
In March a Constitutional Review Commission appointed in October 1990 to draft a new constitution recommended a retum to multi-party democracy. After approval by referendxun, the new constitution came into force in October. Several political parties were subsequently registered and parliamentary elections were expected in 1992.
Sierra Leone was invaded on 23 March by an armed force from Liberia, which attacked towns and villages in the southeast of the country and killed, tortured and imprisoned hundreds of civilians. At least 200 Liberian refugees living in the border area were captured and taken back to Liberia by the invaders, while thousands of others, together with Sierra Leonean civilians, fled to neighbouring Guinea or to other parts of Sierra Leone.
The invasion force, apparently several
SIERRA LEONE
hundred strong, was led by members of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (npfl), headed by Charles Taylor, which had controlled most of Liberia since the 1990 civil war there. It included Sierra Leoneans opposed to the goverrunent of President Joseph Saidu Momoh, as well as soldiers from Burkina Faso and Sierra Leoneans forcibly conscripted after their towns and villages were recaptured by the invasion force. The npfl apparently sought to destabilize the Sierra Leone Government in retaliation for its support in 1990 for military intervention in Liberia by troops from the Economic Community of West Afi'ican States, which had prevented the npfl from taking control of the Liberian capital.
The invasion force was opposed by the Sierra Leone armed forces assisted by troops from Nigeria and Guinea, as well as by Liberian soldiers loyal to the former Liberian President, Samuel Doe. Although most of the npfl force was pushed back into western Liberia by September, rebels opposed to the government retained control of parts of the southeast.
Government officials and supporters -including traditional chiefs, members of the ruling party, and Muslim businessmen from the Fullah ethnic group and the Lebanese community - were particularly targeted by the npfl-dominated invading forces. Many were tortured or killed. In April Alhaji Jalloh-Timbo, President of the Supreme Islamic Council and leader of Sierra Leone's Sunni Muslims, was killed with four other people in an ambush near Zimi.
In the same month Alhaji Omaru Koroma, President of the Farmers' Association, and his family were killed in Jojoima. Also in April the invasion forces reportedly slaughtered 60 civilians in Koindu, most of them Fullah traders, and 46 people in Puje-him. In May they reportedly killed at least five Lebanese men in Sumbuya and beheaded 16 Fullah traders in Pujehun.
Government forces captured some members of the invasion force, who were then imprisoned in Freetown. However, many people suspected of supporting the rebels were seized by the army, interrogated, and either released or siunmarily killed. Most were Sierra Leoneans living in areas recaptured from the rebels. Some were reportedly first interrogated by local traditional rulers and government officials before being handed to the army to be killed.
Some were tortured or beaten or paraded in public before being killed.
At least 26 people from Jorma were apparently arrested in May on suspicion of collaborating with the insurgents and killed while being taken to Freetown. Later, suspected rebels were reported to have been executed in Pujehun, Kenema and other towns in the southeast. They included about 50 said to have been executed outside a police station near Takbombo, Tongo area.
A number of critics and suspected opponents of the government were detained without charge or trial for up to several months, and the absence of legislation permitting administrative detention suggested that they were held unlawfully. They included possible prisoners of conscience.
Keikura Bayoh Kpoto, a Liberian businessman and former politician, was arrested in April after a captured member of the invasion force apparently accused him of supporting the invaders. He was detained incommunicado for over six months without charge or trial. He was released in October on the order of the High Court, after the authorities failed to provide any reason for his detention in response to a habeas corpus action.
Franklin Bunting-Davies, editor of the New Shaft newspaper and President of the Sierra Leone Association of Journalists, was arrested in June and briefly detained. He was then charged with "publication of a false statement which was likely to cause or instil fear or panic" and released on bail. He was subsequently also charged with libel for criticizing the government's response to the invasion. The prosecution had not proceeded by the end of the year.
Up to 130 people were arrested in connection with the invasion, half of whom were still held without charge or trial at Pademba Road Prison in Freetown at the end of the year. Most were Liberian nationals captiued during the fighting but they included some Sierra Leoneans. Others were said to be Sierra Leoneans who had been forced to assist the rebels or Liberians who had been arrested in Freetown and were apparently suspected of links with the invaders. The detainees were reportedly beaten and ill-treated following arrest and held in harsh conditions.
In December two policemen were sentenced to death following their conviction
SIERRA LEONE/SINGAPORE/SOMALIA
for murder by the High Court. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International monitored reports of torture and killings. The organization made inquiries about the detention of possible prisoners of conscience, and appealed for them to be released if they were not to be charged or brought to trial.
