VIET NAM
More than 80 known and possible prisoners of conscience remained imprisoned throughout 1991, and at least 15 others were arrested during the year. Dozens of tribal people, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were also held throughout the year. Over 100 former military personnel and others continued to be detained without trial for "re-educa-tion"; some had been held since 1975. Six people were reportedly sentenced to death and there may have been unreported death sentences. The Criminal Code was amended to extend the application of the death penalty to additional economic offences. The goverrunent increased efforts
VIET NAM
to halt "illegal departures" and reached an agreement providing for the compulsory repatriation of thousands of Vietnamese asylum-seekers already in Hong Kong.
At its Seventh Congress in June the ruling Communist Party of Viet Nam reaffirmed its commitment to socialism. Do Muoi was elected General Secretary and replaced as Prime Minister by Vo Van Kiet. The new General Secretary pledged to continue the reform policy of doi moi, "renovation", announced in 1986, calling on the party to "vigorously accelerate renovation in the political system, implement democratization in social activities, and renovate all aspects of daily life and social conditions". However, despite this reaffirmation of the doi moi policy, there were signs of increasing restrictions on political dissent during the year.
In August the National Assembly approved amendments to the Criminal Code to extend the application of the death penalty to certain economic crimes, including defrauding socialist property, defrauding the people's property and receiving bribes.
More than 80 prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout 1991, including 84-year-old Dominic Tran Dinh Tu, a Catholic priest; Thich Tri Sieu, a Buddhist monk; Tran Xuan Tu, a Protestant pastor; Nguyen Dan Que, a medical doctor; and Le Van Tien, a writer.
Le Van Tien was reportedly arrested with 17 other writers, poets, academics and journalists in a crackdown on known and suspected critics of the government in November and December 1990. Some of them were accused of "crimes against the state" and "contact with foreign countries
and 'hostile' foreign groups", but none of them was brought to trial.
Dozens of members of the Protestant Evangelical Church of Viet Nam from the Jeh, Jerai and Koho tribes were believed to be still imprisoned since their arrests in 1989 and 1990. Some appeared to be prisoners of conscience held on account of their alleged association with unofficial Christian groups. Some were said to have been sentenced to three years' imprisonment after xmfair trials. Among them were Siu Phan and Ro Cam Sieng, elders of the Jeh and Jerai tribes respectively, and Ha Wan and Ha Hak, pastors belonging to the Koho tribe. At least 11 of them were reported to be detained in Pleibong (t15) "re-education" camp in Gia Lai-Kon Turn province.
At least 15 people arrested in 1991 appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Ngo Van An, a former teacher, was arrested in February for allegedly signing an open letter criticizing the officially recognized Catholic Church in Viet Nam. The letter was said to have been written by two other prisoners of conscience, Chan Tin and Nguyen Ngoc Lan (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. Ngo Van An was reportedly sent to a "re-education" camp for three years. Dinh Thien Tu and Tran Dinh Ai, both Protestant pastors and leaders of the unofficial "house church movement", were reportedly detained in February on charges of "abusing religious duties, being involved in social work without permission and with political ambition" and "making contacts with foreigners". Dinh Thien Tu was reportedly sentenced to three years' imprisonment with hard labour and Tran Dinh Ai to three years' imprisonment. Eight other pastors, including Mai Tran and Pham Phu Anh, were reportedly detained without charge or trial.
Duong Thu Huong, a writer, was arrested in April for allegedly trying to send sensitive documents out of the country -the manuscript of a book she had written and letters containing political criticism from Communist Party members to officials preparing the Seventh Party Congress. She was held without charge or trial for seven months before being released. Bui Duy Tam, a medical doctor with United States citizenship, was also arrested in April when customs officials in Ha Noi found documents allegedly received from Duong
VIET NAM
Thu Huong in his luggage. He was released on 31 May.
It was reported in June that Doan Thanh Liem, Do Ngoc Long, Nguyen Van Tan and five others detained in 1990 for alleged espionage and involvement in the drafting of an unauthorized constitution (see Amnesty International Report 1991] would be tried in Ho Chi Minh City. However, no date for the trial was given and it was not known to have taken place by the end of the year.
In November prisoner of conscience Nguyen Dan Que (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991], a medical doctor, was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment followed by five years' house arrest after the People's Coiurt in Ho Chi Minh City convicted him of "activities aimed at overthrowing the People's Government". He was also reportedly accused of "using his capacity as a member of Amnesty International to translate documents into English and send them abroad". A co-defendant, Nguyen Van Thuan, was reportedly sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment at the same trial.
There was no news about other long-term political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, reported to have been detained since the 1970s. They included Thich Thien Tan, a Buddhist monk, Ly Nghiep Phu, an accountant, and Nguyen Dinh Luong, a politician (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1989 to 1991). Information was received in October and November, however, that at least 19 political prisoners had been released. They included Father Joseph Le Thanh Que, Doan Quoc Sy and Nguyen Chi Thien, all prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Reports 1986 to 1991], and two former army officers of the pre-1975 Republic of Viet Nam (rvn-South Viet Nam), Tran Duy Hinh and Cao Nguyen Khoa.
Former Minister of the Interior Mai Chi Tho confirmed in April that more than 100 former soldiers and officials of the rvn were still being held without trial in "reeducation" camps. They included Le Xuan Diem, a former air force officer in the rvn, and Nguyen Van Hao, a pharmacist and former lieutenant in the rvn medical corps. They remained detained without charge or trial under Resolution 49/tvqh, which provides for indefinite detention without trial for "re-education".
At least six people were sentenced to
death after being convicted of murder or offences such as corruption and printing and circulating counterfeit banknotes. One of the six was a soldier, Nguyen Due San, who was sentenced to death by a military court in August after being convicted of destroying important national security projects. There were no reports of executions. In January the official publication Tuan Tin Tuc reported that 56 death sentences had been imposed by the courts during the first nine months of 1990,
Attempting to leave the country without official permission remained a crime. Arrest for attempted "illegal departure" may result in detention without charge or trial under Articles 85, 88 and 89 of the Criminal Code. In March the government pledged to step up efforts to stem "illegal departures" and to persuade "boat people" seeking refuge in first-asylum countries to return home by reiterating its guarantees against prosecution and discrimination. In October the Vietnamese and United Kingdom governments reached an agreement providing for Vietnamese asylum-seekers in Hong Kong who have been "screened out" to be compulsorily retiuned to Viet Nam (see Hong Kong entry).
Amnesty International continued to call for the release of all prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners and for an end to the use of the death penalty. It welcomed the releases of prisoners but received no response when it sought information about those known to have been arrested for political reasons between November 1990 and April.
In June Amnesty International published a report, Viet Nam: Long-term political prisoners, which detailed its continuing concerns about prisoners of conscience held without trial, or on vague charges such as endangering national security or after imfair trials, and the use of the death penalty. The report was sent to the Vietnamese authorities but they did not respond.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in December to express concern about the imprisonment of Nguyen Dan Que after what may have been an unfair trial, explaining the role and responsibilities of an international member of Amnesty International and urging his immediate and unconditional release.
