CONGO
Allegations of gross human rights violations in previous years were made during a National Conference convened in Feb-niary to discuss the country's future. However, there was no official investigation into these allegations, which included the alleged killings of 3,000 people. Instead, the National Conference declared a general amnesty for all those responsible for political crimes, including human rights violations. At least four people remained under sentence of death but no new death sentences or executions were reported.
A National Conference to discuss the country's political future was convened in February following opposition demands. The government also lifted restrictions on the formation of political parties which it had imposed in December 1990.
The National Conference, in which more than 60 political parties and over 130 other groups participated, continued until Jxme. Participants at the conference accused successive governments since Congo's independence in 1960 of responsibility for gross human rights violations, including some 3,000 politically motivated killings. The victims were said to have included Roman Catholic Archbishop Emile Biayenda. who was killed in 1977. Former President Massamba Débat and nine others were executed the same year for alleged involvement in the assassination of President Marien Ngoaubi after an unfair trial before the Revolutionary Court of Justice (see Amnesty International Report 1977). In response to these allegations, President Denis Sassou-Nguesso acknowledged that there had been human rights violations and asked the conference
CONGO/CÒTE DWOIRE
participants for indulgence towards, and understanding for, the mistakes that he and his predecessors had committed. The conference, whose decisions had been given the force of law, subsequently agreed to grant an amnesty to all those responsible for political crimes, including human rights violations, in order to foster national reconciliation. Consequently, no investigations into past human rights violations, including the 3,000 alleged kiUings, were established, and no steps were taken to bring those responsible to justice. However. the state security service, which was accused of responsibility for some human rights violations, was dissolved in June.
The National Conference elected a new executive Prime Minister, André Milongo, to lead the government and assume overall responsibility for the armed forces. President Sassou-Nguesso remained as head of state but without executive powers. The Conference also established new institutions to guide the country through a one-year transitional period before multi-party elections scheduled for June 1992. It elected a 153-member transitional legislative body known as the Conseil supérieur de h République (csr). Higher Council of the Republic, chaired, like the Conference itself, by Roman Catholic Bishop Ernest Kombo. One of the csr's four commissions was given special responsibility for the Constitution, justice, human rights and electoral laws. The Conference dissolved special courts such as the Revolutionary Court of Justice and ordered that in future, any members of the csR or the government accused of plotting against the security of the state, as well as any accomplices, should be tried by a special High Court of Justice with full rights of defence.
The text of a new draft constitution was published in November and approved by the csr in December. It was expected to be put to a national referendum in early 1992. It incorporated two basic laws adopted by the National Conference - the Fundamental Transitional Instrument, which replaced Congo's 1985 Constitution pending adoption of a new one, and the National Freedom Charter, based on United Nations human rights treaties and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights. The draft Constitution penalizes anyone giving, soliciting or carrying out arbitrary orders and requires the government to compensate anyone subjected to arbitrary
or unlawful arrest, detention or torture. Military coups are declared illegal, civil disobedience against any future military government is declared legal and human rights violations such as siunmary executions and torture are prohibited.
Four people sentenced to death in 1989 were believed to be still under sentence of death at the end of 1991. No new death sentences or executions were reported.
Amnesty International called for the commutation of all death sentences and urged the government to ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
