CYPRUS
Some 20 prisoners of conscience were held, all of them Jehovah's Witnesses who had refused on conscientious grounds to perform military service or reservist exercises. At least two people alleged that they had been tortured in police custody.
In July Cyprus ratified the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Draft legislation first armounced in 1988, which would recognize the right to conscientious objection, had still not been debated by the House of Representatives by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). The draft legislation falls short of international standards in a number of respects. It proposes two types of alternatives to the ordinary military service of 26 months: a three-year unarmed military service: or a four-year "military service outside the military sphere" in the Civil Defence Force or a social service. All the services would come under the control of the Ministry of Defence and it was unclear whether a conscientious objector would have the right to choose between social service and the Civil Defence Force. The draft legislation provides for conscientious objection on religious grounds only, and it was imclear what provision would be made for people who developed conscientious objections after being conscripted into the armed forces.
Conscientious objectors were given prison sentences of up to six months. Those who continued to refuse military service or reservist exercises risked further prosecution and imprisonment following
CYPRUS/DENMARK
their release. A number of conscientious objectors imprisoned during the year had already served sentences of up to a year prior to September 1985, when all imprisoned conscientious objectors were released following a decision by the Supreme Court (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Panayiotis Antoniou Kousoulou, who had served sentences for his conscientious objection during 1984 and 1990, was sentenced to two months' imprisorunent in April for refusing to take part in reservist exercises.
In May Andreas Zinonos lodged a complaint against five policemen from the Limassol anti-narcotics squad alleging that they had beaten him with truncheons, kicked him and threatened to shoot and drown him in an attempt to make him confess to drugs-related offences. The five policemen were reportedly suspended on the orders of the commander of the anti-narcotics squad imtil an investigation had been carried out.
Amnesty International appealed repeatedly to the government of President George Vassiliou to release all imprisoned conscientious objectors. It urged the government to introduce alternative civilian service of non-pimitive length; to widen the grounds for objection in the draft legislation; and to provide for objection which develops after conscription into the armed forces.
In August Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the alleged torture of Andreas Zinonos and requested to be informed of the progress of the investigation. In September the Ministry of the Interior informed Amnesty International that charges had been brought in connection with the alleged offences and that the case was awaiting trial.
