TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
A preliminary inquiry into the cases of 114 people charged with treason was held. There were over 100 prisoners under sentence of death. There were no executions during the year; the last hanging was carried out in 1979. At least one flogging sentence was imposed.
In May the government accepted the recommendations made by the Commission of Inquiry into the effectiveness and status of the death penalty (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). The Commission's report, submitted to President Noor Hassanali in September 1990,
recommended retaining the death penalty, commuting death sentences imposed more than 10 years before to life imprisonment, and executing other prisoners sentenced to death who had exhausted their appeals, The Commission also recommended that the cases of all prisoners under sentence of death should be reviewed. By the end of the year no steps were known to have been taken to implement any of the Commission's recommendations.
In May Trinidad and Tobago ratified the American Convention on Human Rights and recognized the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
A preliminary inquiry continued into the cases of 114 people charged with treason, murder and other offences, as a result of the July 1990 attempt to overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. However, it was stayed in December pending other procedures (see below). The accused argued that they could not be tried because the Acting President had promised them a pardon during negotiations to end the overthrow attempt. They also lodged a habeas corpus petition challenging the legality of their imprisonment. The High Court and the Court of Appeals dismissed their submissions on the grounds that a pardon would only be possible at the beginning of the trial or after conviction. The Court of Appeals also questioned the validity of a pardon granted while the Prime Minister and others were being held hostage. The accused then appealed to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (jcpc) in London, the final court of appeal for Trinidad and Tobago, claiming that their constitutional rights had been violated. The jcpc heard the petition in November, and on 10 December ruled that the detainees should have a new hearing before the Supreme Court of Trinidad and Tobago.
Following the government's acceptance of the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry on the death penalty there was concern that executions could resume, after a 12-year unofficial moratorium, but none was carried out. Daniel Pinto remained on death row at the end of the year, although the Human Rights Committee, which supervises implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr), had concluded in July 1990 that his right to a fair trial under Article 14 of the iccpr had been violated.
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO/TUNISIA
and had recommended that he be released (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. More than 100 prisoners, including two women, remained under sentence of death at the end of the year.
A 53-year-old man convicted of rape in April was sentenced to 25 years in prison and 20 strokes with a birch rod. It was not known whether this and other flogging sentences imposed in the past had been carried out.
In June Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Arthur Napoleon Raymond Robinson expressing serious concern about the Commission of Inquiry's recommendation to retain the death penalty and subsequent reports that executions were to be resumed. Amnesty International welcomed the recommendation to commute the death sentences of prisoners who had been on death row for more than 10 years and urged its immediate implementation. The organization urged that all other death sentences be commuted, and asked for information about any steps the government was taking to implement the Human Rights Committee's decision on Daniel Pinto's case. There was no reply by the end of the year.
Four government critics who were held were prisoners of conscience. Thousands of Islamic activists, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested. Some were released uncharged but thousands were sentenced to prison terms. Hundreds of political detainees were tortured in illegally prolonged incommunicado detention: at least seven died in custody reportedly as a result. Five people were executed.
Despite laws legalizing political parties, the Islamic movement Hizb al-Nahda and several left-wing groups were not authorized by the government. The authorities accused Hizb al-Nahda of violence and of plotting to overthrow the government.
In April the government established a human rights council, the Comité supérieur des droits de l'homme et libertés fondamentales, Higher Committee for Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. In June President Zine El Abidine appointed a Special Presidential Adviser for Human Rights and set up a commission of inquiry into torture allegations raised by Amnesty International and the Ligue tunisienne des droits de l'homme (ltdh), Tunisian Human Rights League. The commission presented its report to the President in August but it was not accepted. A second report was submitted in October but its contents were not made public.
Four critics of the government were prisoners of conscience. Two of them were sentenced in 1991 for violations of the Press Code. Hamadi Jebali, editor of Al Fajr (Dawn), a weekly newspaper of the Islamic organization Hizb al-Nahda, Party of the Renaissance, was sentenced in January to one year's imprisonment by a military court. He was charged with defamation for publishing an article calling for the abolition of military courts. The author of the article, Mohamed Nouri, a lawyer, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and AI Fajr was banned. Mohamed Nouri's sentence expired on 8 September but he was kept in detention on new charges of being implicated in a coup plot.
Moncef Triki, head of the Tunis branch of the Association pour !a défense des droits de l'homme et des libertés publiques, Association for Human Rights and Public Freedoms, was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment in August. He was charged with belonging to an unauthorized organization and holding unauthorized meetings. Moncef Ben Salem, a university professor, remained in prison serving a three-year term. He was sentenced in 1990 for criticizing the government in a newspaper interview.
Beshir Essid, a possible prisoner of conscience, continued to serve a four-year sentence imposed in 1990 for defaming the President and other offences (see Amnesty International Report 1991].
Thousands of suspected supporters of Hizb al-Nahda were arrested and held incommunicado in pre-trial [garde à voje) detention, often beyond the maximum 10-day period allowed by Tunisian law. In the first half of the year, many of those arrested were released uncharged. In May hundreds
