NIGER
More than 70 members of the Tuareg eth> nic minority arrested in 1990 were released. Some appeared to be prisoners of conscience; many had been tortured in custody. Three political trials took place; although the defendants were acquitted, the proceedings did not meet international standards for fair trial.
New political parties were established following political reforms in 1990 which had ended the one-party state. In the first half of 1991, opposition parties, trade
NIGER
unions and others campaigned for a National Conference, which began in late July. In August the Conference suspended the government. President Ali Saibou remained in office, but the conference elected a prime minister empowered to appoint an interim government to rule the country until January 1993, when an elected government is expected to take power.
In October the Conference announced an amnesty for all crimes connected with the October 1983 coup attempt (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990). As the last prisoners arrested in connection with this coup attempt were released in December 1989, the amnesty's main purpose was to allow the former security adviser to the head of state. Amadou Oumarou, known as "Bonkano", and three others to return to Niger to testify before the National Conference. Amadou Oumarou alone returned and was placed under house arrest, ostensibly for his own safety, after appearing before the National Conference. He apparently remained under house arrest at the end of the year.
The Conference set up a commission to investigate past political crimes and abuses. This began its inquiries during the Conference and was to continue during the transitional period. It was empowered to initiate its own inquiries, even into cases already judged by the courts. The Commission is to publish a summary of its conclusions and pass the details to the Haut Conseil de la République, High Council of the Republic, which may, if it considers it appropriate, pass them to the relevant procuracy for investigation and possible prosecution. The Conference also established a High Court of Justice to try former government or security officials, which, like the existing State Security Court, denies those convicted any right of appeal. It also abolished the time limit which had previously been set on initiating prosecutions.
The commission's first investigation was into the killings of three student demonstrators in February 1990 and the large scale arrest, torture and killing of Tuareg between March and May 1990 (see Amnesty /niernaijona/ Report 1991). The government had previously failed to initiate any inquiry into the killings of Tuareg. President Ali Sa'ibou appeared before the Conference and, while accepting responsibility for the student deaths in February 1990, denied ordering the security forces to
use live ammunition against the demonstrators. The President also denied ordering the killings of Tuareg in 1990; he expressed horror at the information presented by some of those who testified to the commission about extrajudicial executions of Tuareg. The commission presented a number of conclusions and recommendations before the end of the Conference. Delegates at the National Conference rejected some of the commission's proposals concerning the killings of Tuareg; the commission had recommended that President Ali Saibou resign because of his role and that leading members of the armed forces implicated in the repression of Tuareg be charged. The Conference dismissed the recommendation concerning the President, instead confirming that President Ali Saibou should remain in office during the transitional period. Only one army officer was arrested: Captain Maliki Boureima, who testified before the Conference that he had killed Tuareg detainees. Tuareg organized demonstrations against the Conference's decision. At the end of the year it was still unclear whether any action was to be taken against others implicated in the killings of Tuareg.
Over 70 Tuareg arrested both before and after attacks on government buildings in Tchin-Tabaraden in May 1990 were still held at the start of the year. Many appeared to be prisoners of conscience, detained because of their ethnic origin. However, about 36 of them, including prisoners of conscience, were released uncharged on 7 February. They had spent between nine and 11 months in detention before their cases were reviewed by a magistrate, despite a legal requirement that this should occur within two months of arrest, and some had reportedly been tortured while detained incommunicado.
More than 40 other Tuareg prisoners were tried in April during a three-day session of the State Security Court held in a sports stadium before thousands of people. The trial of seven Tuareg who were accused of involvement in an attack on Tchin-Tabaraden prison in May 1990 was attended by an Amnesty International observer. The defendants were acquitted and released, as were 26 others who had been arrested mostly in March 1990 in the If6rouane area, and who were accused of attacking uranium mining installations at Arlit. Thirteen people from Abalak were
NIGER/NIGERIA
acquitted on charges of planning an attack on government targets, and released.
Many of the defendants in the' three trials appeared to be prisoners of conscience, and had spent a year or more in custody. They told the court that they had been detained unlawfully for months and some said they had been tortured. However, no action was taken by the court to investigate these allegations. One defence lawyer initiated a civil case to try to establish who was responsible for the torture and a magistrate was appointed to investigate, but no progress had been reported by the end of the year, although the National Conference had endorsed the view that torture victims should receive compensation.
The composition of the State Security Court compromised its independence. The President of the Court and two judges were members of the Conseil supérieur d'orientation nationale. Higher Council for National Orientation, the country's supreme governing body. Trial procedures fell short of international standards. None of the defendants was allowed legal counsel during pre-trial legal proceedings and when defence lawyers were appointed they were allowed access to the lengthy trial dossier only three days before the trial and were not permitted to have their own copy.
New information was received during the year about some of the hundreds of extrajudicial executions of Tuareg carried out at In-Gall and around Tchin-Tabaraden in May 1990. For example, it was learned that Abdoulmoumine Ag Mohamed (see Amnesty International Report J99J) had been tortured and then shot dead by soldiers while in detention in Tahoua in May 1990. The authorities claimed he had been shot while trying to seize a guard's gun.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Niger in February and discussed the organization's concerns with the Ministers of the Interior and Foreign Affairs and other officials. While welcoming the releases of 36 Tuareg, Amnesty International called for the prompt, fair trial or release of other Tuareg prisoners and for a full investigation into the killings of and other violations against Tuareg in the Tchin-Tabaraden area in May 1990. Government ministers maintained that the security forces had not committed any human rights violations, and that all those arrested had been involved in endangering the security of the state. They refused to
investigate specific cases of torture and extrajudicial execution. Following new violence and killings of Tuareg by the security forces in December, representatives of a new independent human rights organization visited the affected area and investigated the circumstances in which the killings had occurred. They had not announced their conclusions by the end of the year.
In October Amnesty International published Niger: Summary of Amnesty International's Concerns during 1991. The report concluded that grave human rights violations had occurred in 1990 despite the steps taken in the previous four years to strengthen the rule of law and human rights protection, and called for additional measures to be introduced to safeguard human rights.
