MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
Over 60 long-term political prisoners were released, including more than 50 prisoners of conscience. However, hundreds of other political prisoners, including dozens of prisoners of conscience, continued serving prison sentences imposed after unfair trials, and around 1,000 of more than 1,400 people arrested in late 1990 and early 1991 were imprisoned after unfair trials during the first half of the year. Over 260 "disappeared" Sahrawis (Western Saha-rans) and 11 others, many of whom had been held in secret detention centres for up to 15 years, were released, but no steps were taken by the authorities to clarify hundreds of other "disappearances" of Moroccans and Sahrawis reported between 1963 and 1987. Over 20 former military men detained since 1973 in a secret detention centre in which 30 out of 61 of them had died, were released or moved to regular prisons. Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees held in pre-trial incommunicado {garde a vue) detention were fi^uently received, particularly following the mass arrests early in the year. At least five people died in custody, possibly as a result of torture. At least 152 people were believed to be under sentence of death but no executions were known to have been carried out.
A cease-fire in the Western Sahara came into effect on 6 September, supervised by United Nations (un) military observers. The cease-fire had been agreed in 1990 under un auspices by the Moroccan Government and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Seguia el-Hamra and Rio de Oro, known as the Polisario Front (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1991). A referendum on the territory's future was scheduled for January 1992.
The government took several steps to improve hmnan rights. Hundreds of long-
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
term political prisoners including Western Saharans and others who had "disappeared" in previous years were released. The Conseil consultatif des droits de I'homme (ccdh), Human Rights Advisory Council, appointed by King Hassan IT in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991), presented further memoranda to the King. In December 1990 it had recommended various reforms to the law on garde a vue detention, including a 48-hour limit to such detention. In early 1991 it proposed reforms to the prison system and improved safeguards for detainees. On the basis of these memoranda, Parliament approved a bill in April amending several laws relating to penal procedure, including a reduction in the permissible duration both of garde a vue detention and of remands in custody. The bill was promulgated on 30 December 1991.
Over 60 long-term political prisoners were released, including over 50 prisoners of conscience. In August, 40 political prisoners, including at least 24 prisoners of conscience, were released in a royal amnesty. They included Mohamed Srifi and several others who had been convicted following an unfair trial in 1977 on charges relating to membership of an illegal Marxist organization, Ila'l-Amam, Forward, and endangering state security (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Other prisoners of conscience released in the amnesty included Noureddine Jouhari and Hassan Aharrat, who had been force-fed while on hunger-strike for more than six years, and Ali Idrissi Kaitouni, a poet and painter sentenced in 1982 to 15 years' imprisonment (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In September Abraham Serfaty, one of the leaders of Ha'1-Amam, was released after 17 years' imprisonment. However, he was immediately expelled from Morocco and sent to France.
Between September and November over 20 former military men held at a secret detention centre at Tazmamert were released or removed to regular prisons. M'barek Touil was released in September and the others in October and November: two, Mohamed Raiss and Achour Ghani, were transferred to Kenitra Central Prison and were still held at the end of 1991. In all, 61 military officers had been transferred secretly to Tazmamert in 1973 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991): of these, 30 had reportedly died over the
years owing to the harsh conditions and lack of medical care, Other former military men from the same group remained unaccounted for; they included Lieutenant-Colonel Mohamed Ababou and Ahmed Mzireq, sentenced to 20 years' and 12 years' imprisonment respectively in 1972.
Despite these releases over 700 political prisoners, including dozens of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, continued to serve sentences imposed after unfair trials. The prisoners of conscience still held included members of a!-AdI wa'!-Ihsan, Justice and Charity, an Islamic group, who were sentenced in 1990, and the three remaining prisoners from the I!a'!-Amam group who were sentenced in 1977.
Suspected opponents of the government continued to be arrested and imprisoned in large numbers. Over 1,000 people were arrested following riots in mid-December 1990, in which about 50 people were killed and 200 injured (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In the following six weeks, more than 30 trials were held in towns throughout the country. Over 850 people were sentenced to up to 15 years' imprisonment in trials which were grossly unfair; of these, more than 500 remained in prison at the end of the year.
Between mid-January and the end of February over 400 people were arrested in 25 towns after protests against Morocco's involvement in the Gulf War. Many arrests took place after police dispersed peaceful demonstrations, sometimes with violence. Most of those arrested, the majority of whom were students and school children, were released after a few hours or days. Around 100, most of them prisoners of conscience, were sentenced after unfair trials to up to 15 months' imprisonment on charges which included unauthorized assembly on the public highway and disturbing public order.
Nearly all prisoners of conscience and political prisoners serving sentences were convicted in unfair trials. The minimum fair trial standards most often violated were the use of police statements extracted under torture or other coercion to obtain convictions, and the refusal by courts to investigate tortiue allegations or permit defendants to call witnesses in their defence. The failure of courts to address breaches of pre-trial procedures and to allow the defence similar rights to those
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
given to the prosecution also put their impartiality into question.
Many of the trials held in the first half of the year suffered from these shortcomings. Most of those arrested in connection with the riots were tried in collective trials of up to 85 defendants. They were rarely, if ever, accused of specific criminal acts. Many of the accused alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated in garde a vue detention and denied medical treatment for injuries sustained during police and army actions against the rioters. In many cases defence lawyers complained about irregularities in pre-trial procedures, but their complaints were almost always rejected by judges and some defence lawyers withdrew from trials in protest. In one trial in January, lawyers representing 81 defendants before the Criminal Court in Fes formally complained about the court's refusal to allow medical examination or treatment for some of the defendants, misuse of flagrant d^lit procedme (used when a suspect is arrested while committing the offence), and the prosecution's failure to produce evidence that any of the accused had committed any offence. Nevertheless, 48 of the accused were sentenced to between six months' and 10 years' imprisonment, and 30 others to 15 days' imprisonment. Three were acquitted.
In February eight members of the Oufkir family were released: they had been held virtually incommunicado and without charge for over 18 years apparently because of their family relationship to General Mohammed Oufkir who had died in unclarified circumstances following a failed coup attempt in 1972 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The three Bourequat brothers, of French nationality, who "disappeared" in 1973 and since 1981 were detained in Tazmamert, were released in December and allowed to go immediately to France.
Over 260 "disappeared" Sahrawis, who had been held in secret detention centres in Qal'at M'gouna and Laayoune for up to 15 years, were released in mid-June. However, the authorities refused to account for several hundred others who were said to have "disappeared" between 1975 and 1987.
The releases were connected with the un settlement for the Western Sahara, which provided for an amnesty for all Sahrawi political prisoners. Those freed
from Qal'at M'gouna described the conditions as extremely harsh during the first decade of their captivity. Many were suffering from severe physical or psychological illnesses: at least 43 inmates had died in the centre since 1976.
Among those freed were three elderly brothers of the Mayara family, among the first of the Sahrawis to "disappear" in 1975, and Magboula ment Bouchraya ould Mohamed Yahdih, who "disappeared" after arrest in 1981. Several people who had "disappeared" during the visit of a un technical mission in 1987 were also freed, including Embarca ment Taleb ould Husein. In every case, the authorities had flatly denied prior to their release that the individuals were being held.
Moulay Ahmed ould Mohamed el-Has-san el-Leili, the father of the first prime minister appointed by the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic set up by the Polis-ario Front in 1976, reportedly died the day after his release. Other released members of the Leili family were said to have been moved after 15 years of secret detention to Tan Tan in Morocco. All those released were apparently kept under sxuveillance and not allowed to travel or meet others as they chose.
Other Sahrawis remained "disappeared", including Baidari ould Sidi Mohamed ould Barbouchi, a student from Saguia who was arrested in February 1976, and Fatimatou ment Baad, who was 65 when she was arrested in April 1984.
About 100 "disappeared" Moroccans were still unaccounted for by the end of the year. Among them was Houcine El-Manouzi, a trade union activist, allegedly kidnapped by Moroccan agents in Tunis in 1972. He had escaped with the Bourequat brothers in 1975 before being recaptured two weeks later.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, notably detainees held incommunicado in garde a vue detention, remained common. Methods included beatings, especially on the soles of the feet ifalaqa), often while being suspended in contorted positions; partial suffocation, frequently with rags soaked in chemicals; and electric shocks.
Hundreds of people arrested following the riots and Gulf War demonstrations alleged that they had been tortured. For example, eight people tried in Fes in late January for involvement in Gulf War demonstrations said they were tortured
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
while held in garde a vue detention. All of them were transferred to hospital three days after their arrest on the orders of the public prosecutor. One was kept in hospital, apparently suffering from broken bones in his hand and foot. During the trial the court reportedly refused to allow defendants to be examined by medical experts, although marks of tortiue were visible on their bodies. Six of them were sentenced to one month's imprisonment and two were acquitted.
At least five people died in custody in circumstances suggesting that torture or ill-treatment had caused their deaths. Driss Touati, a cobbler, died in Rachidiya Police Station on 18 April a few hours after he was arrested. The authorities said that he had committed suicide, but refiised to respond to repeated requests by the family and their lawyer for an independent autopsy and for an inquiry to be held.
Five people were sentenced to death but no executions were recorded, At least 152 prisoners under sentence of death reportedly remained in Kenitra Central Prison. Fifteen of them were political prisoners, including five possible prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience, including the Oufkir family, of those who had "disappeared", and of those detained at Tazmamert. However, it continued to press the government to release the remaining prisoners of conscience and to clarify the hundreds of "disappearances" that remain unresolved. In February Amnesty International representatives met members of the ccdh in Geneva; later it wrote several times to the Moroccan Government and the ccdh seeking further meetings to discuss Amnesty International's concerns but did not receive a response.
In March Amnesty International published a major report, Morocco: A Pattern of Political Imprisonment. "Disappearances" and Torture, and launched an international campaign to highlight its concerns. The report was supplemented later in the year by two further reports updating the organization's concerns. No official response was received from the government to any of the reports or commxmica-tions sent to it during the year, and the organization's requests for access to the country for research continued to be denied.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Morocco for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about hiunan rights violations.
