SPAIN
At least six conscripts were imprisoned as deserters after declaring their conscientious objection to further military service. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by members of the security forces. Inquiries into such allegations were often slow and inconclusive. Inquiries were under way into the killings in disputed circumstances of members of an armed Basque group by security forces.
The armed Basque group, Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (eta), Basque Homeland and Liberty, carried out attacks on members of the security forces and civilians throughout the year. The press estimated that by the end of the year 45 people had been killed by eta, of whom 19 were civilians.
Special legal procedures applicable to detainees suspected of belonging to armed groups remained in force. These allow
extended incommunicado detention of up to five days by judicial order. They also allow the detainee's lawyer to be appointed by the court. In April the Ombudsman informed parliament that he was concerned about the continued use of torture and ill-treatment by members of the security forces. He also drew attention to the denial of procedural rights to detainees.
In April Spain deposited its instnunent of ratification for the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
In December parliament approved a bill which reduced the length of military service from 12 to nine months. It also stipulated that a Royal Decree would fix the length of the alternative civilian service available to recognized conscientious objectors. The bill made no provision for conscripts to apply for conscientious objector status after they had been incorporated into the armed forces.
Manuel Blazquez Solis and José Manuel Escalada were among six conscripts imprisoned after declaring their conscientious objection to further military service. They had carried out approximately four months' service in the navy, but left their posts in January, after learning that their ships had been ordered to the Gulf zone. They stated that participation in the Gulf conflict was incompatible with their conscientiously held beliefs and applied for conscientious objector status on moral and philosophical grounds. In April, after presenting themselves voluntarily to the military authorities, they were detained for desertion. In July they were released into provisional liberty pending trial. Hours before their release, they confirmed to the military authorities that they refused all further military service. Within a week new arrest warrants were issued against them on charges of refusing to perform military service. They had not been rearrested by the end of the year and were awaiting the outcome of appeals to the Constitutional Tribunal.
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment were made by detainees held imder anti-terrorist legislation and by criminal suspects in police custody.
On 16 February seven people were arrested by the Civil Guard in Eibar, in the Basque coimtry. The seven were held in extended incommunicado detention for
SPAIN
periods of up to five days under anti-terrorist legislation. They subsequently alleged that they had been physically and psychologically tortured. Three made formal complaints, supported by medical certificates recording injuries consistent with their allegations. Maria Victoria Aierbe and Iñigo Akaiturri were arrested in a bar by Civil Guards. They alleged that they were thrown to the floor, beaten, kicked and punched. They were interrogated in police stations in the Basque country before being taken to Madrid. They claimed that, during initial interrogations, they were systematically beaten and repeatedly hooded so that they could not breathe. They said their treatment improved in Madrid. They both had visible injuries on their faces when they appeared in the Audiencia Nacional (National Court) on 20 and 21 February. Maria Eugenia Gracia, who was arrested outside the bar, alleged that she was beaten, given electric shocks and repeatedly hooded. A medical examination in prison found bruising to her feet and burned areas of skin on her stomach which could have been caused by electric shocks. The court opened an investigation into their allegations.
In September Mohamed Mahmoud Amer Hegazy and Emad Raed Shibli, both resident in Denmark, alleged that a Civil Guard officer assaulted them in Ibiza where they were on holiday after they spoke to him in the street. They claimed that they were taken in handcuffs to a Civil Guard station, severely beaten with rubber truncheons, and punched and kicked all over their bodies. They alleged that they were threatened with a knife held to their throats and that their personal possessions were destroyed. They were then strip-searched and held in a cell until they appeared in court three days later. They were charged with resisting and disobeying public officials and released into provisional liberty. A forensic surgeon examined them in custody and recorded multiple bruising to all parts of their bodies; photographs of Mohamed Hegazy taken after his release showed severe injuries to his buttocks, back, arms and legs. They made formal complaints about their treatment to the court in Ibiza before returning to Denmark. There was no news of the progress of the investigation by the end of the year.
Numerous inquiries into allegations of torture and ill-treatment had still not con-
cluded after many years. Eight youths had made a detailed judicial complaint of torture and ill-treatment by the Civil Guard following their arrest in Zomotza in the Basque country in December 1980. Their statements were supported by medical evidence and they were able to identify some of the officers they claimed had ill-treated them. Since 1980 one of the officers had twice been convicted of torturing detainees, including Tomás Linaza (see Amnesty International Report 1991). However, in April the judge in charge of the inquiry attempted to close the case on grounds of lack of evidence. The outcome of an appeal against this decision was still pending at the end of the year.
Inquiries were opened into the shooting of alleged eta members by security forces in Lliga d'Amunt, Catalonia, in May and in Bilbao in August. Lawyers acting for their families claimed that the security forces had killed them illegally.
In September a police officer was charged with the homicide of an eta member, Mikel Castillo, in September 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In November the National Court in Madrid concluded its inquiry into the deaths of one Civil Guard and two eta members in the Foz de Lumbier in June 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The court charged Germán Rube-nach with killing a Civil Guard and assisting a fellow member of eta to commit suicide. The court decided that Germán Rubenach was then wounded in a suicide attempt with another member of the group. Lawyers acting for the families of the dead eta members appealed against the conclusions of the investigating judge.
Amnesty International, emphasizing that conscripts should be able to claim conscientious objector status at any time, appealed for the release of conscientious objectors it considered to be prisoners of conscience, including Manuel Blázquez Soil's and José Antonio Escalada.
Amnesty International urged prompt and impartial investigations into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment and into the disputed killings. It requested information about the progress of relevant judicial inquiries.
