PARAGUAY
Scores of members of peasant communities involved in land disputes were detained and some were ill-treated. The torture by police of criminal suspects, including minors, continued and official inquiries into allegations of ill-treatment made little or no progress. Judicial investigations into past human rights violations continued, although no sentences were
PARAGUAY
handed down. Two lawyers representing victims of past human rights violations received death threats.
Landless peasant families continued to invade and occupy large Iandholdings, often the property of absentee landlords, throughout the country. Many such occupations ended in the violent expulsion of the peasants by the PoUci'a de Operaciones Especializadas (poe). Special Operations Police, at times acting without a court order. In addition to evicting the squatter families, the police frequently burned houses and crops, destroyed property and carried out mass arrests. The majority of peasants were released by court order after several weeks in detention. Some, particularly community or peasant organization leaders, were charged with criminal offences and faced prolonged trials. Several were ill-treated when they were arrested.
Peasant leader Marcelino Corazón Medina was arrested on a march to commemorate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on 10 December in the capital, Asunción. An arrest warrant had reportedly been issued by a criminal court judge in November on charges of "instigating land invasion", in connection with an occupation by peasant families in General Resquin, San Pedro department. Marcelino Corazón Medina was reportedly beaten severely when he was arrested, before being taken to Tacumbu prison. According to doctors, he suffered fractured ribs and severe bruising. The peasant squatters were expelled from the property in General Resquin and 45 were arrested and taken to Tacumbu prison.
Torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police custody, including minors, continued to be reported. In
October Prisciliano Cabral Gutiérrez told the Chamber of Deputies Human Rights Commission that he had been beaten and kicked for hours by policemen in San Lorenzo police station, on the outskirts of Asunción. He said he had been arrested at the beginning of October when he went to the police station to ask about his nephew who was detained there, and who had also allegedly been beaten in custody. Prisciliano Cabral, who was released without charge after several days, said he also witnessed the torture during interrogation of several 13- and 14-year-old youths detained in San Lorenzo police station. An investigation into the allegations was opened by a criminal court judge.
The courts failed to pursue allegations of torture by police made by several youths before a criminal court judge at the end of
1990	(see Amnesty International Report 1991). Although several police officers allegedly responsible were identified during the course of the investigation, no charges had been brought by the end of
1991	and no steps were taken to suspend from duty those implicated.
Investigations into human rights violations committed during the former government of General Alfredo Stroessner continued to be delayed. In several cases defence lawyers argued that charges of human rights violations against former senior police and government officials should be dropped because the maximum period for prosecution under the statute of limitations on the alleged crimes, many of which took place in the 1960s and 1970s, had expired. In January the Attorney General recommended that the Supreme Court should reject a petition presented on behalf of several former members of the Departamento de Investigaciones de ¡a Policía (d!P-c), Police Investigations Department, on trial for the illegal detention and torture of political prisoners. The Attorney General ruled that the statute of limitations was not applicable in cases of human rights violations committed by members of the former government, because they enjoyed special privileges until the government of General Stroessner was overthrown in February 1989.
In April a criminal court judge ordered that former President Stroessner - in exile in Brazil - should be detained on charges of moral responsibility for the death of Celestina Pérez de Almada. According to a
PARAGUAY/PERU
criminal complaint presented in 1989 by her husband, Martin Almada, Celestina Pérez died of cardiac arrest as a result of being forced to listen repeatedly to a tape recording of her husband's screams under torture in the dip-c. During her husband's detention in 1974, Celestina Pérez also received his blood-stained clothes and was repeatedly told by telephone that her husband was about to be executed. Arrest warrants were also issued against several senior police officials, including the former head of dip-c, Pastor Coronel, and the former chief of police, Francisco Britez Borges, who were already detained on other charges relating to human rights violations. In August the judge declared that Alfredo Stroessner was in contempt of court for deliberately failing to appear before the court to answer charges relating to the death of Celestina Pérez.
In October the Supreme Court informed Congress that 26 trials of senior members of the former government accused of serious human rights violations were under way. With few exceptions, the trials, the majority of which opened in 1989. were still in the investigative stage of the proceedings.
Two lawyers representing victims or relatives of victims of human rights violations under the previous government received repeated death threats. In March Pedro Dario Portillo and Rodolfo Manuel Aseretto, lawyers with the human rights organization Comité de Iglesias, Inter-Church Committee, formally complained to the Attorney General that they had received death threats through anonymous telephone calls and written messages. In their written complaints, the lawyers said they believed the threats were related to their legal activities in judicial investigations of past human rights violations.
Amnesty International appealed to the government of President Andrés Rodriguez to ensure that all past human rights violations were thoroughly and impartially investigated and to guarantee the safely of all those working in defence of human rights in Paraguay. The organization continued to investigate allegations of ill-treatment of detainees in police custody.
