TANZANIA
Twenty-seven peaceful protesters who were briefly detained were prisoners of conscience. A prominent government opponent held on Zanzibar since 1989 was released on bail in December. South African nationals were held prisoner in camps controlled by the African National Congress (anc) of South Africa: the Tan-zanian authorities cooperated with the anc to permit these apparently unlawful detentions. Fourteen Burundi nationals detained for political reasons in 1989 were released. At least four people were sentenced to death and there were believed to have been at least three executions.
The Union Government faced intensified demands for the reintroduction of a multi-party political system to replace the one-party state in place since 1977. In March a presidential commission was set up to collect views on political pluralism, but the government warned independent groups advocating multi-party democracy that the ruling Chama cha Mapinduzi (ccm). Party of the Revolution, remained the only legal arena for political activity.
Union Government powers of internal banishment without trial were extended to Zanzibar in March, allowing the authorities to restrict anyone deemed a threat to public order to any district of the country. The banishment powers were not known to have been used by the end of the year.
Twenty-seven supporters of the Civil
and Legal Rights Movement, founded by former prisoner of conscience James Map-alala to advocate multi-party democracy, were arrested in September. They were charged with imlawful assembly after a peaceful demonstration in Dar es Salaam against the authorities' refusal to grant their orgeinization legal status. The 27. all prisoners of conscience, were released on bail after 11 days and the charges were dropped shortly afterwards. James Mapalala and Rajab Usaseme were briefly detained by police in November on suspicion of forming an \mlawful society.
Seif Shariff Hamad, a former chief minister of Zanzibar and leading advocate of secession for the island (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991), was released on bail in December. He had been held since 1989 on charges of illegal possession of government documents. His trial was delayed by legal arguments over whether it should be heard in the High Coiul or the Regional Magistrate's Court.
Musa Membar, leader of the opposition Tanzania Youth Democratic Movement, who had been detained without charge or trial since September 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991), was released in May but served with a deportation order. He died two days later. The government attributed his death to natural causes but failed to carry out an autopsy or order an inquest.
At least 11 South African nationals were held prisoner, apparently illegally, by members of the anc with the complicity of the Tanzanian authorities. Samuel Mngqabisa, an anc member who had sought protection from the Tanzanian authorities following an internal dispute, was reportedly handed over to anc security officials who kept him prisoner imtil he escaped one month later. Ten other South African men were handed over to the anc in June after being arrested by Tanzanian security officials, who reportedly assisted the anc to tortiue at least one of the 10. Five of them were released at the Prime Minister's office in August, but the other five were believed to be still unlawfully detained by the anc at the end of the year.
Fourteen members of a Burundi opposition group, the Parti pour la libération du peuple butu (palipehutu). Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People, were released from detention in July. They had been held pending deportation since 1989 for
TANZANIA/THAILAND
allegedly engaging in political activities detrimental to Tanzania's relations with Bxmmdi (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991).
Four people were sentenced to death for murder and at least four other death sentences were confirmed by the Court of Appeal. At least three people were executed although the executions were not officially announced.
Amnesty Intemational representatives visited Tanzania in March and met government officials in both Dar es Salaam and Zanzibar. The representatives expressed concem about the continued detention for political reasons of the 14 refugees from Burundi. Subsequently, Amnesty International expressed concem to the govem-ment about apparently imlawful detentions by the anc and the reported tortiue of one detainee by the anc and Tanzanian officials, and sought clarification of the whereabouts of those not released. No response was received.
Amnesty Intemational also appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
