MALDIVES
One prisoner of conscience, a member of parliament, was banished to a remote island for six months. At least 29 other people arrested on political grounds in 1990 were still held at the end of 1991, including several possible prisoners of conscience.
Mohammad Latheef, a member of parliament arrested in September 1990, was brought to trial in January. He was charged with planning a vote of no confidence in President Maiunoon Abdul Gayoom, and with other activities deemed critical of the government. In April he was convicted and banished to Muladhoo Atoll, a small island 120 miles from Male, the capital, for six months. Three weeks before the end of his sentence, he was pardoned by President Gayoom and released.
The government announced in May that 54 people, including a number of journalists, editors and cartoonists, had been arrested in 1990 on suspicion of violent political crimes (see Amnesty International Report 199J). In October it said that eight
MALDIVES/MALI
of the 54 had been tried, 23 had been released and another 23 were awaiting triah Mohammad Shafeeq, editor of the banned news magazine Sangu, was brought to trial in August and charged with causing an explosion in a Male park and planning to explode a home-made bomb during the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (saarc) meeting in November 1990. It was xmclear whether he received a fair trial: an Amnesty International observer was prevented from entering the coiut. Some of the charges were brought under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (No. 10/90) introduced in December 1990, which may be applied retroactively. Mohammad Shafeeq reportedly said that he had been forced to confess under duress. He was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in December.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the detention and banishment of Mohammad Latheef and pressed for his unconditional release. The government said in July that he had been arrested "not for voicing his opinions or criticizing the government, but for having committed certain offences that are not covered by his parliamentary immunity". In November an Amnesty International representative visited the country to attend the trials of Mohammad Shafeeq and other political prisoners accused of arson and to discuss with goverrunent officials and others matters relating to the protection of human rights. The observer met several government officials but was not permitted to enter the court.
In May Amnesty International published a report, RepubUc of Maldives: Arrests of possible prisoners of conscience, detailing arrests made during 1990. A copy was sent to the government for comment. The government replied in October reiterating that "it has not detained any individual who can even marginally be termed as a prisoner of conscience". It also informed Amnesty International that eight of the 29 political prisoners arrested in 1990 had been sentenced but failed to provide further details.
