ECUADOR
An official conunission of inquiry found a branch of the National Police responsible for the "disappearance" of two brothers in 1988 and for other human rights abuses. Detainees were tortured and ill-treated by members of the security forces; one detainee allegedly died under torture. The government failed to clarify numerous cases of "disappearance" and torture documented in previous years.
In February the armed opposition group Alfaro Vive, Carajo, Alfaro Lives, Dammit, handed over its weapons as part of a peace agreement with the government.
There were repeated violent clashes over land rights between Indian communities and paramilitary groups hired by local landowners. Some paramilitary groups were reported to be operating with the acquiescence of the official security forces. In April the Minister of Government and Police stated that the government would investigate the activities of paramilitary groups said to be operating illegally, but no investigation was known to have been undertaken.
In September the Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into the "disappearance" of Santiago and Pedro Andrés Restrepo Arismendi was published. The
ECUADOR
Commission concluded that members of the Servicio de Investigación Criminal (sic), Criminal Investigation Service, a branch of the National Police, were responsible for the "disappearance" in January 1988 of the two brothers, aged 17 and 14 respectively. Although their bodies had not been traced, the Commission also concluded that the brothers were dead. The Report stated that the Sic's investigative methods included "systematic torture, arbitrary detention and the use of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment". Following publication of the Report, a former Commander General of the National Police and about 30 police and other officials were arrested for their alleged involvement in the Restrepo case. By the end of 1991, siunmary proceedings in the Supreme Court against those accused had not concluded.
In the wake of the Report's publication, President Rodrigo Borja decreed the immediate dissolution of the sic and announced measures to form a new Judicial Police force. At the same time the President extended the mandate of the Special Commission to include the investigation of other past human rights violations by the security forces.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by members of the sic continued until shortly before the dissolution of this force in September. In January official forensic certificates reported that Edison Roberto Sarasti and Eddy Pablo Rivadaneira Muñoz had wounds consistent with blows from a blunt instrument. The two men had been arrested by the police in December 1990 and taken to the sic headquarters in Ambato, Tungurahua province. Both men claimed they were hung by their thumbs and repeatedly beaten with a stick before being submerged in water until they nearly drowned, In March Isaac Rómulo Bustos Bermúdez was held incommimi-cado for four days at the Sic headquarters in Babahoyo, Los Ríos province. He was reportedly kicked and beaten with clubs while hung from the wrists. Two independent forensic certificates, including one issued by the Office of the State Attorney General, docmnented injuries to Isaac Bustos which were consistent with his having been tortured. In June José Maria Cabascango, the secretary for hiunan rights of the Confederación de Nacionalidades Indígenas del Ecuador (conaie). Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador,
was detained by soldiers during a protest over land rights. He was subsequently transferred to the sic in Ibarra, Imbabura province, where he was allegedly hit on the ears, hung by his thumbs and subjected to mock executions and death threats.
In April and September complaints were submitted to the authorities concerning at least eight men who were said to have been nearly drowned by police officers attached to the sic in Guayas province. In one such case, Milton Iván Crespo Dalgo, a university worker, claimed to have been taken off a bus on 8 August in Guayaquil by armed sic police and accused of theft. He was reportedly blindfolded, handcuffed and had his legs tied before being thrown into a river estuary. The police also allegedly kicked him and jumped on him. A lawyer reportedly submitted a complaint about his case to a prosecutor, but no judicial inquiry was known to have been opened.
Torture by members of the armed forces also continued to be reported. On 7 July Mayer Yoncer Mina Montaño, who had been detained by marines and accused of theft, allegedly died under torture at the navy base in San Lorenzo, Esmeraldas province. According to relatives, two days after being detained he was taken to his home by marines and beaten, then returned to the naval base. Hours later, he was transferred to a local hospital where he was found to be dead. The navy claimed that he drowned after throwing himself off a quay in an attempt to escape. However, an official autopsy documented extensive bruising and abrasions consistent with torture. His relatives reportedly filed a complaint before a judge in San Lorenzo, but no judicial investigation into the case was known to have been initiated.
The government failed to clarify numerous human rights cases from previous years. An investigation was said to have been ordered in June 1990 into the alleged torture of René Sangolqui, but no findings were published (see Amnesty International Report 1991). A judicial inquiry into the reported ill-treatment and subsequent death of Cayetana Farinango in November 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) was closed after her relatives withdrew from the case. The fate of numerous people who had "disappeared" since 1984 remained unknown. They included Gustavo Garzón Guzmán who reportedly
ECUADOR/EGYPT
"disappeared" in Quito in November 1990.
In April and May Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to conduct thorough and impartial investigations into reports of tortiu-e. In July the organization called for a full and independent investigation into the alleged torture of José María Cabascango. The government responded by submitting a police report issued in September which concluded that José María Cabascango had not been tortured. However, no independent investigation into the case had been initiated by the end of the year,
