MEXICO
The widespread use of torture and ill-treatment by law-enforcement agents continued to be reported. At least one prisoner of conscience was held for several weeks. Hundreds of people were arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by the security forces during forced evictions of peasants. At least one person "disappeared" and little progress was reported in clarifying hundreds of "disappearances" from previous years. A journalist was believed to have been killed because of his articles accusing the police of human rights abuses. Most of those responsible for human rights violations were not brought to justice. Prison conditions continued to be harsh.
The government adopted further measures intended to protect human rights and
to ensure that human rights violations did not go unpunished. Legislative reforms prepared by the governmental National Human Rights Commission and endorsed by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari were approved by Congress and enacted in December. They included a new law against torture, replacing the 1986 Federal Law to Prevent and Punish Torture (see Amnesty International Report 1987), under which no official had ever been convicted. The National Hiunan Rights Commission received thousands of complaints of human rights abuses and issued dozens of recommendations to the relevant authorities. Few of the recommendations were fully implemented.
Mid-term elections held in August resulted in a landslide victory for the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional (pRi), Institutional Revolutionary Party. Allegations of electoral fi'aud triggered widespread but mostly peaceful protests. As a result of these, two elected pri governors resigned. Following complaints presented in previous years by the right-of-centre Partido de Acción Nacional (pan), National Action Party, the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights issued new recommendations in February calling on the government to "effectively guarantee the exercise of political rights" to those participating in elections (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Torture was frequently used throughout the country by law-enforcement agents, principally the state and federal judicial police. Most cases were reported in the context of criminal investigations, including police operations against drugs. Confessions extracted under duress continued to be admitted as evidence in courts. Torture methods reported included beatings, electric shocks, near-asphyxiation in foul water or by covering the head of the victim with a plastic bag containing ammonia or other irritants, forcing carbonated water with chilli pepper into the nose, and psychological torture. Official forensic doctors frequently failed to document cases of torture adequately, in some cases allegedly because of threats from those in charge of the investigations. Medical treatment for detainees who suffered torture was frequently unavailable or inadequate.
Among the scores of cases of torture reported was that of Amir Aboud Sattar, who was arrested without warrant on 14
MEXICO
June at his home in San Luis Potosí by federal judicial police officers and a delegate of the Republic Attorney General's Office. During his transfer to prison he was reportedly tortiued by being beaten, kicked and raped. Amir Aboud was released later that month, but those responsible for his tortiure were not brought to justice. In another case, José Adrián Rosales Ochoa was arrested without warrant on 19 June by the judicial police in Mexico City. He was transferred to a local police station, where he was reportedly tortured by beating and by being nearly suffocated with a plastic bag. He died later that day. Five police agents were charged with murder, but several others allegedly responsible, including a police commander, faced only minor charges and were released on bail.
Five people detained for 18 months on charges based on confessions extracted under torture were released without charge in June. Francisco Antonio Valencia Fontes, Enrique Machi Ramírez and three others arrested in connection with the same case had reportedly been beaten and nearly suffocated. They received no compensation and those responsible for their torture had not been brought to justice.
Also in June, Magdaleno Vera and Carlos Valencia Morfin, the last of those allegedly tortured in Aguililla in May 1990 who remained in detention, were released without charge (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Very few of those responsible for tortm-e and other human rights violations were brought to justice, despite hundreds of complaints filed with the relevant authorities. For example, those responsible for the killing of Rubén Oropeza Hurtado, who died in October 1990 in Tijuana as a result of torture, remained at large (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In one of the few cases where official action was taken against state agents responsible for torture, eight police officers were convicted in June of the murder of Emiliano Olivas Madrigal, who died under torture in the town of San Francisco de la Joya in October 1989.
At least one prisoner of conscience was held. In September Joel Padrón, a Catholic priest from the community of Simojovel, was arrested without warrant. He was held on several charges, including theft and "advocacy of the offence". His claims that he was not present when the incident took
place were confirmed by several witnesses. It is believed he was imprisoned solely for his peaceful support of local peasants' demands for land. The authorities offered to release him if he agreed to leave the state and to certain other conditions, but he refused. He was unconditionally released in November, following a national and international campaign for his freedom.
Hundreds of people, including members of indigenous communities, were arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by security forces, usually aided by local landowners and pistoleros (gunmen), in the context of land disputes. In April police using helicopters, together with pistoleros, forcibly evicted hundreds of peasants from the communities of Paso Achiote and Emiliano Zapata II in the state of Chiapas. Men. women and children were ill-treated during the evictions and many were injured. Many were arrested for a short period and seven community leaders were held for over four months. Members of both communities had suffered similar abuses the previous year (see Amnesty International Report 1991). They had resettled on communal land after the local authorities had awarded land titles to the Paso Achiote community in May 1990 and had promised to award them to the Emiliano Zapata II community.
At least one person "disappeared" in 1991, this time at the hands of the Guatemalan army. On 3 June Joaquin López López, a Mexican peasant, was abducted by Guatemalan soldiers, before witnesses, from the southern border community of Nuevo Progreso in Mexico. Despite complaints to the Mexican and Guatemalan authorities, the whereabouts of Joaquin López López remained unknown, and those responsible for his "disappearance" were not brought to justice either in Mexico or in Guatemala (see Guatemala entry).
Little progress was reported in investigations into past "disappearances", most of which occiured during the 1970s and early 1980s, and no officials have been held accountable.
The whereabouts of José Ramón García (see Amnesty International Report 1990) remained unknown. In January the National Human Rights Commission published a report revealing serious irregularities in the investigation into José Ramón García's 1988 "disappearance". Despite reports that
MEXICO/MONGOLIA
members of the security forces were responsible for his "disappearance", none was brought to justice.
In March the body of Francisco Quijano Garcia, who "disappeared" in June 1990, was discovered in Mexico City (see Amnesty International Report 199Í). The Federal District Attorney General's Office announced that a former business partner of the victim had confessed to his abduction and murder. However, days later, this individual complained to a judge that he had been forced to confess to the crime. No investigations were reported into witnesses' accounts that Francisco Quijano Garcia had been seen in police detention after his "disappearance".
A renowned journalist and human rights activist, Dr Victor Manuel Oropeza, was stabbed to death on 3 July in Ciudad Juárez. He had received several death threats after he published articles accusing the police of abuses. The investigations into his killing were marred by irregularities, including the arrest and torture of several suspects, some of whom were released without charge after widespread complaints, Those responsible for Dr Oropeza's murder had not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
Despite recommendations by the National Human Rights Commission that police officers allegedly responsible for the killings of Hector, Jaime and Erik Quijano Santoyo in January 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991] should be suspended pending trial, the officers remained at large, and at least one was promoted. In November the Republic Attorney General's Office claimed that the brothers had died in an armed confrontation, despite eyewitness and forensic evidence to the contrary. There were serious irregularities in the investigation into the killings.
In September a federal judicial police commander was arrested and charged with the May 1990 murder of Norma Corona Sapién (see Amnesty International Report 1991] and the killing of at least one other person. Amnesty International remained concerned that several others allegedly involved in her killing remained at large.
Prison conditions continued to be harsh, in some cases constituting cruel, inhxunan or degrading treatment. Most prisons were severely overcrowded, with inadequate sanitary facilities. A large number of prisoners awaiting sentence had
been held far beyond the constitutional limits for their detention. In May, 18 people were killed and several wounded during an armed confrontation between rival gangs in the prison of Matamoros. Several officials, including the prison director, were subsequently dismissed on charges of corruption, having allowed arms to be smuggled into the prison. In an effort to reduce prison overcrowding, a number of prisoners were granted pardons, were paroled or benefited from early release programs.
Amnesty International repeatedly called for full and impartial investigations into human rights violations in Mexico and urged the authorities to bring all those responsible to justice. In June the President of the National Human Rights Commission met Amnesty International representatives to discuss the Commission's work. Amnesty International welcomed the Commission's activities but expressed concern about its limited independence, its lack of effective legal powers, and the fact that many of its recommendations were not fully implemented.
In September Amnesty International published Mexico: Torture with impunity. The report, which examines the use of torture by law-enforcement agents and the lack of accountability for such abuses, was sent to President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, along with a series of recommendations for the prevention of torture and other himian rights abuses. Although Amnesty International did not receive an official response to the report, several officials referred to it. The Attorney General welcomed the report and stated that abuses would not be tolerated. The National Human Rights Commission acknowledged in September that torture existed in Mexico, but said that its frequency was diminishing. Amnesty International welcomed these statements, but continued to call for an end to torture and other human rights abuses, and for those responsible to be brought to justice.
