YEMEN
Over 130 people were arrested following violent anti-govemment protests. At least 36 suspected opponents of the government arrested in previous years in the former Yemen Arab Republic (yar) continued to be held. It was not possible to confirm the release or continued detention of one prisoner of conscience and 15 political detainees also arrested in the former yar in previous years. Five amputations were carried out and the use of shackles to restrain or punish prisoners continued to be reported. The cases of 11 people who "disappeared" in the former yar remained unresolved. Five judicial executions were carried out and 34 death sentences were pending ratification by the Presidential Council.
In January the Presidential Council ratified the Judicial Authority Law which defined the role of judges and outlined the court system, In May the Constitution of unified Yemen was approved in a referendum which was boycotted by the principal Islamic political parties. In November Yemen became a State Party to the United Nations Convention against Tortme and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
At least 135 people were arrested in October after violent anti-govemment protests in Sana'a, in which at least two demonstrators were killed. The protests followed the killing of a traffic officer in which an army officer who is a member of the President's tribe was implicated. The demonstrators shouted anti-government slogans and called for the trial of the army officer. Most of the detainees were released
uncharged within a month, but at least 17 were still detained without trial at the end of the year.
At least 36 political opponents of the government who had been arrested in the former yar between 1981 and 1989 continued to be held. All were suspected members of the National Democratic Front (ndf). Four had been detained without trial since their arrest in 1989. Sixteen were serving prison terms or had been sentenced to pay Diyya (a fine imposed in accordance with tribal tradition in Yemen). Sixteen others were under sentence of death following trials which may have been unfair. They had reportedly been denied access to lawyers, not given adequate time to prepare their defence and had been convicted of murder, kidnapping and other charges on the basis of contested "confessions" and witness testimony. All the sentences were pending appeal before the Dhamar Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Cassation in Sana'a.
The situation of 'Ayesh 'Ali 'Ubad, a prisoner of conscience who was only 12 years old when he was arrested in 1987, and of 15 other suspected ndf members (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991), remained unclear. It was learned that six other members of this group were in prison after being convicted of murder and that four had been released.
In August, five people convicted of repeated theft had their right hands amputated in Sana'a, The amputated hands were publicly displayed in the city centre. These were the first judicial amputations known to have been carried out since the unification of Yemen in May 1990.
Despite a decision by the government in November 1990 to abolish the use of shackles in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1991), these continued to be in use in the northern provinces which formerly comprised the yar, and were particularly used on women prisoners. In al-Hudaida Province, for example, women prisoners were kept shackled for long periods in prisons in al-Zubaid, Bajil, al-Marawi'a, Bayt al-Faqeeh and al-Hays.
Information was received about 39 detainees who had "disappeared" in previous years in the former yar and People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (pdry) (see below). However, the fate of 11 suspected members of the ndf, who "disappeared" between 1978 and 1985 while in detention
YEMENAUGOSLAVIA
in the former yar, remained unclear. The 11 included 'Abdul-Majid 'Abdul-Qadir, a restaurant-owner from Ta'iz Province. He was arrested by cigents of al-'Amn al-Watani, National Security, at his restaurant in Sana'a in February 1983 and held at an al-'Amn al-Watani detention centre in Hadda in the suburbs of Sana'a, where he subsequently "disappeared".
In September Hassan al-Huraibi was killed in Sana'a, apparently for political reasons. At the time of his murder. Hassan al-Huraibi was with 'Omar al-Jawi, former head of the Union of Yemeni Writers, who many believed had been the real target of the killers. 'Omar al-Jawi had been an outspoken critic of conservative forces and had voiced strong criticism of the Iraqi Government during the Gulf crisis. There were allegations that factions within the military and security authorities were responsible for the attack which resulted in Hassan al-Huraibi's death. The government announced an investigation, but its findings had not been made public by the end of the year.
In August, five people convicted of premeditated murder were executed in Sana'a, Ibb and other cities after their sentences had been ratified by the Presidential Council. These were the first executions known to have been carried out in unified Yemen. At the end of the year, 34 death sentences which had been upheld by the Supreme Court of Cassation were awaiting ratification by the Presidential Council. All had been imposed for criminal offences committed before the unification of Yemen, 25 of them in the yar and nine in the pdry. The scheduled execution of Hassan Yussif al-Bishri, postponed in November 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) had not been carried out by the end of 1991. Hamza Abu Zaid, a Palestinian found guilty by a tribunal of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo) of killing three plo officials in Timis in January, was taken to Yemen and executed by plo forces.
Amnesty International expressed its dismay to the government about the continued imposition of the death penalty and the judicial punishment of amputation. It appealed to the government to prevent the execution of Hamza Abu Zaid by the plo. It called for a judicial review of all pending death sentences and urged their commutation. The organization also requested information about the arrests of demonstra-
tors in October and the legal basis for the continued detention of 17 of them. It reiterated its request for information about political detainees arrested in previous years and about people who had "disappeared". Amnesty International urged the government to implement its decision to end the use of shackles in prisons, and called for an independent investigation into the killing of at least two demonstrators and the assassination of Hassan al-Huraibi.
Amnesty International received no response to its appeals regarding the death penalty and amputations. However, in October the government informed the organization that 35 detainees who had "disappeared" in previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1991) had "died in prison after exceptional trials in circumstances related to the security and political situation [prevailing] between the two parts of Yemen at the time". Information received from the government in December 1990 that four others from this group had been released was confirmed during the year.
