AUSTRIA
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody continued. At least one conscientious objector to military service served a prison sentence; he was considered a prisoner of conscience.
Austria signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty in April, It had not yet ratified this instrument at the end of the year.
From 1 January complaints about tor-tiue or ill-treatment could no longer be made directly to the Constitutional Court. Initial responsibility for hearing such complaints was transferred to "independent Administrative Tribunals". Doubts were expressed about the independence of the Tribunals because of the requirement that at least one quarter of their members must be public employees, some of whom could be police employees. There was insufficient information to assess the Tribunals' handling of complaints about police ill-treatment.
In May the Ministry of Justice issued a decree to public procurators restricting the use of criminal proceedings for "defamation" (under Article 297 of the Penal Code) against people accusing the police of ill-treatment. Previously many people who complained about police ill-treatment had been prosecuted for defamation, and many other alleged victims said they were reluctant to make complaints for fear of such prosecution (see Amnesty International Reports 1988, 1990 and 1991). There was insufficient information to assess the way the decree was being put into effect.
AUSTRIA
The new Security Pohce Law, adopted in October, required statistics on complaints of police ill-treatment to be presented annually to Parliament by the Interior Ministry. Previously no official statistics relating specifically to complaints of police ill-treatment had been published regularly. The new law was scheduled to come into force in May 1993.
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (ecpt), a committee of experts set up under the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, published a report in October on its first periodic visit to Austria, which had taken place in May 1990. The ecpt heard a large number of allegations of ill-treatment in police custody. The report, published with the consent of the Austrian Government, concluded that "there is a serious risk of detainees being ill-treated while in police custody".
In December an amendment to the Law on Alternative Military Service abolished the Alternative Service Commission. Previously all applicants for conscientious objector status had been required to appear before the Alternative Service Commission and to submit to an oral examination of their objection, on grounds of conscience, to military service. Under the new amendment applications are dealt with by the Interior Ministry in a purely administrative procedure.
In January three police officers were charged with ill-treating a detainee and perjury. A fourth officer was charged with perjury. The case concerned an 18-year-old Yugoslav who alleged that he had been tortured at Himberg police station (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991). In July all four officers were acquitted for lack of evidence. The Vienna Provincial Court concluded that in spite of strong elements of suspicion which pointed to ill-treat-ment, at least some of the injuries in question could have been self-inflicted. According to medical evidence the injuries included six second-to-third-degree bums on the man's back, signs of bleeding beneath two of his fingernails, and bruising and swelling to his penis,
In February the Constitutional Court concluded that in March 1989 Mustafa Ali had been pushed through a pane of glass by an unidentified police officer while in custody (see Amnesty International
Reports 1990 and 1991). In March 1990 the public procurator had decided to drop criminal proceedings against the police officers involved after an investigation into the incident by the Vienna police authorities. The police officers maintained that Mustafa Ali had thrown himself through the glass.
In March a 17-year-old Romanian citizen alleged that she had been raped by a police officer while detained in a police prison in Vienna before possible expulsion as an illegal immigrant. The officer accused was immediately suspended from duty and was later charged with rape and abuse of authority. He was found guilty of the latter offence in October and sentenced to one year's imprisonment.
Two officers who had allegedly forced a 19-year-old woman to have oral sex with them at Karlsplatz police station in Vienna in May 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1991) were convicted in November of abusing their authority. The two officers had originally been charged with the additional offences of rape and sexual coercion. Both men were given a suspended sentence of one year's imprisonment.
In July the Supreme Court in Vienna rejected an appeal against a court decision which allowed statements allegedly obtained under diu-ess to be considered in coml. Qani Halimi-Nedzibi had been sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment for drug-related offences by Vienna Provincial Court in July 1990. He alleged that a police officer from the Lower Austria Drugs Squad had beaten him about the head, punched him in the stomach and forced his head into a bucket of water to force him to sign a false confession. The police officer denied the allegations. Qani Halimi-Nedzibi's lawyer had asked for his client's statements to be struck from the record because there was sufficient evidence that they had been obtained through physical duress. The court had refused, stating, as part of its judgment, that "Austrian law does not recognise such a procedure" and that it believed that the allegations of ill-treatment had already been adequately examined. However, a substantial number of the allegations had been made for the first time during the trial itself and therefore could not have been investigated. The court's statement thus appeared to conflict with the Justice Ministry's decree of September 1989. The decree contained guidelines for
AUSTRIA/BAHAMAS/BAHRAIN
public procurators and courts on the way in which the prohibition in the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on the use of evidence obtained through torture should be put into practice.
Wolfgang Ulrich served six weeks in prison in January and February for refusing to perform military service on grounds of conscience. His application for conscientious objector status, based on pacifism resulting partly from his Christian faith, had been turned down by the Alternative Service Commission and the Higher Alternative Service Commission. On 15 February he was sentenced to three weeks' imprisonment, However, as he had already been detained for six weeks in investigative detention he was released immediately.
In January Amnesty International called for the release of Wolfgang Ulrich.
The organization and the government engaged in extensive correspondence about the ill-treatment of police detainees. In December Amnesty International published Austria: Torture and lU-treatment, Update to report of January 1990. The update welcomed the measures taken by the government to protect the rights of detainees but expressed concern that they were not being fully implemented. It expressed particular concern about the use of physical violence by the police against criminal suspects to obtain confessions or information and at the apparent reluctance of the government to take additional measures to combat this.
