UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
At the end of the year there were at least 14 known or probable prisoners of conscience. Scores of people seeking to exercise their human rights were detained for short periods, especially in the first half of the year. There were nmnerous allegations of torture or other ill-treatment in detention, and at least two people were said to have died as a result of torture. Over 20 people were reported to have been killed in circimistances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed by the army or police. According to newly published official statistics, 445 death sentences were passed in 1990 and 195 executions were carried out. The ussr parliament passed legislation restricting the scope of the death penalty.
Following the failed August coup against President Mikhail Gorbachov, the trend towards independence of the former constituent republics of the ussr gained further impetus. In September the State Council recognized the independence of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, over 50 years after they had been incorporated into the ussr, and they became members of the United Nations (un) and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce). In December all but one of the remaining 12 republics agreed to form a Confederation of Independent States, declaring that the ussr no longer existed. Inter-ethnic violence continued to claim hundreds of lives in some southern republics.
The ussr and republican parliaments continued reforms aimed at bringing laws closer to international standards on human rights. In May the ussr parliament passed a law, to be implemented fully by 1993,
UGANDA/UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
which recognized for the first time in domestic Soviet law the right of citizens to enter and leave the coimtry. Reforms were incorporated in the revised Fundamentals of Criminal Legislation of the ussr and Republics adopted in July. However, its provisions were not due to come into force until 1992, with the exception of the article on the death penalty, which entered into force in July. This reduced the number of crimes punishable by death and exempted women. In September the ussr parliament adopted a Declaration on Human Rights and Freedoms whose guarantees included the rights to freedom of expression, conscience, religion, association and assembly. In October the Russian Federation abolished two laws which restricted religious activity ("violating the laws separating church and state" and "engaging in antisocial religious activity"), under which hundreds of people had been imprisoned in the past. In December Ukraine amended its criminal code so that consenting homosexual activity between adult males was no longer punishable.
Ukraine, which has a separate seat at the un, acceded to the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in July. The ussr did the same in October.
At least 14 people were believed to be imprisoned or forcibly confined in psychiatric hospital at the end of the year for peacefully exercising their human rights. The majority of known prisoners of conscience were conscientious objectors to military service. Almost all had been sentenced before 1991 and were serving up to three years' imprisonment for "evading regular call-up to active military service". One of those prosecuted during the year was Sergey Osnach, arrested in Ukraine in April and sentenced in June to 18 months' compulsory labour. He had refused his call-up papers on the grounds that the Soviet Army "does not defend the motherland and the nation, but the 'socialist choice'".
Although it was announced in February that a civilian alternative to military service would soon be discussed by the ussr parliament, by the end of the year there was still no legal provision under all-union law for conscientious objectors. Some republics had adopted their own provisions, but these were not recognized by the central authorities. In November there
was an amnesty for soldiers who had left military units without permission. Those imprisoned for desertion were released and pending prosecutions discontinued. However, only deserters who returned within the following month to complete their military service were eligible.
At least three people served prison sentences during the year for attempting to leave the ussr without permission, reportedly on grounds of conscience. They had all been arrested before 1991. Vladimir Lebedev, for example, was sentenced to two years' compulsory labour in January 1990 for "illegal exit abroad" and "evading regular call-up to military service". He had refused to perform military service on grounds of conscience and was arrested after attempting to seek asylum abroad. All three were at liberty by the end of the year.
According to reports, at least one person was sentenced during the year solely for consenting homosexual activity between adults. A court in Moscow sentenced Vladimir Mironov to three years' imprisonment in May on a charge of "sodomy", but full details of the case were not known. The absence of official statistics and stigmatization of offenders made it difficult to assess the total number of prosecutions.
Some probable prisoners of conscience 'were arrested on criminal charges they alleged had been fabricated to punish them for their political activities. Ceorgy Chan-turiya, for example, head of the National Democratic Party, was arrested in Georgia in September after organizing meetings calling for the resignation of the republic's government and president. He was charged with violating public order. Shirali Nurmu-radov, a poet and playwright, was sentenced in July to three years' imprisonment in Turkmenia for swindling. He had been publicly threatened with imprisonment by the President of Turkmenia in 1990, after publishing poems critical of the republic's government.
At least one person was confined in a psychiatric hospital on what were believed to be political grounds. Kurbanberda Kara-balakov was forcibly confined in a psychiatric hospital in Ashkhabad, capital of Turkmenia, in October 1990. He had reportedly tried to organize local support for the Democratic Platform, a grouping of reformist members of the Communist Party. He had been released by the end of February.
UGANDA/UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
Short-term preventive detention and administrative arrest (see Amnesty International Report 1990] continued to be used to detain scores of people seeking to exercise their human rights, particularly before the August coup attempt. On 24 June, for example, brothers Andrey and Yevgeny Knyazhev were detained and allegedly beaten by police in Tyumen in the Russian Federation. They had attended a protest by the Democratic Union (du) party against holding a major csce human rights meeting in Moscow. Other du members were detained after mounting a subsequent protest picket. In September Edgor Obidov, a writer, was detained following a rally in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, to celebrate the failure of the August coup. He was placed under administrative arrest for 15 days.
Soviet troops and special police (omon) from Azerbaydzhan conducted an operation in April and May in the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh. Scores of Armenians alleged that they were detained for short periods solely because of their ethnic origin, A state of emergency, introduced in January 1990 in response to inter-ethnic violence, made it difficult to investigate further allegations of human rights violations. It was alleged that troops had committed rape and carried out extrajudicial executions and that scores of Armenians remained imprisoned on ethnic grounds, not because they had participated in violence.
Numerous allegations of torture and other ill-treatment of detainees emerged throughout the year. Many of the detained Armenians alleged that they were beaten, and at least two were said to have died in June after being tortured in Azerbaydzhani custody. One of the dead, Yury Gulyan, reportedly had his skull fractured in 15 places, broken fingers and numerous stab wounds. The official cause of death was internal bleeding. The second person who died was a police officer. Grachy Shakhbazyan. His cries as he was being tortured were said to have been relayed by police radio to his ethnic Armenian colleagues as a threat.
Earlier in the year Soviet troops and members of omon units were said to have beaten detainees in Lithuania and Latvia. In January, for example, journalists reported seeing soldiers punch, kick and slap six Lithuanians, five of whom were subsequently hospitalized.
Over 20 people were alleged to have been deliberately and unlawfully killed by troops and police. In January, for example, 13 reportedly peaceful, unarmed demonstrators died in the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius when Soviet troops dispersed a crowd that eye-witnesses claimed offered only passive resistance. In June the preliminary report of an investigation by the ussr procuracy concluded that the troops had acted lawfully. In November kgb (state security police) Major Viktor Tolstenev was killed in the self-proclaimed Chechen Republic, allegedly in the custody of the local omon, one of whose members had stated that the major would be tried by the people rather than a court. The local procuracy initiated an investigation, but the result was not known by the end of the year.
In May three people were sentenced to up to 15 years' imprisonment by a court in Azerbaydzhan in connection with events in the capital, Baku, in January 1990. Over 30 Armenians had been killed in what was reported to be a pogrom (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Death penalty statistics were published for the first time since 1934. According to the ussr Ministry of Justice, 445 people were sentenced to death in 1990, 29 had their death sentences commuted and 195 were executed, mainly in Ukraine and the Russian Federation. The majority of those executed had been convicted of aggravated murder. Others executed had been convicted of rape, attempted murder of a police officer, treason, banditry and disrupting the work of corrective-labour institutions. In July the ussr parliament passed legislation reducing the scope of the death penalty to five offences: treason, premeditated murder with aggravating circumstances, rape of a minor with aggravating circumstances, kidnapping of a minor with especially grave consequences and grave crimes against the peace and security of humanity. Women were exempted fi-om the death penalty and minors continued to be exempted. However, with legislative initiative passing to individual republics it was imclear if they would automatically adopt similar legislation. In January, for example, it was announced that Uzbekistan had made rape during mass disturbances a possible capital offence, Georgia abolished the death penalty for economic crimes in March. In September Boris Yeltsin, President of the
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIAUST REPUBLICSAINfTED KINGDOM
Russian Federation, commuted 24 death sentences and in December the Russian Federation abohshed the death penalty for three economic offences.
Twenty-five asylmn-seekers from Iraq were detained at Moscow airport in March after refusing to board a plane they believed was travelling to Syria, rather than Sweden as they had been informed. Some alleged that they were beaten by Soviet officials. All were believed to be still held at the end of the year.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the all-union and republican authorities for the release of all known prisoners of conscience and sought information on others thought likely to be prisoners of conscience. The organization m^ed the authorities to commute all death sentences, impose a moratorium on the death penalty and publish death penalty statistics for each republic. It also continued to urge the introduction of a non-punitive civilian alternative to military service.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to undertake comprehensive and impartial investigations into all allegations of extrajudicial executions and of torture or ill-treatment in detention. It called for the results to be made public and the perpetrators to be brought to justice. It also luged the authorities to ensure that all law-enforcement officials were aware of, and conformed to, international standards on the use of force and firearms.
In March Anmesty International urged the ussr Government to ensure that none of the Iraqi asylum-seekers held at Moscow airport would be returned to Iraq without full and detailed consideration of each case and of the risks they might face if returned. It also asked for each detained asylum-seeker to be granted a prompt and fair hearing to determine whether such detention was legitimate under international standards.
In June an Amnesty International delegate travelled to Kiev, Ukraine, to observe part of the trial of Stepan Khmara, a former prisoner of conscience arrested in November 1990 after an altercation with a police officer. However, the trial was adjourned and proceedings against Stepan Khmara were eventually dropped in August.
