DJIBOUTI
A leading opponent of the government was held in administrative detention without charge or trial for five months. He was a prisoner of conscience. Over 270 suspect* ed government opponents were arrested in January and many of them were tortured. Most were released without charge but several were kept in custody and charged with involvement in an armed attack. Their trial, scheduled for December, was postponed. In September at least 10 prisoners died in a police cell as a result of alleged ill-treatment. In December over 30 people were extrajudicially executed in the capital during mass arrests. One prisoner was sentenced to death.
Djibouti remained a one-party state but the government promised constitutional changes in 1992 to allow a multi-party system. Tensions increased between the Somali Issa clan, which dominates the government, and two other groups - the Afar ethnic group and the Somali Gadabursi clan - and there were violent intercommunal clashes in the capital, Djibouti, in July, which resulted in several deaths. Armed attacks on military barracks early in the year were followed in November and December by sustained fighting in the north between government forces and the Front pour la restauration de l'unité et de la démocratie (frud). Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy, an armed Afar opposition group.
Djibouti ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights in November.
Mohamed Moussa Ali (known as "Tour-tour"), leader of the Mouvement pour l'unité et la démocratie, Movement for
Unity and Democracy, an imofficial opposition party, was detained in April when he tried to register the party. Four other people were briefly detained during a demonstration calling for his release. Mohamed Moussa Ali, a prisoner of conscience, was held in administrative detention without charge or trial and was allegedly tortured. In August he staged a 24-day hunger-strike and was denied proper medical treatment. He was released in late September.
On 8 January 71 people were arrested and accused of holding a subversive meeting in Djibouti. Some hours later, an army barracks in Tadjourah in the north was attacked and the security forces arrested a further 100 suspected government opponents in the capital. The detainees were all members of the Afar ethnic group. Most were tortiu'ed during interrogation by the security police. Over 20 were kept in custody and charged with seeking to overthrow the government and involvement in the Tadjourah attack. Following protests against the arrests, over 100 other members of the Afar community were briefly detained.
Among those charged were Ali Aref Bourhan, a former prime minister, and his nephew Aref Mohamed Aref, a lawyer who had defended political prisoners. They were held in the remote Ali-Adde army prison in the south and at times were denied adequate medical treatment and food. They were among a total of 49 defendants, including 38 provisionally released, who were due to be tried in December by the Seciirity Tribunal of the Republic, a special coiut whose judges include senior government officials. The trial was rescheduled for 1992 at the request of defence lawyers.	^
After the outbreak of fighting with frud | rebels in the north in mid-November, the | government said its forces had captured 232 guerrillas. Unofficial sources, however, claimed that these included government opponents who had not been involved in armed opposition. A spokesperson of the frud opposition group, Dr Abatte Eboh, who had been involved in negotiations in the capital to end the fighting, was arrested on 17 December and charged with seeking to overthrow the government.
Seventeen members of the Somali Gadabursi clan who had been detained and tortured after the 1990 bombing of a
DJIBOUTI/TWMINICAN REPUBLIC
restaurant in the capital, were released uncharged in February (see Amnesty International Report 1991). One man accused of planting a bomb at an army barracks in mid-1990 was still held awaiting trial at the end of 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Torture of suspected government opponents, as well as criminal suspects, was reported, Among the Afars detained in January, all but the most prominent were tortured, particularly by being subjected to "the swing", in which victims are tied by their wrists and ankles to a horizontal pole, gagged with a sponge soaked in detergent, and beaten all over the body. Some were also given electric shocks, burned with cigarettes or had a bottle forced into the anus.
On 19 September at least 10 criminal suspects died in a police cell in the capital. A special inquiry by the Ministry of Justice led to four police officers being dismissed for responsibility for the deaths, which were attributed to suffocation in an overcrowded cell. The inquiry report was not published. Unofficial sources claimed that as many as 29 prisoners had been asphjoci-ated after they protested at overcrowding and a tear-gas canister was thrown into their cell. The dismembered bodies of about 10 victims were reportedly discovered later on a rubbish dump.
On 18 December, while fighting continued in the north, the security forces rounded up over 100 people in Arhiba, a poor Afar-inhabited area of Djibouti, and reportedly shot dead at least 30 people who tried to flee or refused to get into police trucks. Dozens of others were arrested and taken away: their fate and whereabouts were unknown at the end of the year. Government sources claimed that gunmen had fired at the security forces, killing three, after which soldiers and police retinned fire, killing five and woxmding 26.
The first death sentence since independence in 1977 was imposed. Adouani Hamouda Ben Hassan, a Tunisian national, was convicted in March of bombing a restaurant in the capital in 1987. His appeal to the Supreme Court had not been heard by the end of the year.
In January Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to stop the torture of the Afar detainees. An Amnesty International delegation visited Djibouti in April for talks with the government about
this and other human rights issues. The delegates interviewed political detainees and released prisoners. A doctor on the delegation concluded that many had been tortiu-ed. A memorandiun submitted to President Hassan Gouled Aptidon in September urged the government to take steps to end torture, arbitrary arrests and the administrative detention of peaceful government opponents. The organization also called for Ali Aref Bourhan and his fellow-detainees, whom it believed might be prisoners of conscience, to be tried fairly or released. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death sentence imposed and for the ratification of international and regional human rights treaties.
Amnesty International published its memorandum in November as part of a report, Djibouti: Torture and Political Imprisonment. In response the Minister of Justice denied that torture was routine but said he was studying some of the reforms which Amnesty International had recommended. He later informed Amnesty International of Djibouti's ratification of the African Charter and the introduction of a right of appeal to the Supreme Court for those convicted by the Security Tribunal of the Republic.
