GHANA
Several critics of the government were detained during the year. At least 50 other political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, continued to be held without charge or trial: some had been held for
more than eight years. At least eight people were sentenced to death but no executions were known to have been carried out.
Internal and international pressure for political reform led the ruling Provisional National Defence Council (pndc), headed by Flight-Lieutenant J.J. Rawlings, to promise elections in 1992 and a return to constitutional rule. However, laws allowing arbitrary detention were not repealed.
Several critics of the government were arrested, including former prisoners of conscience. The police brought charges against some of them, who were subjected to unsubstantiated allegations in the government-owned press. However, none was prosecuted. B.B.D. Asamoah, a former government official and prisoner of conscience, was arrested in May after distributing a leaflet in the capital, Accra, calling for the resignation of the government. He was held until July and charged with sedition and illegal possession of a firearm but then released.
Two leading members of the Movement for Freedom and Justice (mfj), a human rights organization, were also arrested in May after putting up anti-govemment posters in Accra. One, Kwesi Pratt, a former prisoner of conscience, was reportedly beaten at the time of his arrest and later at police headquarters. However, he and Augustus Owusu-Gyimah were released two days later, after being charged with possessing seditious documents and assaulting a police officer.
Alhaji Ottman Danfordio, another mfj activist, was detained in August by plain-clothed men who took him to Osu Castle, the seat of goverrmient in Accra. There he was reportedly beaten and had his head
GHANA
shaved with a broken bottle by soldiers before being released uncharged.
Kwesi Armah, a lawyer and former government minister, and Nana Okutwer Bekoe, a former leader of the ruling party under the previous government, were detained in October by the armed forces. Nana Okutwer Bekoe was released after a few days but Kwesi Armah was held incommunicado and had not been released by the end of 1991. Their detentions followed the publication of an article criticizing members of the previous military government. George Naykene, editor of the Christian Chronicle in which the article was published, was also arrested and still held without charge at the end of the year. In December a habeas corpus action on behalf of them and other detainees was dismissed on the grounds that the High Court had no jurisdiction. In 1984 the power of the courts to challenge administrative detention was removed by the pndc.
In December John Ndebugre, opposition leader and a former government minister, was arrested, allegedly for not standing up when the national anthem was played at a rally attended by the head of state. He was reportedly beaten and had his head forcibly shaved. He was acquitted on a charge of failing to show respect for the national flag,' but was detained again briefly.
Major Courage Quarshigah and at least five other army and security police officers remained in detention without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991]. Agnes Quicoo was also held for most of 1991, apparently solely because her son had escaped after being detained in connection with the same case. She was arrested in June 1990 and held incommunicado until her release, uncharged, in November. Ras Seth Djamah Tei, a businessman arrested in September 1989, apparently in connection with the Quarshigah affair, was released uncharged in August after receiving hospital treatment.
Twenty employees of the Ghana Oil Palm Development Corporation were detained in September following industrial action. The outcome of a habeas corpus action on their behalf in October was not known.
A number of businessmen were detained or prosecuted on charges of sabotaging the economy, a capital offence.
apparently because of their criticism of the government or to enable the state to seize their companies or force them to pay large fines. After the prosecution of Dr Kwame Safo-Adu, an opposition leader, and three others had resulted in acquittals, Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings publicly criticized the court decisions and the prosecuting authorities lodged appeals against them in November.
In June Shawky Makarem, a United Kingdom businessman, was arrested on a visit to Ghana and detained without charge for over a month in poor conditions at Police Headquarters in Accra. In September he was charged before the Public Tribunal with sabotage of the economy for allegedly withholding payment in a business transaction and remanded in custody for three weeks. In December he was convicted and sentenced after an unfair trial to 23 years' imprisonment or a fine of over us $360,000. He was held for more than two weeks until he paid the fine.
At least 50 suspected opponents of the government arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, continued to be held in administrative detention without charge or trial under the 1982 Preventive Custody Law. This permits indefinite incommimicado detention without charge or trial "in the interest of national security". Most of those held were members of the armed forces, many of whom were detained in the mid-1980s.
Jacob Jabuni Yidana, a former chief superintendent of police, was detained throughout 1991. He was reportedly served with an administrative detention order in July 1988 when he was eligible for parole, having served most of an eight-year prison sentence imposed in 1983 after he was convicted of involvement in a coup attempt. His trial was allegedly unfair and the real reason for his imprisorunent may have been his involvement in an investigation which implicated members of the government in the murder of three judges and a retired army officer in 1982.
Daniel Opare Sarpong and Emmanuel Sawimdi, both army corporals, also remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1991. They were apparently suspected of involvement in plots to overthrow the government in 1984 and 1985 respectively. William Asiedu and Eric Ossei Yaw, both sergeants in the Forces Reserve Unit, had been detained without
GHANA/GREECE
charge or trial since January 1986, also apparently for political reasons.
Richmond Aggrey, detained without charge or trial since May 1990, was released in October. He had been arrested after returning to Ghana from the United States of America and held incommunicado for almost a year. The authorities gave no reasons for his detention.
Andrew Kwame Asare Pianim continued to serve an 18-year prison sentence. He was convicted of involvement in a November 1982 coup attempt, on the basis of what appeared to be inadequate evidence.
Eight people were sentenced to death after trials by Public Tribxmals, special courts which may impose death sentences for a wide range of offences, including offences not previously punishable by death or even defined as offences in law. Seven people were sentenced to death for armed robbery (one in absentia) and one for murder. No executions were known to have been carried out.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of prisoners of conscience and for a review of the cases of all other political prisoners. It called for the removal of legislation permitting arbitrary arrest and detention and for an end to the use of the death penalty.
In April an Amnesty International delegation visited Accra and met government officials to discuss human rights. Officials said that concerns about detention without trial and the use of the death penalty would soon be resolved by planned future constitutional changes and moves towards a multi-party political system. However, they provided little specific information. In December Amnesty International published a report, Ghana: Political imprisonment and the death penalty, detailing its concerns and recommending measures necessary for the protection of human rights.
