KENYA
Hundreds of pro-democracy activists were imprisoned for short periods. Four prisoners of conscience were convicted of sedition after a grossly unfair trial and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment; three other prisoners of conscience were released from administrative detention. About 20 political prisoners convicted after unfair trials in previous years continued to serve their sentences. Eight other government opponents charged with treason in 1990 remained in prison without being brought to trial. Treatment of political prisoners was deliberately harsh. Over 320 people were reportedly under
KENYA
sentence of death, including over 40 convicted during 1991, but it was not known if there were any executions.
The government of President Daniel arap Moi faced renewed demands for an end to the one-party state; At first these were rejected: the National Democratic Party (ndp), an opposition party formed in February by Oginga Odinga, a former Vice-President, was banned and members of the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (ford), another group formed in August, were arrested. In December, however, after the country's main aid donors said they were provisionally stopping aid to Kenya for six months until democratic and human rights improved, the government announced that political parties other than the ruling Kenya Afi'ican National Union (kanu) would be allowed. A constitutional amendment on 10 December formally ended the one-party state, allowing opposition groups such as the ford to function openly.
Several government critics were arrested in early 1991 and charged with sedition. Gitobu Imanyara, a lawyer and editor of The Nairobi Law Monthly, was charged with publishing a seditious publication, after his journal accused the government of practising tribalism. It criticized the preponderance of Kalenjin - people of President Moi's ethnic group - in senior official posts. Gitobu Imanyara was held for three months, during which he became seriously ill and required hospital treatment, before the charge against him was dropped. Several others who were arrested and accused of possessing seditious publications were also freed when charges were dropped some weeks later.
In November three senior government figures were arrested after a judicial com-
mission of inquiry pointed to high-level involvement in an attempt to cover up the abduction, torture and murder of Foreign Minister Robert Ouko in February 1990, apparently to prevent him disclosing official corruption. However, the two main suspects, a former government minister and a senior civil servant responsible for security, were released without explanation a few weeks later. Jonah Anguka, a district commissioner, remained in custody, charged with Robert Ouko's murder.
Charges were brought against several ford supporters arrested after its formation in August. They were accused of public order offences but the charges were dropped after their release on bail. Scores of other pro-democracy activists were arrested in November when a rally called by ford in the Kamakunji area of Nairobi was banned by the government. Among them were ford leaders, including Oginga Odinga and Gitobu Imanyara, and many ford activists, who were arrested two days before the rally. On 16 November, the day of the rally, police sealed off the Kamakimji area, forcibly dispersed peaceful protesters with tear-gas and batons, and arrested as many as 300 people. Among them were Martin Shikuku, a former prisoner of conscience, and Paul Muite, Chairman of the Law Society of Kenya. Dozens of prominent ford supporters throughout the country were promptly charged under the Public Order Act with "publicizing an illegal meeting", an offence punishable by six months' imprisonment. Most were at first remanded in custody, but a few days later all were released on bail. Scores of others were swiftly tried, convicted of offences such as "creating a disturbance", and fined, The arrests attracted considerable international criticism and by early December all charges had been dropped.
In July, four prisoners of conscience were jailed for seven years after a sedition trial lasting six months. They included George Anyona, a former member of parliament, and Edward Oyugi, a university professor. All four were convicted of holding a "seditious" meeting in 1990 in a Nairobi bar, a charge they denied. Their trial was unfair. The judge ignored their allegations that they had been tortured and admitted as evidence statements which they said had been made under torture. No evidence was produced by the prosecution about the subject of their meeting in the bar, nor was
KENYA/KOREA {DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
there evidence that they had used or advocated violence. They lodged appeals but these had not been heard by the end of the year.
Three prisoners of conscience held in administrative detention without charge or trial since July 1990 under the Public Security Regulations were all released after becoming ill. Kenneth Matiba, a former government minister and a leading advocate of multi-party democracy, was released in June and allowed to seek medical treatment abroad after suffering a stroke. Charles Rubia, another former government minister, and Raila Odinga were released in April and June respectively. It appeared that all three had become ill because they were denied adequate medical treatment.
The Reverend Lawford Imunde, who was jailed for six years in March 1990 for making "seditious" notes in his private diary (see Amnesty International Report 1991), was released by the Court of Appeal in March. He continued with appeal proceedings against his conviction, maintaining that he had been tortured and given false inducements by the police to make him plead guilty to sedition, but the appeal had not been heard by the end of the year.
About 20 other political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years remained in prison. They were serving sentences of between three arid 10 years for "sedition" or "membership of an illegal organization". Most had pleaded guilty at their trials as a result of torture or duress. Six were released during the year after receiving one-third remission of their sentences.
Koigi wa Wamwere, a leading government opponent, and seven others remained in prison awaiting trial on treason charges. The authorities said Koigi wa Wamwere had been arrested in October 1990 in Nairobi for possession of weapons. He denied this and alleged that he had been forcibly abducted ft'om Uganda. The seven charged with him included Rumba Kin-uthia and Mirugi Kariuki, both lawyers. All denied the charges, which carry a mandatory death penalty. They said they had been tortmed to make false statements incriminating themselves or others, and were being ill-treated in prison. A key prosecution witness expected to be called at their trial was shot dead in July. Bernard Githinji Kiragu had been detained unlawfully since September 1990 by security
police belonging to the Department of Security and Intelligence (dsi), the former police Special Branch. He was killed while trying to escape from the dsi's Nairobi headquarters, during which he shot dead two security police officers. The Attorney-General reportedly initiated an investigation into the incident, but no findings were annoimced.
At least 40 people were sentenced to death after being convicted of robbery with violence or murder. Official statistics on death sentences and executions in Kenya are not disclosed but over 320 prisoners were reported to be under sentence of death. It was not known if any prisoners were executed or had their death sentences commuted in 1991.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of possible prisoners of conscience, including those facing trial on treason charges. The organization also urged the authorities to prevent the torture or ill-treatment of political detainees and sentenced prisoners, to investigate complaints of torture, and to commute all death sentences.
