JORDAN
Over 200 suspected opponents of the government, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge, trial or judicial review, or were tried by civilian and special military courts. These included the Martial Law Court and the State Security Court, whose procedures do not satisfy international standards of fair trial. Seventeen political prisoners sentenced by the Martial Law Court in 1991 and previous years were pardoned and released. Scores of detainees were allegedly tortured or ill-treated. At least six people were executed, some after unfair trials.
In July the government repealed martial law directives issued in 1967 giving the executive sweeping powers of arrest and detention without charge, trial or judicial review. Martial law, however, was not formally lifted and the existing Martial Law Coiul, before which unfair trials have been held, was authorized to complete its case load. In addition, sweeping powers of arrest and detention remained available to the authorities under the Defence Law in force since 1939. A new draft Defence Law
JORDAN
presented to Parliament in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) continued to be debated.
Other laws relevant to human rights were reviewed by the government and Parliament. They included a new law on political parties and a new law on the State Security Court. The court would take over much of the Martial Law Coiul's jurisdiction and allow the right of appeal to a higher tribunal, Also drafted was a Law Lifting Responsibility as a Result of the End of Martial Law, which would grant immimity from prosecution to officials who had been entrusted with enforcing martial law directives. The government's proposal to repeal the 1953 Law of Resistance to Commimism had not yet been decided by Parliament by the end of the year.
In June a "National Charter" drafted by a commission appointed by King Hussein bin Talal was adopted at a special conference attended by some 2,000 citizens. The document included principles for political activity and a corrunitment to the rule of law and the protection of human rights as set out in relevant international human rights treaties.
In November Jordan acceded to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Over 200 suspected government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience. were arrested on security grounds mostly by the General Intelligence Department (gid). Many were released after having been held without charge, trial or judicial review. Among them were suspected members of Islamic organizations, including the Islamic Hizb al-Tahrir fi al-Urdun, Liberation Party in Jordan (lpj). One of them, Shaykh Taher 'Abd al-Hamid al-Taher, was detained for two months between March and May apparently after he had criticized the authorities in a Friday sermon. He had been detained for similar reasons in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Eight men arrested in April apparently on suspicion of planning to carry out an attack across the Israeli border were leleased in October after they had gone on hunger-strike to protest at their detention without charge or trial. Also detained without charge for up to 16 days in June were 'Isam al-Tal, a journalist, and seven other suspected members of the
Jordan Communist Party - the Revolutionary Path. They had been arrested apparently in connection with the publication of a leaflet said by the authorities to contain a personal attack on the then Prime Minister, Mudar Badran. Bakr al-Khawalidah, President of the lpj's Cultural Committee, was arrested with a dozen others in October, apparently for speaking publicly in opposition to the Madrid peace conference between Israeli and Arab representatives. He and four others were still held by the end of the year.
Other alleged lpj members were brought to trial during the year. They included Musa Khalil Shehadah, who was convicted in March by the Martial Law Court of membership of an illegal organization: he was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment, Arrested in December 1990, he was released in October after a special pardon.
Over 150 people were arrested, mostly in July, and accused of belonging to an illegal organization called Jaysh Muhammad, The Army of (the Prophet) Muhammad. The authorities said the group had been responsible for bomb attacks and other acts of violence in Jordan. They were detained incommunicado by the gid. About 80 of them were released in September; a number of others remained held without charge or trial; and 18 were charged with offences including membership of an illegal organization and acts of terrorism. They were tried by the State Security Court. Six of the 18 and two others who were tried in absentia were sentenced to death in November. The others received sentences of between four years' and life imprisonment. The death sentences passed on the six prisoners were commuted by the King in December. The State Security Coiut lacked basic safeguards for fair trial. An Amnesty International delegate observed sessions of the trial in Amman.
Seventeen prisoners convicted by the Martial Law Court in 1991 and previous years were pardoned and released in March and October. They included 'Abdullah and Muhammad al-Darduk, who had been under sentence of death in connection with a bomb attack in a shop in 1982.
Torture and ill-treatment, mainly by the gid, continued to be reported. About 30 of the suspected members of faysh Muhammad who were arrested at the end of July and held incommunicado for about three weeks by the gid said they were subjected
JORDAN/KENYA
to falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet) and other beatings. Others who were brought to trial in October also alleged that they had been subjected to falaqa and other forms of tortme or ill-treatment to force them to confess. They had been denied access to lawyers throughout their pre-trial detention. They were examined by a forensic doctor who found on some of them injuries consistent with torture. In Swaqa prison, Husayn Jahalin was reportedly punitively beaten in June for a minor infraction of internal rules. He was taken to hospital for treatment but. despite a formal complaint, no measures were known to have been taken by the authorities.
At least six people were executed. In February two people, an air force pilot and a farmer, were executed after having been convicted of spying for Israel. Four others who had been convicted in separate miu*-der cases were executed in May. One of these cases, involving the murder of an officer of the Public Security Directorate during an anti-drugs operation, resulted in the first execution to be carried out under the 1988 Law on Drugs and Stimulants. Five of those executed were reportedly convicted by the Martial Law Court and thus denied internationally recognized safeguards in capital cases, including the right of appeal. Five others sentenced to death by the Martial Law Court in March, including one sentenced in absentia, had their sentences commuted to prison terms in August. The five had been convicted of being members of an illegal organization, possession and use of explosives and other offences.
A number of people were expelled or faced expulsion to countries where they may have suffered human rights violations such as torture. In October Muhammad al-Fasi, a Saudi Arabian national who had been publicly critical of his government, was arrested in Amman and forcibly returned to Saudi Arabia apparently without any legal process. He was believed to be at risk of torture and possible execution in Saudi Arabia.
Amnesty International welcomed the repeal of martial law directives permitting detention without trial, the releases of prisoners and the commutation of death sentences. The organization remained concerned, however, about the continued use of prolonged incommunicado detention without charge, trial or judicial review of
political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, and about trials by special military courts which lacked basic safeguards of fair trial. It was also concerned about the allegations of torture and about the use of the death penalty, including after unfair trials. Amnesty International sought assurances from the authorities that people would not be expelled to countries where they would be at risk of torture, execution or imprisonment as prisoners of conscience.
In August an Amnesty International delegation visited Jordan and discussed human rights issues with Prime Minister Taher Masri and other government ministers and officials, including the gid Director General. While welcoming recent human rights reforms, Amnesty International called for the urgent introduction of safeguards against torture and ill-treatment of detainees, including routine medical examinations and access to lawyers; for the speedy completion of the review of cases of political prisoners sentenced by the Martial Law Court; and for fair trials for all political prisoners. Amnesty International also pressed for the commutation of all death sentences. Government officials denied the use of torture, provided information about impending prisoner releases and the commutation of five death sentences, and said the government intended to lift martial law shortly. Amnesty International was assured of the government's continuing commitment to human rights reforms and its willingness to consider Amnesty International's recommendations.
