SUDAN
More than 300 prisoners of conscience were released but there were hundreds of new arrests of suspected opponents of the government. Almost 200, including at least 40 prisoners of conscience, were still held at Uie end of the year. More than 40 were serving sentences after unfair military trials but others were detained without trial, often in secret detention centres. Torture was common and cruel pimishments including amputations and floggings were enshrined in a new penal code. At least 21
detainees reportedly "disappeared" and government troops and militia committed extrajudicial executions. At least 30 people were sentenced to death and there were at least 14 executions.
The ruling National Salvation Revolution Command Council (nsrcc), headed by President Omar Hassan al-Bashir, continued to face armed opposition from the Sudan People's Liberation Army (spla) in southern and western Sudan. The army mounted attacks on the Fur and Zaghawa ethnic groups in Darfur in the west. The spla, which effectively controlled much of southern Sudan, was responsible for human rights abuses: civilians were summarily executed and dissidents within the organization were imprisoned.
The nationwide state of emergency, imposed after the military coup that brought the nsrcc to power in June 1989, remained in force and continued to permit government opponents to be detained indefinitely without charge or trial. In May the government said that all detentions would be under judicial supervision, but in practice detainees continued to be held without reference to the judiciary, often in secret detention centres known as "ghost houses". Detainees were often given no information about the basis of their detention and no opportunity to challenge it. Only a small proportion were charged and brought to court.
A new penal code, based on the nsrcc's interpretation of Shari'a (Islamic) law, was introduced in March. Applicable in northern Sudan only, it reintroduced various forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment including judicial amputations and floggings, and provided for execution by stoning or by hanging followed by public crucifixion. Apostasy - the renunciation of Islam - became a capital offence. In October the government announced that the death penalty was to be introduced for drug smuggling.
Hundreds of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were still held at the beginning of 1991, virtually all of them detained without charge or trial. In April, however, the government announced that all political prisoners were being released. Those freed included 299 prisoners of conscience. Ushari Mahmud, a university lecturer and human rights activist, and many others, including politicians, academics, lawyers and trade
SUDAN
unionists, had been held since 1989 (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991).
Despite the government's announcement, more than 60 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, continued to be held. One prisoner of conscience, Ahmad Osman Siraj, a prominent critic of the government, was serving a 15-year sentence after an unfair trial in December 1990. His trial before a military court lasted only a few minutes and apparently resulted in a death sentence, although he was not told this. It was subsequently commuted. He was convicted of participation in a coup plot. Albino Akol Akol, a retired army officer, remained in prison until October 1991, although he had apparently been acquitted in the same trial. Thirty-nine others arrested with him in September 1990 were held throughout 1991, including 11 sentenced after an unfair trial.
Others who continued to be held without trial included southern Sudanese arrested as suspected supporters of the spla, such as Deng Mesham Angai, a prisoner of conscience and chairman of the banned Southern Sudan Farmers' Union. Arrested in January 1990, he was still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1991.
There were hundreds of new political arrests after the releases announced in April. Detainees were held in "ghost houses" for weeks or months by Security of the Revolution secret police. Many were tortured, including Omar Adlan al-Mek, a trade unionist and member of the banned Sudan National Party. He was one of at least six government opponents to be rearrested within days of their release. Omar Adlan al-Mek was released in December, but there was no information on the other five. Adnan Zahir Surur, a lawyer, was also tortiued after he was rearrested in August. He was also released in December.
Dozens of students and others were arrested in July after members of the Security of the Revolution police opened fire on demonstrators at Khartoum University, killing one. Most were released within days, but 12 student leaders were detained and beaten during questioning. Nine were released after two weeks, but three remained in detention until August. Students were again arrested after further disturbances at Khartoum University in September, but all were reported to have been released in October.
In August the government announced that it had thwarted a new coup attempt. At least 81 supporters of banned political parties and former and serving army officers were detained. They included 'Abd al-Rahman 'Abdallah Nugdalla and Sid Ahmad al-Hussein, both former government ministers and members of the banned Umma and Democratic Unionist parties.
Fifty-three of the 81 arrested in August were tried in camera before a military tribunal in October. None had legal representation and each case lasted only a few minutes. The verdict and sentences in each case were not revealed until December, when it was announced that 46 defendants had been convicted and the rest acquitted. Eleven received death sentences, although these were commuted to life imprisonment, and 35 received prison terms ranging from six months to 20 years. At least 15 of those arrested but not tried were released in October and November, but seven others remained detained in "ghost houses". There was no information about the others.
Torture of detainees was common in "ghost houses", in the headquarters of various security services in Khartoum and in provincial detention centres. Victims included many of those arrested in August. Some detainees were whipped or beaten with rubber truncheons and one of those arrested in August was first burned with a hot iron and then made to roll on a concrete siuface baked hot by the sun. Other detainees reportedly had their testicles crushed with pliers and were bound and suspended from cell walls for up to three nights. One detainee, Zein al-Abdin al-Tayib Osman, was beaten and subjected to electric shocks in October, while held at Sinnar. Political detainees were also ill-treated by being held in particularly cramped conditions, sometimes in cells full of water, or by being locked in cupboards or dirty latrines. Criminal suspects were also tortured: in November a trader arrested on suspicion of hoarding petrol died in El Obeid after being beaten by security officers.
Three people were sentenced to have limbs amputated after being convicted of theft in September. These were the first such sentences reported imder the new penal code, but it was not clear whether they had been carried out by the end of the year. Earlier, the authorities had announced that all sentences of amputation passed
SUDAN
before the introduction of the new penal code in March had been commuted.
Many people were subjected to public floggings, including unlicensed street vendors, often women, who were sentenced after summary trials in market places by Public Order Courts. Some women were also publicly flogged in Khartoum and Wad Medani in October after courts ruled their dress "indecent".
At least 21 people belonging to the Nuba ethnic group reportedly "disappeared" after being detained by security police or Popular Defence Force (pdf) militia, which operated under army control. Among the victims were Hassan Koury, a lawyer, and Mohamed Nowar Aso, a dental assistant. They were apparently suspected of sympathizing with the spla. The situation of about 100 other Nuba arrested in September was unclear at the end of the year.
Government forces committed extrajudicial executions in areas affected by armed conflict. In March troops were said to have extrajudicially executed many civilians - some unconfirmed reports suggested over 300 - at the town of Mundri in southern Sudan because they refused to act as a human shield to deter attacks by the spla. Many killings were also reported from Darfur where, in one incident in April, 17 people belonging to the Zaghawa ethnic group were shot dead by soldiers in the courtyard of a mosque in Khazan Jadid. Soldiers were reported to have extrajudicially executed 19 suspected spla sympathizers at Lagowa in the Nuba mountains in November, pdf militia were also responsible for extrajudicial executions in the Nuba mountains: the victims included Jibreel Salah and Jibreel Sendica, who were detained, beaten, then killed in April in the Kallandi area.
At least 30 people were sentenced to death but 13, including 11 political prisoners, later had their sentences commuted. At the end of 1991, over 100 people were believed to be under sentence of death.
Five Palestinians, who had been sentenced to death in 1988 following attacks on a hotel and club in Khartoum in which several people were killed, were released in January. In 1989 the Supreme Court had ruled that the relatives of those killed should decide whether the death sentences should be carried out (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990).
At least 14 people were executed, 13 in Khartoum and one in Darfur. The latter was one of 11 people who had been sentenced to be hanged and then publicly crucified for armed robbery. The 11 appeared to have no right of appeal.
The spla was responsible for grave human rights abuses in southern Sudan. There was a split within the organization in August following an attempt by spla commanders in Upper Nile to oust the spla leader John Garang de Mabior. Those opposed to him reportedly killed many civilians from the Dinka ethnic group, including over 30 at Akobo town in October and over 1,000 in and around the town of Bor in November. The spla also continued to hold at least 47 people detained after disputes within the spla in previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Amnesty International welcomed the April releases but urged the government to release all prisoners of conscience. It called for the release or fair trial of other political prisoners, for an end to the use of "ghost houses", and for effective measures to stop torture. Amnesty International also raised its concern about judicial amputations and other cruel punishments, and called for all death sentences to be commuted. In June Amnesty International published a report, Sudan: Human rights violations during the military government's second year in power, covering the period between June 1990 and May 1991.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about the torture and detention of non-violent opponents of the government in Sudan. In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Sudan for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
In October an Amnesty International communication about the violation of human rights guaranteed by the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights was declared admissible by the African Commission established under the Charter. Earlier, in March Amnesty International had submitted further information to the African Commission.
