ZIMBABWE
More than 100 opponents of the government were briefly detained and then released uncharged. At least three prisoners died in custody, allegedly as a result of
ill-treatment. No independent investigations were conducted into at least three deaths in custody dating from 1990, nor into the alleged extrajudicial execution of an army officer in 1989. An intelligence officer was charged in connection with the "disappearance" of a prisoner. A constitutional amendment explicitly permitting hanging was enacted, but a draft law was introduced limiting the scope of the death penalty. At least 18 people were sentenced to death but no executions were reported.
In April an amendment to the constitutional Declaration of Rights came into force, stating that neither hanging as a method of execution nor the corporal punishment of male juveniles constitutes a form of inhuman or degrading punishment (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Human rights groups criticized the amendment not only for its substance, but also because it appeared to be an attempt to remove discretion from the Supreme Coiut to rule on constitutional cases.
Zimbabwe acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultiu'al Rights in May.
Zimbabwean troops maintained their presence in neighboiuing Mozambique. Insecurity continued along the country's eastern border where guerrillas fighting the Mozambican Government committed abuses against Zimbabwean villagers.
In May police arrested 113 members of the opposition Zimbabwe Unity Movement (zum) who were attending an internal party meeting in Gweru. They were held for two days before being released on bail, but they were not charged.
At least three prisoners died in police or military custody, allegedly as a result of
ZIMBABWE
torture or other ill-treatment. One was Shepard Chisango, an army lieutenant, who died in military custody in Harare. He had apparently been arrested because he had tried to stop soldiers from smuggling goods from Mozambique into Zimbabwe. One inquest was held into a death in custody but no independent investigation was initiated into any of the other deaths in custody in 1991, nor into three others in 1990.
On a number of occasions courts found that police had tortured or ill-treated prisoners. In March the High Court awarded a former prisoner 7,000 Zimbabwe dollars (about US $4,000) in damages for a "prolonged sadistic assault" by police officers in 1987. The following month a total of eight police officers were convicted and sentenced to prison terms for assaults on prisoners in three separate incidents.
The authorities failed to bring to justice those responsible for the death in 1989 of Captain Edwin Nleya, whose body was found on a hillside in Hwange. An internal army inquiry concluded that he had committed suicide but an inquest found that he had been murdered. Shortly before his death he had claimed that senior army officers were engaged in smuggling goods from Mozambique and poaching ivory. There were allegations that Captain Nleya was killed by military personnel to stop him making these allegations public. According to new information which emerged in 1991, shortly before his death Captain Nleya had given his family details of individuals who were keeping him under surveillance.
According to official figures, anti-poaching patrols made up of wildlife department personnel and members of the security forces killed 145 suspected poachers between July 1984 and September 1991. Amnesty International's concern was that the 1989 Protection of Wildlife (Indemnity) Act gave national park and security force officials immunity from prosecution for acts carried out in the suppression of poaching. There were fears that this indemnity was encouraging the use of lethal force in the suppression of poaching, including possible extrajudicial executions.
In December a former official of the Central Intelligence Organization (cio) was charged with kidnapping Rashiwe Guzha, who had "disappeared" from ao custody in May 1990. Later the same month the
High Court ruled that nine men from the Silobela area who had "disappeared" in 1985 should be presumed dead. Witnesses had described them being abducted by members of the seciuity forces, but the coiul did not establish what had happened to them afterwards.
In November the government published a draft law limiting the application of the death penalty to the offences of murder and treason and certain military crimes. It had previously been in force for attempted murder, rape, armed robbery and a variety of offences related to political violence. Most of the death sentences imposed since independence in 1980 had been for murder. At least 18 prisoners were sentenced to death during the year; none was known to have been executed.
Amnesty International urged the government not to prosecute zum members for attending a peaceful political meeting. The organization called on the authorities to initiate independent inquiries into a number of deaths in detention in 1990 and 1991. Arrmesty International urged President Robert Mugabe not to give his assent to amendments to the Declaration of Rights but welcomed proposals to limit the scope of the death penalty.
