FIJI	
	>
	■ ' . ' -«»r.
	
	
c	
	V
Seven civil rights activists continued to face sedition charges. Eight chiefs had their 1989 sedition convictions quashed by the Court of Appeal. Charges of malicious publication against three journalists were dropped.
The government of Prime Minister Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara deferred elections scheduled for 1991 until July 1992. Three decrees were issued which appeared to limit peaceful political expression. The Suppression of Terrorism Decree was introduced in January with the stated aim of ensuring public safety against threats of international terrorism during the Gulf War. The decree allowed the Commissioner of Police to declare a "terrorist emergency" and to exercise wide-ranging powers, including the deployment of the armed forces, to counter it. It also imposed a ban on demonstrations and public meetings but this was lifted in April. In May two decrees outlawed strikes and boycotts in the major industries, and provided penalties of up to 14 years' imprisonment for those convicted under the decree. The government rescinded these decrees in July, following an agreement with trade unions.
Seven civil rights activists who had participated in non-violent protests against the country's new Constitution in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) continued to face trial on sedition charges. The seven included Dr Anirudh
1
Singh, who had been abducted and tortured by army officers. The defendeints, who were free on bail, continued to have restrictions placed on their freedom of movement. They were still awaiting trial at the end of 1991.
In June the Coiut of Appeal quashed the 1989 sedition convictions against eight chiefs from the island of Rotuman (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Charges of malicious publication against three journalists (see Amnesty International Report 1991) were dropped by a lower comi on 15 August.
Amnesty International welcomed the decision to drop malicious publication charges against the three journalists. The organization remained concerned about the seven civil rights activists facing sedition charges and in May informed the government that the activists, if convicted and imprisoned, would be regarded as prisoners of conscience.
