LATVIA
Latvia gained independence after over 50 years' incorporation in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (ussr). Prior to this at least five detainees alleged that they had been ill-treated by ussr law enforcement officials (see ussr entry). Four people were sentenced to death, of whom three were executed.
In September, following the failed August coup in the Soviet Union, the State Council of the ussr recognized Latvia's independence. The new republic, headed by President Anatolijs Gorbunovs, became a member of the United Nations and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Prior to independence many Latvians had refused conscription into the Soviet army, or had deserted from it. An amnesty
was declared in Latvia on 18 September for those convicted of military crimes under the legislation of another state. From 1 October men aged 19 to 25 became liable to call-up for Latvian military service, lasting 18 months. Religious or pacifist objectors could apply for alternative service, lasting 24 months. There were no reports of people imprisoned for refusing conscription on grounds of conscience.
Nine offences in the criminal code carry a possible death sentence. During the year four people were sentenced to death, three of whom were executed. Statistics on the use of the death penalty have been made public since 1989. These record 18 people sentenced to death from 1989 to 1991, of whom 11 were executed and two had their sentences commuted. All had been convicted of premeditated murder under aggravating circumstances.
In April and October Amnesty International wrote to the authorities expressing its concern at the length of alternative service. The organization urged a moratorium on death sentences and executions, the commutation of all pending death sentences and the publication of full death penalty statistics. Following independence Amnesty International urged Latvia to ratify a number of international human rights instruments as a matter of priority. No reply to any of the letters had been received by the end of the year.
