BHUTAN
Six alleged opponents of the government, all prisoners of conscience arrested in 1989, remained in detention without charge or trial. Three were unconditionally released in December. Hundreds of other suspected government opponents were arrested for "anti-national" activities and held without charge or trial. Many were reported to have been ill>treated or tortured.
The government's policy of national integration and the carrying out of the census begun in 1988 continued to be opposed by Nepali-speaking people living in south-em Bhutan, many of whom had been officially classified as illegal immigrants under the census. There was widespread unrest in the area, including killings of civilians. The government attributed the violence to "anti-nationals", who were
alleged to belong mainly to the Bhutan People's Party (bpp), which was founded in 1990 in India and seeks the establishment "of a constitutional moneirchy guaranteeing fundamental and human rights" in Bhutan, Many schools were closed, some .ubse-quently being used as army barracks; health services were disrupted; and hundreds of people seen as "anti-nationals" by government forces had their land confiscated and their homes burned or demolished.
Six prisoners of conscience who the government held responsible for initiating the imrest continued to be detained without charge or trial at undisclosed locations. They had been arrested in 1989. In December, however, three of them were released in accordance with an amnesty announced by King Jigme Singye Wangchuck on Bhutan's National Day. Those freed were Ratan Gazmere, Bakti Prasad Sharma and Biswanath Chhetri. The remaining three -Jogen Gazmere, Sushil Pokhrel and Tek Nath Rizal - were still held at the end of 1991.
Hundreds of people of Nepali origin living in southern Bhutan were arrested and held without charge or trial on suspicion of being members or sympathizers of opposition groups. By the end of the year the King had ordered the release of 1,035 such detainees in a series of amnesty measures. However, 685 other political detainees continued to be held without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Thousands of Nepali-speaking people from southern Bhutan were reported to have sought refuge in Nepal and India to escape human rights violations and other abuses by Bhutanese security forces. By the end of the year over 6,000 refugees had fled to Nepal. The refugees reported that hundreds of those detained had been beaten, tortured or ill-treated. The victims included women who had been raped by soldiers in their homes or while held at army barracks. In one case, a woman from Phipsoo, Sarbhang District, alleged that she had been repeatedly raped by soldiers while detained for a month at a local army camp.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of the six prisoners of conscience held since 1989 and sought information about their whereabouts, It also sought information from the government in October about more than 450 people reported to have been detained in southern Bhutan. King Jigme Singye Wangchuck invited
BHUTAN/BOLMA
Amnesty International in December to send a delegation to Bhutan to discuss human rights. This visit was expected to take place in January 1992.
