BURUNDI
As many as 1,000 people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by government soldiers following rebel attacks in November. More than 800 people were detained for suspected opposition to the government, including possible prisoners of conscience. Most had not been tried by the end of the year. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees was reportedly widespread. At least 35 people reportedly "disappeared" after being detained by the security forces.
Early in the year the government took steps to ease tensions between the majority Hutu ethnic group and the politically dominant Tutsi minority. For the first time in more than 20 years, an Hutu was appointed Secretary General of the ruling Union pour le progrès national, Union for National
Progress. In January a committee was established to supervise the return of refugees -mostly Hutu - who had fled from Burundi since the 1960s owing to repeated bouts of intercommunal unrest and killings of Hutu by the Tutsi-dominated armed forces. By the end of the year the government said several thousand refugees had returned.
In February a Charter of National Unity was approved by referendum (see Amnesty International Report 1991). A constitutional commission was appointed and in September it recommended the introduction of a multi-party political system, with parties obliged to recruit members from more than one ethnic group, and the inclusion of human rights protections in a future constitution. In October the State Security Court, set up in 1980 to conduct political trials, was abolished.
Intercommunal tensions were exacerbated by a series of violent attacks in November on military and other installations in the capital, Bujumbura, and northwestern Burundi in which at least two dozen Tutsi were reportedly killed. The government attributed the attacks to the illegal Parti pour la libération du peupie Hutu (palipehutu), Hutu People's Liberation Party, set up in the early 1980s by Hutu exiles to campaign against Tutsi domination.
As many as 1,000 people, mostly Hutu, were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by government forces following the November rebel attacks. Several dozen people were reportedly beaten or bayonet-ted to death by soldiers at Muha and at the paratroopers barracks in Bujumbm^a and at Bubanza gendarmerie brigade. In one incident soldiers from Muzinda barracks, near Bujumbura, were reported to have extrajudicially executed six members of farmer and businessman Isidore Ciiza's household, including three children and £in infant.
Between July and November about 300 Hutu were arrested on suspicion of supporting palipehutu. The government claimed that the organization intended to instigate intercommunal conflict and killings of Tutsi, but palipehutu denied advocating violent change. The arrests took place mainly in Cibitoke, Muyinga and Gitega provinces. Most detainees were transferred to the capital, where they were interrogated by members of the national security service and the Brigade spéciale
de recherche (bsr], Special Investigation Brigade, a branch of the National Gendarmerie.
At the end of July seven people, including a Rwandese immigrant worker, were arrested in Cibitoke province at a meeting to plan a commemoration of the 1990 death in detention in Tanzania of the paupehutu leader, Remy Gahutu. Six of them were reportedly beaten in custody. They remained in Mpimba prison at the end of the year. Although the authorities said they had been charged with serious security and public order offences, they were denied legal counsel. Antoine Ntirabampa, paupehutu Vice-President, was detained in September.
Himdreds of Hutu were detained following the rebel attacks in November; nearly 500 were still held without trial at the end of the year. More than 200 Rwandese nationals were also still in detention at the end of 1991. The authorities said they were being held for interrogation about possible involvement in the November rebel attacks.
Four people arrested after an armed attack on Mabanda military camp in August 1990 remained in custody without trial (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Their cases were reportedly being handled by the military justice system.
Two Hutu arrested in March in Rugazi district, Bubanza province, were tried on political charges. They had been arrested in 1990, apparently because they had encouraged peasant farmers to reclaim land taken from them by government and security officials. Emile Ruvyiro was charged with endangering the security of the state and inciting ethnic hatred. Ephreme Ndab-warukanye was charged with inciting members of the public not to obey lawfully given orders. The charges were later reportedly altered to those of assault. Ephreme Ndabwarukanye was convicted of the new charge and sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment. Emile Ruvyiro's trial was still continuing at the end of 1991.
Many detainees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated by the security forces. About 50 taxi-drivers arrested in June after a demonstration in Bujumbura protesting against a new tax were reportedly beaten in custody and made to sign self-incriminat-ing statements.
About 60 people were arrested in late September and early October, including Alfred Ntahimpera, a nurse from Mabayi
BURUNDI
district in Cibitoke province, reportedly accused of illegally supplying identity cards to returning refugees, and Abdallah Sibomana, a former refugee who was arrested in Gitega. He was reportedly tortured by members of the security forces. Both he and Alfred Ntahimpera were held without trial at Mpimba prison at the end of 1991.
Elsewhere, detainees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated in Kirundo, Gitega and Bujumbura provinces. In Kirundo's Ntega district, for example, two Hutu were reportedly kept lying on a bare floor for several days with their arms tied behind their backs. In Gitega, Emmanuel Nkunzi-mana, an employee of a brick factory, was said to have been severely beaten after his arrest in September by members of the security forces who also pierced his genitals with a sharp object. He was later made to appear on television and repeat a "confession" he had made under torture. Hutu prisoners including Isidore Ciiza held at Bubanza gendarmerie brigade were for several weeks deprived of food in December and some reportedly died as a result.
About 35 people arrested by the security forces in the aftermath of the November attacks reportedly "disappeared": unofficial sources alleged that they had been detained but the authorities denied they were ever in custody and there were fears that they may have been killed.
In June Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government with proposals to ensure that human rights were guaranteed and protected by the new constitution. The organization pressed for an impartial investigation into alleged extrajudicial executions, torture and other human rights violations, and called for the introduction of safeguards to prevent their recurrence, In response to inquiries by Amnesty International, the authorities said that those arrested from March 1991 onwards were members of palipehutu seeking to overthrow the government and commit murder. They denied that any were prisoners of conscience and said that they would be quickly brought to trial.
