BRAZIL
Hundreds of children and adults were killed by death squads. Members and leaders of rural trade unions and their advis-ers were killed or threatened with death; in the vast majority of such cases the Brazilian authorities persistently failed to
take effective action to prevent the crimes. Investigations were not completed into the 1990 killings of three members of indigenous communities in the state of Pemam-buco. Torture and ill-treatment of people in police custody continued to be reported. Twenty-four inmates of a prison in Rio de Janeiro died as a result of a fire allegedly started by prison officers. Evidence emerged about human rights violations under previous governments. A proposal to reintroduce the death penalty for certain crimes was under consideration by Congress.
Hundreds of street children and adults were killed by death squads. National figures for killings of children and young adults were difficult to corroborate, but a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry reportedly found that some 7,000 homeless children had been killed in urban Brazil over the previous foiur years. Many had been killed by death squads formed by off-duty police officers. According to official figures, there were 306 recorded killings of children and adolescents in the state of Rio de Janeiro alone.
In January a working group to combat the killing of street children, established by the federal Minister of Justice, published a number of recommendations. The group compiled a list of seven test cases of violence against children and adolescents for investigation by the authorities. By the end of the year none of these cases had resulted in a conviction. In June the Federal Parliament set up a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry to investigate the killings of children and adolescents. The Commission was expected to report its findings by early 1992. In October President Fernando Collor de Mello announced the creation of a
BRAZIL
Federal Council for the Rights of Children and Adolescents.
hi January the Minister of Health and the Child accused businessmen of funding death squads, allegedly to "clean up" their neighbourhoods by removing robbers and petty thieves, hi September a Rio de Janeiro State legislative Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the killing of children and adolescents found strong evidence that police and members of the judiciary were involved with death squads. The Commission stated that the vast majority of the crimes remained unpunished.
Among the cases reported by the Commission was that of a former Police Commissioner for Minors, who was sentenced to six years in prison for the killing of a 15-year-old boy, but he did not serve his sentence. The Commission expressed astonishment at the authorities' failure to enforce the prison sentence, given that the whereabouts of the former Commissioner were widely known.
In the state of Pemambuco, between January 1986 and July 1991, there were 460 recorded killings of people under 18 years of age. In only 118 of the cases was a police inquiry completed and sent to the judiciary. In none of them was the accused brought to trial. However, in October in Sao Paulo, a military court sentenced two military policemen to prison terms of 19 years and eight months. They had been convicted of killing an adolescent and seriously injuring another in May.
Members of the judiciary who attempted to pursue legal proceedings against death squad members received death threats. Tania Maria Salles Moreira, Public Prosecutor of Duque de Caxias, Rio de Janeiro state, well known for prosecuting members of death squads accused of killings, was placed imder police protection in February. She had reportedly received telephone death threats at work and at home.
One of the cases in which street children were killed was that of a 13-year-old boy killed in January in Rio de Janeiro, allegedly by a security guard who had been given the status of an ad hoc justice officer by a judge. A witness to the killing who had been prepared to testify in court, street child Marco Antonio Costa. Silva, was assaulted in September, allegedly by members of the same firm that employed- the security guard. His body was soaked in
paraffin and glue was poured over his head. In October he was shot and wounded by two unknown gunmen in Praça do Pacificador, a public square in Duque de Caxias, Rio de Janeiro. Marco Antonio Costa Silva was said to have subsequently been given police protection.
By the end of 1991 no one had been charged with the abduction of 11 people (including five minors) in July 1990, from a farm in Magé, Rio de Janeiro (see Amnesty International Report 1991). They were reportedly abducted by police officers, and their whereabouts remained unknown.
Human rights activists were also victims of death-squad-type killings and threats. On 13 August Fausto Ribeiro da Silva, a lawyer working for the Urban Squatters Movement, was killed by unknown gunmen in Sao Miguel Paulista, Sao Paulo East. Nobody had been brought to justice for the killing by the end of the year.
Peasants, trade union leaders, advisers and campaigners for peasant rights continued to be the targets of death threats and killings in rural areas, particularly in Para and other states of the north and northeast. According to figures from the Comissdo Pastoral da Terra (cpt). Pastoral Land Commission, 41 people were killed in incidents related to land disputes in 1991. By the end of the year no one had been convicted for these crimes. The persistent failure of the authorities to identify those responsible for such abuses and bring them to justice helped to create a climate of impunity that encouraged further violations of human rights.
On 2 February Expedito Ribeiro de Souza, President of the Rural Union Workers of Rio Maria, Parâ state, was shot dead 200 metres from his home. He had been receiving death threats for more than a year. Expedito Ribeiro de Souza was the sixth leader of the Rio Maria Union to be killed since 1985. Three people were arrested for his killing. One of them, the person who allegedly ordered the crime, was freed on bail awaiting trial. A priest and four rural workers from the same town were placed under police protection after receiving death threats.
Official investigations into the killing of three members of indigenous communities at the end of 1990 made little progress and had stalled by the end of 1991. The victims were members of the Truka and Atikum commimities in the state of Pemambuco.
BRAZIL
Community leaders made repeated attempts to draw the attention of the state and federal authorities to the dangers faced by the communities. However, little action was taken against state officials who allegedly threatened the communities with violence, despite being responsible for protecting them.
Antonio Gilvan da Cruz, a Truka Indian, was abducted, tortured and killed and his body mutilated in November 1990. The Truka community had recently protested at the enclosure by a local landowner of a piece of land identified by the authorities as Indian territory. The family of Antonio Gilvan da Cruz, who believed that his abduction had been in part a police operation, was refused permission to see a lineup of local civil police personnel.
Abdon Leonardo da Silva was killed in December 1990 four months after being elected leader of the Atikum community in Floresta. His brother Abdias Joao da Silva was killed at the same time. Abdon Leonardo da Silva had travelled to Brasilia in April and September that year to complain about staff of the government's Indian Protection Agency, who he alleged were involved in illicit activities and had threatened him and other members of the community. He had repeatedly but unsuccessfully sought protection from the authorities. He left signed statements at the regional headquarters of the Fundagao Naciona} do Indio, National Indian Foundation, and gave press interviews drawing attention to his fears. Following the killings of Abdon and Abdias da Silva, their mother identified two of the alleged assailants, who were known to her, and a third was identified by another witness. According to reports, the civil police made no attempt to apprehend the suspects, claiming that they had no transport.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police custody continued to be reported. On 23 July Miriam Fires Medeiros was taken to a police station in Queimados, Rio de Janeiro, for questioning about stolen goods. According to her statement, during interrogation police officers insulted her, sexually assaulted her, attempted to make her perform oral sex, beat her and gave her electric shocks. She was released later the same day without charge. In response to Amnesty International's expression of concern about the case, a police inquiry was set up and a police officer was charged
with indecent assault.
On 22 September Maiu-o Martins Solano, aged 17, was detained by agents of the civil police near his home in Cuiabá, Mato Grosso. Accused of theft, Mauro Martins Solano was taken to Santa Isabel police station where he was allegedly severely beaten and his head forced under water. He died on the same day in the police station, in the arms of his wife, who had been taken to the station later that day. According to the official death certificate, Mauro Martins Solano died from suffocation by being submerged in water. Two policemen were charged with his death, Street children from Cuiabá reported that they had been routinely beaten and tor-tiued by the police, allegedly to extract contributions from their petty robberies.
Twenty-foiur inmates died as a result of a fire, allegedly started by prison officers, in a prison in Rio de Janeiro. Prison officers initially said that the fire was started by the inmates during a riot at the Ary Franco maximum security prison. Other sources later alleged that an incendiary device had been thrown into a cell by prison guards. Two prison guards were reportedly arrested and charged in connection with the deaths. A report by the Rio de Janeiro branch of the Brazilian Bar Association, described conditions in the Ary Franco prison as "unbearable".
Evidence came to light during 1991 about past human rights violations. Human remains exhumed iñ July from the Dom Bosco Cemetery, at Perus, Sao Paulo, were identified by forensic scientists as being those of three political detainees ft'om the 1970s. A mass grave containing more than 3,000 bodies was found in a public cemetery in Rio de Janeiro. Among the unidentified bodies, the grave was believed to contain the remains of 13 political prisoners arrested during the years of military government (1964 to 1985).
A proposal for a constitutional amendment which would allow the death penalty to be reintroduced for certain crimes was being considered by Congress. If the constitutional amendment were passed by Parliament, public opinion would have to be polled within 18 months to ratify the amendment. In August the proposal was returned to the Constitution and Justice Commission for further study, following questions in parliament regarding its constitutionality.
BRAZiiyBRUNEI DARUSSALAM
In May Brazil's Minister of Health and the Child visited Amnesty International. The Minister outlined a number of specific measures undertaken by the government to combat violence against children and adolescents. Amnesty International welcomed the measures but noted that so far the legislative and administrative measures taken by the Brazilian authorities seemed to have had no significant impact on the incidence of violence against children.
In June Amnesty International sent a delegate to Brazil to join the organization's Brazilian Section in its campaign against the possible reintroduction of the death penalty.
In August Amnesty International issued a report, KiUings of Members of the Truka and Atikum Indigenous Communities in Pemambuco State. The organization called on the authorities to investigate thoroughly the killings of three members of the Truka and Atikum commimities, to investigate allegations of official complicity, to bring those responsible to justice and to guarantee the safety of members of both communities.
In September Amnesty International wrote to the president of the Federal Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the killing of children and adolescents. Amnesty International drew to the Commission's attention unsolved cases of killings by death squads and the police. It also submitted cases of beatings, threats and harassment of street children by the police in Sao Paulo. The organization stated its belief that the persistent failure of the authorities to identify those responsible for such abuses and bring them to justice has helped to create a climate of impunity that encourages further human rights violations against children.
In November Amnesty International published a report, Torture of Street Children in Police Custody in Cuiaba, Mate Grosso. The organization called for allegations of the torture of Mauro Martins Solano and other street children in Cuiaba to be thoroughly investigated and for those responsible to be brought to justice.
