CHINA
Thousands of pohtical prisoners remained in prison, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience. Scores of prisoners of con* science were serving prison sentences but others were detained without charge or trial. At least 26 prominent pro-democracy activists were sentenced to terms of imprisonment in early 1991 after highly publicized political trials. Political and religious activists, including Tibetan nationalists, continued to be arrested and hundreds of thousands of people were held without charge under various forms of administrative detention. Trials continued to fall far short of international fair trial standards. Torture of detainees by police and harsh prison conditions were frequently reported. The dramatic increase in the use of the death penalty that began in 1990 continued. Amnesty International recorded 1,650 death sentences and 1,050 executions, but believed that the true number was far higher.
The police and security forces continued to exercise extensive powers of arbitrary arrest and detention under a variety of laws and government regulations. Public meetings and demonstrations remained severely restricted. No public inquiry was known to have been carried out into the 1989 kiUings of more than 1,000 civilians by government forces in Beijing; nor was there any inquiry into the killings of Tibetan demonstrators by security forces in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, between 1987 and 1989.
In November the government issued a "white paper" defending its human rights record, which argued that the most fundamental human right was the right to
subsistence. The report did not mention individual cases of prisoners. It denied that there were any political prisoners in China, stating that "ideas alone, in the absence of action which violates the criminal law, do not constitute a crime". While describing at length certain rights and procedures provided by Chinese law, the report failed to acknowledge that human rights violations occurred both imder and in breach of the law. It conceded, however, that there was still "much room for improvement" and said China was ready to work with the rest of the world to uphold and promote human rights. Publication of the report followed changes in the government's traditional refusal to discuss human rights issues with foreign governments. Several foreign delegations were admitted to discuss such issues.
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience arrested in connection with the 1989 pro-democracy protests were held in prison throughout 1991, but the fate of thousands of others remained unknown. Many were held without charge or trial, but some were serving prison sentences imposed after unfair trials.
In the first three months of the year at least 26 prominent dissidents were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary" offences after highly publicized and grossly unfair trials in Beijing. Most of them had been held for more than a year without charge.
On 5 January nine political prisoners were convicted of "counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitation" by Beijing's Intermediate People's Court after a two-hour trial. Seven were se itenced to prison terms ranging from two to foiu years; two were "exempted from criminal punishment". Among those sentenced were four student leaders from a list of 21 "most wanted" students issued by the government after the Jime 1989 crackdown. On 26 January three prisoners of conscience -Wang Dan, Ren Wanding and Bao Zunxin
-	were sentenced by the same court to prison terms ranging from four to seven years. They were convicted of "counterrevolutionary propaganda and agitation" (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Two others - Guo Haifeng and Yao Yvmlin
—	were sentenced to four and two years' imprisonment respectively on charges of "counter-revolutionary sabotage". On 12 February Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao,
CHINA
two intellectuals accused of masterminding the 1989 protests, were both sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment and a further four years' deprivation of political rights (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Less prominent dissidents and those tried outside Beijing often received more severe sentences, but details of such trials were rarely publicized. It emerged that Chen Lantao, a pro-democracy activist from Shandong province, had been sentenced in September 1989 to 18 years' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary" offences.
The authorities announced in April that 787 people had been tried in Beijing in 1990 in connection with the pro-democracy protests. However, they did not account for the thousands of others who had been detained. The authorities also stated in early 1991 that 69 dissidents had been released or exempted from criminal punishment in the previous months. Several other prisoners of conscience were released later in the year. Among them was Luo Haixing, a Hong Kong businessman, who was freed in September. He had been sentenced in March 1991 to five years' imprisonment after being convicted of "harbouring" dissidents Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao who were trying to flee the country.
About 200 advocates of Tibetan independence, including Buddhist monks and nuns, were believed to be detained in Lhasa. Some had been held without charge or trial for up to three years. In April the authorities reported that 1,025 people had been arrested diuing pro-independence demonstrations in Tibet since September 1987: of these, they said, 807 had been released and 218 had either been sentenced by the courts or "sent to receive re-education through labour".
Jampa Ngodrup, a medical doctor in Lhasa, was reported to have been sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment in December 1990 for compiling a list of political prisoners and "passing it on to others". Thupten Tsering, a technician, and Tseten Norgyal, a clerk, were sentenced in February 1991 to prison terms of five and four years respectively for printing and distributing leaflets advocating Tibetan independence.
Several dozen of the more than ICQ Roman Catholic priests, bishops and lay leaders arrested in the previous two years
remained in prison, some without charge or trial. A few were reportedly released in mid-1991.
Dozens of political and religious activists, advocates of Tibetan independence and others were arrested during the year. Some were released but others remained held without charge or trial at the end of the year. Among Tibetans arrested were five monks from Toelung Dechen who were detained in March when they unftuled a Tibetan nationalist flag. A witness alleged that the monks were beaten by officers of the Public Security Bureau. In Inner Mongolia, two intellectuals - Wang Manglai and Huchin Togos - were arrested in April in connection with a crackdown on two "illegal organizations" accused of "instigating ethnic divisions" in the region. A third. Ulaanshuvuu, was reportedly detained in late July and other members of the banned organizations were reportedly placed under surveillance. The three men were believed to be still held without charge or trial at the end of 1991.
Some 60 Roman Catholics were detained in mid-December 1990 in Hebei province for their involvement in peaceful religious activities. They belonged to the "underground" church, which remains loyal to the Vatican and refuses to join the official church. Most were detained for short periods, but at least a dozen were reported to be still held without charge or trial at the end of 1991. Unofficial sources reported that a new crackdown on "illegal" rehgious groups had been launched by the authorities in late 1991. Members of independent Protestant groups were reportedly arrested in several provinces, but few details were available.
Hundreds of thousands of people were held without charge or trial under various forms of administrative detention. Some were political or religious dissidents, but the overwhelming majority were people of low social status - vagrants, the unemployed, rural migrants and people regarded as "social deviants". Regulations which permit administrative detention without judicial approval or review, and illegal practices which have become the norm, continued to facilitate prolonged detention without charge or trial.
According to official soiuces some 50,000 people are sent each year to labour camps under a law on "re-education through labour", which allows detention
CHINA
without charge or trial for up to four years. Among those held in such camps in 1991 was 75-year-old Father Francis Wang Yijim, the Vicar-General of Wenzhou diocese in Zhejiang province. He was sentenced in February 1990 to three years' "re-education through labour". The order, issued on the day he completed an eight-year prison sentence as a prisoner of conscience, stated that Father Wang Yijun "still refused to repent".
Trials continued to fall far short of international standards for fairness. Minimum standards for fair trial are not provided for in Chinese law. such as the right to have adequate time and facilities to prepare a defence, the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty in a court of law, and the right to cross-examine prosecution witnesses and to call defence witnesses. In practice, in China the verdict and sentence are often decided by the authorities before the trial. Extreme limitations on the role of defence lawyers, the use of torture to induce "confessions", and interference by political authorities in the judicial process are other major obstacles to fair trial.
Many of these features applied in the cases of the pro-democracy activists tried in Beijing in early 1991. They also applied in the case of Tang Yuanjuan, who was sentenced in 1990 to 20 years' imprisonment. His four co-defendants received sentences ranging fi-om two to 13 years. The five, all employees in a car factory in Changchun, were charged with involvement in a "counter-revolutionary group", The trial, heard before the Changchun Intermediate People's Court on 27 November 1990, was a mere formality. The public prosecutor reportedly stated that the case had been collectively analysed by the police, procuracies and local courts, and had been "agreed upon" by the relevant leaders of the city and province. At the end of the one-day trial the judgment and sentences were announced, apparently having been prepared in advance. An appeal against the verdict was rejected by the High People's Court of Jilin province in March 1991.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners continued to be reported. The methods of torture most commonly cited included severe beatings, shocks with electric batons and the use of shackles in positions deliberately intended to inflict pain. Deprivation of sleep or food, exposure to cold and
being made to adopt exhausting physical postures were also reported to be common during interrogation.
Many allegations of torture and ill-treatment concerned Tibetan political detainees. On 27 April Lobsang Tsondrue, a 76-year-old Buddhist monk and prisoner of conscience, was reportedly beaten severely in Drapchi prison, Lhasa, with about 20 other political prisoners. Lobsang Tsondrue, who was reportedly seen with bloodstains on his face and clothes after the incident, was later held in solitary confinement for a prolonged period. Another Tibetan political prisoner in Drapchi prison, Lhakpa Tsering, was reported to have died on 15 December 1990 owing to lack of medical care. He had reportedly been beaten by prison guards shortly before his death. To Amnesty International's knowledge, no public inquiries were carried out into allegations of torture or ill-treatment.
Many prisoners were reported to have fallen ill owing to harsh prison conditions. In August Wang Juntao, who had hepatitis, and Chen Ziming went on hunger-strike in protest against prison conditions. The two men, along with three other prisoners of conscience, had been held in solitary confinement in Beijing's Prison No. 2 for several months following their trial in February on "coimter-revolutionary" charges. They were reported in September to have ended the hunger-strike when Wang Juntao was transferred to a prison hospital.
The dramatic increase in the use of the death penalty begun in 1990 during an anti-crime campaign continued in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In May the government announced that it was stepping up the anti-crime campaign by assigning military units to help the police. More than 1,650 death sentences and 1,050 executions were recorded by Amnesty International, but the organization believed the actual figures were much higher. Many defendants were tried under legislation which allows for summary procedures in death penalty cases: several people were tried and executed within a few days of being arrested. Groups of prisoners sentenced to death were taken to mass sentencing rallies and paraded in public before execution, a practice which in Amnesty International's view constitutes degrading treatment.
CHINA/COLOMBIA
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to press for the release of prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial of all political prisoners and for commutation of all death sentences. However, the Chinese authorities did not reply directly to any of these appeals, nor allow the organization to attend political trials or visit the country.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in China for United Nations (un) review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503. for confidential consideration of communications about situations of gross and systematic human rights violations. In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to concerns in China: the detention and unfair trials of pro-democracy activists charged with "counter-revolution-ary" activities, the rise in the number of executions, and the lack of safeguards against the use of torture.
The organization also published several reports about human rights violations in China: in February, The Death Penalty in 1990 and Trials of Dissidents: Sentences and Releases in Reijing-, in April, Violations of Human Rights and Trials and Punishments since 1989; in July, The Case of Tang Yuanjuan; in September, Punishment Without Crime: Administrative Detention; and in October, Recent Reports on Political Prisoners and Prisoners of Conscience in Tibet.
