PAPUA NEW GUINEA
	> % Í
' 'g	«v.- ,.
	
	
r	
	Q >
Dozens of suspected supporters of a secessionist group were reportedly extrajudicially executed by government forces; others were detained and reportedly tortured and ill-treated. Torture and ill-treat-ment of criminal suspects was also common. Parliament restored the death penalty for wilful murder.
The government of Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu announced a series of proposals in March aimed at stemming violent crime, including the tattooing of convicted criminals, the imposition of curfews and the restoration of the death penalty.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA/PARAGUAY
Legislation restricting public assembly was introduced in June. In October the Minister of Justice expressed concern at the "widespread abuse of human rights" in the country and urged the establishment of a judicial commission of inquiry into human rights violations.
The political status of Bougainville, where an interim government declared independence in May 1990, remained unresolved. In January representatives of the national government and Bougainville's interim government signed the Honiara Declaration, which provided for the restoration of essential services to the island under the supervision of a Multinational Supervisory Team. However, in April government troops landed in Bougainville and sporadic fighting with the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (bra) resumed. There were persistent reports of human rights violations by government forces in northern Bougainville and neighbouring Buka Island. There were also reports of human rights abuses by the bra, including the torture and killing of civilians.
The military commander for Bougainville, Colonel Leo Nuia, was dismissed in June after he confirmed a report, earlier documented by Amnesty International, that soldiers had extrajudicially killed a parish priest and five others in February 1990 and dumped their bodies at sea. The government promised to investigate all human rights violations on Bougainville since 1989. but later said it would not do so until the Bougainville crisis was resolved.
Dozens of suspected bra supporters were reportedly extrajudicially executed by government forces on Buka Island; the bodies of many of the victims were badly mutilated or burned. Eleven young men from Hetan village were reportedly tortured and then killed by Papua New Guinea Defence Force soldiers on 12 March. Eye-witnesses said that some appeared to have been burned to death.
More than 130 people were held without trial by security forces for several months on Buka Island and in Rabaul. A number of suspected bra members were reportedly arrested on Buka Island in December 1990 and in January. Most were reportedly released without charge in May.
Political detainees and criminal suspects were routinely ill-treated and tor-
tured by government security forces and prison officials. According to one eyewitness, dozens of bra suspects arrested on Buka Island in January were stripped, beaten and burned with cigarettes by soldiers.
In November nine criminal suspects held at Keravat jail in East New Britain alleged that they had been assaulted and ill-treated by prison officials. Wayake Komane said that he had been forced to drink toilet-water, to eat dirt and ash, and to suck and swallow the pus from other prisoners' open sores. Prison officials reportedly prevented a judge ft'om entering the jail when he returned for a second visit to investigate the allegations.
The death penalty, abolished for all crimes except treason and piracy in 1974, was restored for wilful murder in August. No death sentences had been handed down by the end of the year.
Four asylum-seekers from Irian Jaya, Indonesia, who had been forcibly returned by the Papua New Guinea authorities in December 1989 despite fears that they would be at risk of serious human rights violations, became prisoners of conscience in Indonesia (see Indonesia/East Timor entry). After unfair trials there, they received sentences ranging from 12 to 17 years.
Amnesty International again urged the government to initiate thorough investigations into human rights violations committed by government forces on Bougainville since 1989, and to bring the perpetrators to justice. The government replied in September saying that it had "no immediate plan" to conduct investigations. Amnesty International also expressed concern to the government about the forcible return of asylum-seekers to Indonesia and in September expressed deep regret at the restoration of the death penalty.
