FRANCE
Hundreds of conscientious objectors to the national service laws, the vast majority of them Jehovah's Witnesses, were considered prisoners of conscience. There were reports of ill-treatment in police custody.
The alternative civilian service available to recognized conscientious objectors remained twice the length of ordinary military service. Conscientious objectors who refused to conform to the national service laws continued to receive prison sentences.
According to unofficial estimates, over 500 Jehovah's Witnesses were imprisoned during the year for refusing military service. Amongst them were Eric Pawlac, Christophe Komorski and Frédéric Laboulais. They had not applied for conscientious objector status because they also rejected, on religious grounds, the option of alternative civilian service. On 11 January a Bordeaux court sentenced all three to 15 months' imprisonment for refusing to perform military service.
A few imprisoned conscientious objectors had been refused conscientious objector status on the grounds that they applied
FRANCE/GAMBIA
after their call-up orders had been issued.
Tristan Defosse applied for conscientious objector status on 21 January, unaware that the stipulated time limit had passed. When ordered to report for active duty at an air force base on 5 February, he protested to the authorities. He was told that if he reported to the base his situation would be resolved. On arrival at the base, he declared his conscientious objection to military service and refused to put on military uniform. He was arrested, charged with refusal to obey orders, and on 21 February sentenced to four months' imprisonment. He was released in early April and a second application for conscientious objector status was granted on 16 April. The Ministry of Defence stated that it had been granted as an "exceptional measure".
Allegations of ill-treatment in police custody often concerned immigrants and French citizens of North African origin.
Aissa Ihich, of Moroccan origin and a chronic asthmatic, was arrested on 25 May during a disturbance in Mantes-la-Jolie, near Paris. He died in police custody approximately 36 hours later, after a severe asthma attack. He was allegedly beaten by the police at the time of arrest; a medical certificate issued dm-ing his detention and a subsequent autopsy report both recorded injuries to his head and body caused by blows, It was also alleged that during his detention he was deprived of medication to alleviate his asthma and held in conditions likely to exacerbate it.
His family made a judicial complaint about his treatment and a judicial inquiry was immediately opened. The Minister of the Interior also ordered the Inspection générale de la police nationale (igpn), General Inspectorate of the National Police, to
conduct an investigation. According to the court-appointed forensic specialists, Aissa Ihich's death resulted Irom his asthma. Further forensic tests were apparently unable to establish any direct causal link between blows to his head and pelvis and the onset of the fatal asthma attack. The judicial inquiry was continuing at the end of the year.
In January the judge responsible for investigating the alleged ill-treatment of Abdelaziz Gabsi and Kamel Djellal by police in Echirolles in December 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) ruled that there were no grounds on which to proceed. Abdelaziz Gabsi and Kamel Djellal appealed against the decision.
A judicial inquiry into Lucien Djos-souvi's allegations of ill-treatment by the police in Paris in September 1989 (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991) had not concluded by the end of the year.
Amnesty International considered that, because of its punitive length, civilian service did not provide an acceptable alternative to military service. It also considered that individuals should be able to seek conscientious objector status at any time. The organization appealed throughout the year for the release of conscientious objectors whom it considered to be prisoners of conscience. It expressed concern to the authorities about allegations of ill-treatment in police custody and asked to be informed about the progress and outcome of inquiries opened into such allegations.
