AUSTRALIA
The Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody published its final report. Allegations of ill-treatment during police interrogation were published in the Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission (hreoc) report on racist violence.
AUSTRALIA/AUSTRIA
Australia acceded to the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in September.
The Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody published its final report in May, the result of a three-year inquiry into 99 Aboriginal deaths in custody (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1991]. It concluded that none of the 99 deaths had resulted from unlawful, deliberate killing, as had been alleged in some cases. However, it foimd that there were "glaring deficiencies" in the standard of care afforded to many of the deceased which, in some cases, directly contributed to their deaths. Some commissioners recommended that their reports of inquiries into individual deaths should be forwarded to the appropriate authorities to decide whether criminal proceedings or disciplinary action should be taken against officials. In the final report one commissioner "strongly suggested" that the reports of all 99 deaths should be carefully studied and that, when appropriate, action should be taken against officials. At the end of the year no such actions had reportedly been taken.
A working party of state, territorial and federal government representatives was established to coordinate the government's response to the final report of the Royal Commission. The group was due to present a program for implementation of the Royal Commission's 339 recommendations in March 1992.
Evidence of police brutality to force confessions from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander juveniles was published in April in the hreoc report. Racist Violence: Report of the National Inquiry into Racist Violence. Most if not all of the alleged incidents had occurred in 1989 and 1990 during interrogations in police stations and lock-ups. Similar patterns of police behaviour in different states were revealed by the report. The federal government stated in late July that it was preparing a response to recommendations contained in the report, although to Amnesty International's knowledge none had been announced by the end of the year.
Amnesty International welcomed the Royal Commission's recommendations to strengthen safeguards against possible tor-tme or ill-treatment of Aboriginal prisoners and to improve procedures for investigating deaths in custody.
