SOMALIA
Thousands of people, including children, were killed in bitter fighting between rival political groups following the overthrow of President Mohamed Siad Barre's government in January. Some were victims of
SOMALIA
deliberate and targeted killings by the contending forces, including those of the interim government based in Mogadishu.
The government of President Siad Barre, in power since a coup in 1969, was overthrown in January. President Siad Barre fled to Gedo, in the south of the country, shortly before forces supporting the opposition United Somali Congress (use) captiu'ed Mogadishu, the capital. In the north, another opposition group, the Somali National Movement (snm), defeated the government's forces and took control of the territory comprising former British Somaliland. On 18 May the snm unilaterally declared this area independent as the Somaliland Republic, although this was not recognized internationally.
In Mogadishu the use chairman Ali Mahdi Mohamed was sworn in at the end of January as interim President of the renamed Somali Republic. However, his authority was not recognized by the snm or other groups. The following months saw intense fighting in both Mogadishu and the south, where groups opposed to the use government included troops loyal to Siad Barre.
Following the capture of Mogadishu by the use, most of whose members belong to the Hawiye clan, use forces summarily killed hundreds of people in February and March. The victims were mostly members of the Darod clan, to which former President Siad Barre's Marehan sub-clan belongs, but not all were supporters of the former president. For example, one of those killed was Ibrahim Mohamed Abyan, a former prisoner of conscience. The identities of many others could not be confirmed owing to the turmoil in Mogadishu. Other killings occurred outside Mogadishu. On
21 February use forces killed up to 200 unarmed civilians in Belet Weyne, a Darod clan area 200 kilometres north of the capital. There were other reports of summary executions of civilians in the south, where there was continuing conflict dming the year.
The situation within Mogadishu deteriorated further following a split within the use in May between supporters of President Ali Mahdi and those of the use's military commander, General Mohamed Farah Hassan (known as "Aideed"). The factions, representing different Hawiye sub-clans, were responsible for widespread destruction, looting and other abuses, including killings of unarmed civilians. The fighting and destruction escalated towards the end of the year, with an estimated 5,000 killed and 15,000 wounded in Mogadishu, mainly as a result of apparently indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas by both sides. The dead and injured included many children. Hundreds of thousands of people fled from the violence and ensuing food shortages to the rival areas or to neighboiuing countries.
Some political prisoners were still held by the Siad Barre government at the beginning of 1991 despite a general amnesty in November 1990. One of them, Mohamoud Ismail Guled, an army officer jailed since 1981, escaped from the Central Prison in Mogadishu in mid-January. All other prisoners were freed when President Siad Barre's forces fled, but two long-term prisoners were imaccounted for: Hussein Mohamed Nur, an Eritrean aircraft technician detained in Labatan Jirow prison since 1976, and Ahmed Dore Farah, a judge held in the same prison since 1979.
It was unclear whether any political prisoners were held by the use government headed by President Ali Mahdi, or by the other use faction led by General "Aideed". No details of any prisoners were available and it appeared that captives were siun-marily executed by both sides to the conflict.
In the north, snm forces took an unknown number of prisoners, mostly army personnel and civilian officials, when they captiued Berbera and other towns in January. Some were said to have been released later but this could not be confirmed. Others, including some officials of the former government, were said to have been executed in Hargeisa after summary
SOMALIA/SOUTH AFRICA
trials for alleged criminal offences.
Amnesty International was greatly concerned by the widespread abuses which accompanied the spiralling violence in Mogadishu and attempted to obtain information about the victims of extrajudicial executions and other gross human rights violations. The general breakdown of order in the coimtry, and especially in Mogadishu, made it particularly difficult to get detailed information or to identify who was responsible for specific abuses.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Somalia for United Nations review under a procediure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503 for confidential consideration of communications about hiunan rights violations.
