BENIN
Five human rights activists were briefly detained. Two other government critics who were held for several months awaiting trial were possible prisoners of conscience. Two security officials were arrested in connection with the death in custody of a prisoner in 1984.
Parliamentary elections in February and a two-stage presidential election in March
BENin/BERMUDA
completed the transition to a democratically elected government which had been begun in February 1990 by the National Conference (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Nicephore Soglo, who had headed the transitional government, was elected President of the Republic, defeating former President Mathieu K6r6kou. The former President was then granted a specific personal immimity from prosecution covering the 19 years since his seizure of power in 1972. Several associates of the former President, however, were arrested or held in custody awaiting trial on corruption charges.
The immunity granted to former President Kérékou provoked protest in view of the many cases of torture and killings of prisoners which had occurred under his government. In April five hirnian rights activists, all members of the Ligue pour la défense des droits de l'homme au Benin, Benin League for the Defence of Human Rights, were arrested while demonstrating against the immunity. They included the League's President, Maître Yansannu Magloire. All were held for three days at Cotonou's central police station. They appeared before a procmator who dismissed their case and criticized the police for bringing the prisoners before him in handcuffs.
Three people suspected of distributing a tract commenting on divisions between the north and the south of the country were arrested in May in Parakou, apparently because the tract was considered critical of the government. They were charged with public order offences and inciting hatred, although the tract apparently did not advocate violence. One was provisionally released in June; the others, Boun Badorou
Sabi and Gani Aliou Robert Dabo, were provisionally released in November awaiting trial in February, and were possible prisoners of conscience.
Others still held awaiting trial at the end of the year included at least 27 people arrested in northern Benin in March during the second stage of the presidential election. In all, about 150 people were arrested in connection with an outbreak of violence. It was not clear whether those held had used or advocated violence.
Two senior security officials were arrested in August charged with murder, embezzlement and torture. The arrests followed a formal complaint to the courts by a former prisoner, Mohamed Diawara, who disclosed that Baldé Samba Tenin, another prisoner, had died in the custody of the presidential security services in 1984. His death was said to have been caused by ill-treatment.
Amnesty International sought information about the two prisoners detained in Parakou for distributing tracts. It also sought information about those arrested in connection with pre-election violence in the north to establish whether any of them might be prisoners of conscience.
