NORWAY
Three prisoners of conscience, all conscientious objectors to military service, began serving prison sentences. All three completed their sentences and were released. A Palestinian student was allegedly ill-treated in police custody. Two Iranian asylum-seekers were imprisoned in Iran after being returned there against their will by the Norwegian authorities.
In September Norway ratified the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
The three prisoners of conscience were Petter Thaulow, imprisoned in January for
120 days; Sverre H0egh Krohn, imprisoned in July for 90 days; and Torbjem Bran-deggen, imprisoned in October for 90 days. All refused to perform military service because of their political beliefs. Their political objections were judged not to fulfil the requirements of Norwegian law on exemption from military service.
In January Hassan Salem, a Palestinian student at the University of Oslo, was allegedly ill-treated by the police after he participated in a demonstration against the Gulf War. At the time of his arrest, the police allegedly threw him to the ground and trampled on him. While in custody, he was allegedly kicked, beaten and subjected to verbal abuse by the police. At one point, they reportedly referred to him as "Little Saddam".
Following an investigation by the Special Committee for the Investigation of Police Conduct a police officer was fined in May for acts of negligence in Hassan Salem's case. When the officer refused to accept the fine, the case was taken to the Oslo Municipal Court. In October the officer was acquitted by the Municipal Court. The court decided that the grip used by the officer when apprehending Hassan Salem was a common police practice and was regarded as relatively safe. The court also ruled that Hassan Salem's injuries could not have been caused by this grip, and that "... it is more likely that Salem's injury was inflicted after he had been laid to the ground by the defendant".
In March the Norwegian Government forcibly returned to Iran a supporter of a left-wing Iranian opposition group after her asylum claim was rejected. Her husband had reportedly been imprisoned twice and tortured in recent years in Iran for
NORWAY/PAKISTAN
campaigning for workers' rights. She was imprisoned for 45 days on her return to Iran. Another Iranian asylum-seeker, a supporter of a monarchist opposition group, was returned to Iran in May after his claim was also rejected; he . was reportedly detained for 10 days on arrival and interrogated.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government in December that the Municipal Court's decision in Hassan Salem's case did not resolve the matter of how his injuries were sustained. The organization also raised questions about the fairness of proceedings against him, noting that he had not been present at the court hearing and had been denied access to documents relating to his case.
In June Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the forcible return of the two Iranian asylum-seekers who were reportedly detained as possible prisoners of conscience and placed at risk of torture after their return to Iran.
The organization also called for the release of Petter Thaulow, Sverre Heegh Krohn and Torbjorn Brandeggen.
