URUGUAY
Several detainees alleged they were tortured or ill-treated in police custody and there were reports of ill-treatment in prison. At least five police personnel were prosecuted for ill-treatment of detainees or unlawful killings, but other cases of torture and ill-treatment reported under the current administration remained unresolved. The impunity conferred by the Expiry Law on those who had committed human rights violations under the military govenunent continued to prevent the clarification of the fate of the "disappeared".
Several criminal suspects held in police custody in Montevideo presented formal complaints alleging that they had been tortured or ill-treated. In many of the cases of torture reported since President Luis Alberto Lacalle took office in 1990, judicial proceedings did not result in the identification and prosecution of those responsible, although considerable forensic evidence in support of specific allegations was presented to the courts. A complaint against the Comisaría de la Primera Seccional de Policía, the First District Police Station in Montevideo, was submitted to the courts on behalf of 17-year-old Alejandro Maid-ana and 18-year-old Julio Correa, who were allegedly beaten, kicked and hooded by police officers during interrogation there on 9 January. The complaint named the sergeant allegedly responsible for their ill-treatment and included a forensic doctor's report consistent with the allegations. However, by the end of the year both cases had been temporarily closed and those responsible had not been brought to justice.
Following several reports of ill-treat-ment and other police abuses at the beginning of the year, the Minister of the Interior announced the establishment of the Fiscalía Letrada Nacional de la Policía, the National Police Prosecutor's Office, to monitor internal administrative proceedings against members of the police accused of abuses. Major changes were made to the police hierarchy in March, following statements by the Interior Minister that neither the Ministry nor the police hierarchy would cover up for officials acting outside the law.
Isolated cases of torture and ill-treat-ment were reported towards the end of
URUGUAY
the year, but there appeared to be an improvement in the effectiveness of official investigations into such abuses. In November Juan Carlos González was arrested in a Montevideo bar and taken to the jefatura de PoUcía. Police Headquarters, were he was allegedly hooded, stripped and beaten. A forensic examination reportedly revealed injuries consistent with the allegations. Shortly after his release, two agents and an officer of the Narcotics Brigade were charged in connection with the ill-treat-ment. Several weeks later the Interior Minister announced that the head of the Narcotics Brigade had been dismissed from his post because it had been his responsibility to ensure compliance with the Ministry's express instructions that detainees should not be ill-treated.
The reported suicide in February of 16-year-old Rafael Berón Charquero in the Cárcel de Miguelete, a maximum secmity prison in Montevideo, drew attention to inadequate guarantees for the physical security of inmates. Rafael Berón Charquero was sent to Miguelete on 10 February on charges of sexually harassing his two younger sisters. Fellow inmates claimed that on his first day in prison he was beaten and suffered several attempts at rape. While the role played by prison guards in these events was unclear, they appeared to have done little to prevent the attacks. The next day, Rafael Berón Charquero apparently attempted to commit suicide and was found hanging in his cell, still conscious. He died in hospital after two weeks in a coma. An autopsy revealed severe bruising and cuts on his body, as well as signs consistent with allegations of 'attempted rape. To Amnesty International's knowledge, there was no investigation into his death, nor were measures taken to guarantee the physical safety of minors in Miguelete, despite reports of another suicide there in May.
Although the Interior Ministry had taken preliminary steps in late 1990 to investigate allegations of ill-treatment in Libertad prison and to monitor conditions there (see Amnesty International Report 1991), none of the prison deaths which occurred in disputed circumstances in 1990 appeared to have been clarified. Conditions in Libertad and certain other prisons reportedly continued to be harsh.
In March a policeman was convicted of the killing of Néstor Castillo Romero, shot
on arrest in the Capurro district of Montevideo in 1989 (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). A policeman was also prosecuted for the killing of another resident of Capurro, textile worker Raul Alberto González, who was shot dead at a party in March.
The 1986 Expiry Law (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1988) continued effectively to block investigations into killings, torture and "disappearances" committed in the period of military rule between 1973 and 1985, and relatives of the "disappeared" who persisted with their attempts to clarify the fate of their loved ones faced additional obstacles. In May a civil appeal court ruled against carrying out blood tests to ascertain the identity of an adopted 14-year-old boy whom Sara Méndez believed to be her "disappeared" son Simón (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). The appeal court stated that the blood test should be carried out in the course of a civil action questioning the legality of the adoption. Sara Méndez had requested that a criminal coxut investigate the possible illegality of the adoption in 1989, but this avenue had been barred to her in 1990 following the government's decision that the case was covered by the Expiry Law. In September Sara Méndez presented a request for nullification of the boy's adoption to a civil court, where proceedings were continuing at the end of the year.
Although fi'esh evidence had come to light in 1990 regarding government involvement in the "disappearance" of teacher Elena Quinteros in 1976 (see Amnesty International Report 1991), the authorities took no measures to investigate her fate nor that of other people who "disappeared" under military rule.
In November Amnesty International published a report, Uruguay: Torture and ill-treatment after six years of civilian rule. The report stated that while torture and ill-treatment did not appear to be a widespread practice nor part of government policy, the lack of effective investigations into some of the cases reported under the current administration may have served to encourage the persistence of such practices. The report welcomed the measxues introduced to prevent police abuses and urged the government to implement an effective program to eradicate torture.
