TOGO
Major political reforms were accompanied by detailed revelations about past hiunan rights abuses. At least 20 political prisoners were released in an amnesty
TOGO
announced in April. Before the reforms started in April, some demonstrators were extrajudicially executed and many others were subjected to ill-treatment.
Following demonstrations and strikes in support of political reform, and an upsurge in human rights violations, President Gnassingbé Eyadéma agreed in April to summon a National Conference to discuss the country's future and the introduction of a multi-party political system. Opposition political parties were legalized, an amnesty was announced for government opponents and the National Conference was convened in July. It elected Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, a human rights activist, as Prime Minister and he nominated a transitional government to hold power until elections planned for early 1992. President Eyadéma remained as head of state and retained the backing of the army. Relations between the new government and the army were tense and the army twice threatened to seize power in October. On 1 December the army finally took control, surrounding the Prime Minister's residence, taking him prisoner and killing his guards. Prime Minister Koffigoh then undertook to rescind a ban imposed on President Eyadéma's political party and to appoint a new government including members of President Eyadéma's party.
The first months of the year saw widespread anti-govemment protests and renewed human rights violations. In March soldiers broke up a peaceful students' meeting called to discuss the lack of facilities at a technical school in Adidogomé, near Lomé, and assaulted a number of the students, On 5 April soldiers opened fire on demonstrators who were trying to topple a statue of President Eyadéma, killing two of them. There were violent street protests during the following week and on 11 April, 28 bodies were discovered in the Bè lagoon near Lomé. The security forces were accused of responsibility for the killings: they denied any involvement and said that criminals had been responsible. The National Commission of Human Rights (nchr), established by the government in 1987. mounted an investigation. This concluded, on the basis of forensic and other evidence, that the victims had been extrajudicially executed by the security forces. Some of the victims had been killed in the water; others had apparently been killed before their bodies were
thrown into the lagoon.
The nchr and subsequently the National Conference both called on President Eyadéma to punish the perpetrators of the lagoon killings, but no action was apparently taken. Similarly, the authorities apparently failed to respond to revelations of past human rights violations which came to light during the year, mostly during the National Conference, in which the army, in particular, had been implicated.
One series of revelations concerned the treatment of inmates at a prison within the Centre de réinsertion sociale, Centre for Social Reintegration, at Kaza, a village in central Togo between Kazaboua and Agom-bio. Many prisoners, some of whom were political detainees and most of whom were held without charge or trial, were said to have died there in previous years. Some died from exhausting hard labour, ill-treatment or medical neglect; others were reported to have been extrajudicially executed. Some of those who survived had become paralysed and others were blind as a result of being forced to look directly at the sun.
Former prisoners also came forward during the National Conference to reveal that former Vice-President Idrissou Antoine Meatchi had been deliberately starved to death while detained in March 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985).
Serious human rights violations were also reported to have occurred over several years at Pya, President Eyadéma's home village, where a number of people had been arbitrarily arrested and accused of practising sorcery. Some had apparently been drowned or beaten to death. Others were arbitrarily banished to Mandouri, a town near the country's northern border, in some cases for up to 12 years. There, they had been forced to report regularly to and work for the local governor and police chiefs, and had not been allowed to leave the area. The nchr investigated some of their cases in February, following which an unspecified number of people who had been banished to Mandouri were released.
New information also came to light about extrajudicial executions and arbitrary detentions in the vicinity of game parks near Sansanne Mango, in northern Togo, where the security forces operated a shoot-to-kill policy against people entering the parks. Soldiers who detained suspected
TOGOARINIDAD AND TOBAGO
poachers instead of killing them were said to have been punished themselves. One of those killed was a man who was fishing with his teenage son when he was shot dead by five soldiers in December 1990. The boy was taken to the Civil Prison at Sansanne Mango where he was held until the nchr obtained his release in February 1991.
The National Conference called for these past human rights violations to be investigated, and for the government to acknowledge what had occurred and to seek the people's forgiveness. No steps were taken, however, by the authorities or the courts to investigate past violations.
Amnesty International called for an independent investigation into the lagoon killings and for the perpetrators to be brought to justice. In December Amnesty International expressed concern about the attack by the army on Prime Minister Koffigoh's residence and urged President Eyad6ma to take all possible steps to safeguard the human rights of anyone taken into custody by the army.
