ESTONIA
Estonia gained independence in Septem-her after over 50 years' incorporation in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (ussr). One execution was announced, amid allegations that it had been carried out extrajudicially, and one person was believed still under sentence of death at the end of the year.
Following the failed August coup in the Soviet Union, the State Council of the ussr recognized Estonia's independence. In September the republic, headed by President Arnold Riiiitel, became a member of the United Nations and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In October Estonia acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its first Optional Protocol; the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Following independence the Head of
the State and Border Defence Department, announcing plans for military conscription, was quoted as saying that "coercive methods" would be used against those not wishing to do military service. Call-up for this service, not exceeding 15 months in length, began in October. A law of March 1990, passed when conscription was for the Soviet Army, had established a program of alternative service lasting 30 months for conscientious objectors. There were no reports of people imprisoned for refusing conscription on grounds of conscience.
The Minister of Internal Affairs annoimced the first execution to have taken place in Estonia since 1968: previous sentences passed in Estonia had been carried out in the Russian Republic of the ussr. He said that Rein Oruste, who had been sentenced to death for murder, was executed on 11 September. However, unofficial sources alleged that Rein Oruste had been shot that day by prison officials while in the washroom in retaliation for an earlier altercation with prison guards. At least one other death sentence came to light, but it was not known if it had been carried out by the end of the year.
Amnesty International 'urged the authorities to ensiu-e that conscientious objectors continued to be offered a civilian alternative to military service, and that it be of non-punitive length. It asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to clarify the circumstances of Rein Oruste's execution and urged a moratorium on death sentences and executions, the commutation of all pending death sentences and the publication of full death penalty statistics. No substantive response to these concerns had been received by the end of the year, although President Riiiitel wrote affirming the republic's commitment to international human rights standards and stated that the death penalty was applied only rarely for especially grave crimes against Üie person.
