SYRIA
New arrests of suspected government opponents were reported and thousands of others, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained with-out charge or trial under state of emergency legislation in force since 1963. Others remained in prison after the expiry of their sentences. However, at least 2,400 untried political detainees, including 140 known prisoners of conscience, were released. Of those released, more than 1,000 were pardoned in December. Torture of political detainees was reported to be widespread and routine, and some detainees were held incommunicado for long periods. At least two people were executed.
In June Syria and Lebanon signed a Treaty of Brotherhood, Cooperation and Coordination providing for cooperation between the two countries on military, seciirity, economic and other matters. In September the two governments signed a Defence and Security Agreement which provided for. among other things, the
exchange of information about political suspects (see Lebanon entry).
Thousands of people arrested in previous years as suspected government opponents, including at least 230 prisoners of conscience, remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1991. Many were suspected members of prohibited political parties such as Hizb al-'Amal al-Shuyu'i, Party for Communist Action (pca); al-Hizb al-Shuyu'i al-Maktab al-Siyassi, Communist Party-Political Bureau (cppb); Ittihad al-Nidal al-Shuyu'i, Union for Communist Struggle (ucs) ; al- Tanzim al-Sh a 'bi al-Nasiri, Popular Nasserist Organization (PNo); al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun, Muslim Brotherhood; and the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party. Others were members of medical, engineering and other professions arrested in 1980 and 1981 after pubhcly demanding improvements in human rights in Syria. Some detainees had been arrested in place of relatives being sought by the authorities, or to punish further those already in detention. Hundreds of Palestinians, including suspected supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo), continued to be detained.
At least 11 PNO supporters, among them lawyers, doctors and teachers, were arrested in May and held without charge or trial. They included 'Abd al-Majid Man-jouneh, a prominent lawyer and former cabinet minister, who had been previously held in untried detention for nine years. He was released in July, together with Hassan Isma'il 'Abd al-'Azim, a lawyer and former member of the Syrian People's Assembly. The nine others were released at the end of the year. The arrests were believed to have been carried out in several cities by al-Amn al-'Askari (Mihtary Security). At least 10 other pno members or supporters, most of whom were arrested in 1986, remained in detention without charge or trial. Some of them were reported to be in poor health and to have been denied essential medical care.
Six members of a family of Syrian Jews were arrested in May on suspicion of attempting to flee the coimtry. Subhe and Lisa Kastika and their two infant sons, together with Subhe's brother, Sa'id, and his wife, Shaftqa, were held incommunicado for two weeks at a military base. All four adults were said to have been severely beaten. The two women and the infants were released after three weeks, but the
SYRIA
brothers were transferred to 'Adra Civil Prison near Damascus and subsequently released from untried detention in November. Two other Syrian Jews arrested in 1990 on suspicion of attempting to flee the country remained in untried detention in Aleppo Central Prison.
Aktham Nu'aysa, a lawyer from Lataqiyya, together with at least six others, was arrested on 18 December by members of al-Mukhabarat al-'Askariyya (Military Intelligence). They were reportedly arrested in connection with a written statement issued on 10 December by the Committees for the Defence of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria, which contained criticism of the re-election of President Hafez al-Assad to a seven-year term of office. All were said to have been tortured. One of the detainees was released after a few days, five were reported to be held incommunicado in the Military Interrogation Branch in Damascus, and Aktham Nu'aysa was admitted to Harasta Military Hospital as a result of torture, where he was reported to be held incommunicado.
At least 300 members of the pca, many of them prisoners of conscience arrested between 1980 and 1988, were believed to have remained in detention without trial. Among them were three brothers. Yasser Mulhim was arrested with his pregnant wife, Bayan Allaf, in 1987. Mundhir Mulhim and his wife, Asia al-Saleh, were also arrested in 1987. A third brother, Munif Mulhim, had been detained without charge or trial since 1981 in Tadmur Military Prison: he was said to have been severely tortured. Bayan Allaf and Asia al-Saleh were released in December.
Scores of other people arrested in previous years in place of relatives sought by the authorities, or to punish political opponents by imprisoning their relatives, remained in detention without charge or trial. Among them was Bara al-Sarraj, a student at Damascus University who was arrested at the Faculty of Engineering in March 1984 by al-Mukhabarat al-'Askariyya and detained in Tadmur Military Prison. The precise reason for his arrest was not known, but it was believed to be related to his family connection with Adnan Sa'ad al-Din, a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood living abroad.
Up to 100 members of the cppb, many of them prisoners of conscience arrested since 1980, were believed to have remained in
detention without trial. Among them were many of the party's leaders, including its First Secretary, Riad al-Turk, who remained in incorrununicado detention (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. His health deteriorated further in April and he was reportedly transferred to Tishrin Hospital in Damascus. He was returned to the Military Interrogation Branch two weeks later.
More than 140 members of the medical and engineering professions, including at least five prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without charge or trial. They were arrested in 1980 and 1981 following a one-day national strike in support of political reforms. Some of the prisoners of conscience were held in 'Adra Civil Prison, others in Saidnaya Prison or Tadmur Military Prison. The whereabouts of most of the others remained unknown.
Seventeen Ba'th Party members, among them former government ministers, continued to be detained without charge or trial: some had been held for over 20 years. All were reported to be in poor health, suffering mainly from stomach ulcers and high blood pressure, owing to prolonged imprisonment and inadequate medical care. Other long-term political detainees included suspected supporters of the pro-Iraqi Arab Sociahst Ba'th Party.
More than 2,400 untried political detainees, including 140 known prisoners of conscience, were released during 1991. In April, 41 pca members, all prisoners of conscience, were released. They included Wa'il al-Sawwah, 'Ali al-Kurdi, 'Imad Naddaf and 'Izzat al-Mahmud, all writers and journalists arrested in 1981 and 1982. In December more than 60 women prisoners of conscience associated with the pca were released. They included Hind Qahwa-ji, arrested in 1984, and Shafiqa al-'Ali and Fatima 'Abbas, both arrested in March 1986. Many others had been arrested between 1987 and 1988, some in place of family members being sought by the authorities, others who had relatives already in detention (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. Eight cppb members were released in April and September, among them Badr al-Din Shanan, who had been held since 1983. He was said to be suffering from a damaged heart muscle in 1988 as a result of torture during interrogation (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Another prisoner of conscience,
SYRIA
Salman al-'Abdallah, a former member of the National Command of the Ba'th Party in Syria, was released in September after 20 years in mitried detention. Two young Syrian Jews, Ramoun Ibrahim Darwish and Joseph Rafoul Sabato, were released from untried detention in November. They had been arrested in September 1990 on suspicion of attempting to flee the country.
In March an estimated 1,300 untried political prisoners were released, the majority of them Palestinians. At least 700 of them, all plo supporters, had been arrested by Syrian forces in Lebanon in previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Seven officers loyal to the former interim prime minister of Lebanon, General Michel 'Aoun, who were arrested by S5TÍan forces in Lebanon in October 1990 and taken to Syria, were released in March (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The fate of six other army officers and scores of supporters of General Aoun, who had been arrested at the same Üme, remained unknown.
The government announced on 14 December that 2,864 prisoners "who committed crimes against national security" had been pardoned and were to be released immediately. By 31 December more than 1,000 political prisoners, including 20 prisoners of conscience, were known to have been released. At least 600 of them were said to be members of the Muslim Brotherhood; an estimated 370 were Ba'thists, among them 70 Lebanese nationals; and 40 were suspected members of Harakat al-Tawhid al-Islami, the Islamic Unification Movement, all Lebanese nationals. The remainder were members of the cppb and the pga, or former members of the Syrian Engineers' Association.
Two members of the Jewish community, brothers Eli and Selim Swed, who had been held in imtried detention for over three years, were tried in camera and sentenced in May to six-and-a-half-year prison terms reportedly on charges of treason or espionage (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
The torture and ill-treatment of untried political detainees continued to be reported. A Palestinian, Muhammad Dawud (also known as Abu Dawud), died in custody in January reportedly after being denied medical treatment for injuries resulting fi'om torture during his detention and from ailments contracted as a result of prolonged
detention and poor prison conditions (see Amnesty International Report 1990). He was a senior plo member who had been held incommimicado since 1985. The authorities reportedly refused to release his body for biu-ial. Information was also received about the tortiue of political detainees in previous years.
At least two people were executed dm--ing the year. One was publicly hanged in Aleppo and the other in Lataqiyya, both in February: they had been convicted of murder. Reports that four other executions were carried out in Aleppo in October remained unconfirmed. Confirmation was received that two people convicted of murder had been executed in October 1990.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners but expressed its concern to President al-Assad about new political arrests and the continued detention without charge or trial, or after unfair trials, of hundreds of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners. Amnesty International was also concerned about new reports of torture and the continuing use of the death penalty.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in October and December to renew its proposal that a delegation from the organization should visit Syria to discuss hiunan rights, but there was no response. In January, however, the Defence Minister had replied to Amnesty International's appeals in October 1990 in relation to arrests and extrajudicial executions of supporters of General 'Aoim by Syrian forces in Lebanon (see Amnesty International Report 1991), denying that such violations had occurred. He added, "It's not in our traditions and our custom to point a gun on civilians. You can visit personally the arrested Lebanese who are loyal to General 'Aoun and you can see that they are under good care. We will hand them to the ft'iendly Lebanese Army [at] the earliest opportunity."
In oral statements to the United Nations Commission on Hiunan Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about the continued detention without trial of thousands of suspected govermnent opponents and the torture of detainees resulting in deaths in custody in Syria.
