CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
At least 40 trade unionists and other advocates of multi-party democracy who were arrested appeared to be prisoners of conscience. However, they and most other critics and opponents of the government arrested in previous years had been released by the end of 1991. Ten prisoners had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment. No executions were reported.
The government of President André Kolingba came under renewed pressure from the Comité de Coordination pour la convocation de la conférence nationale (ccccn), Coordination Committee for the Convening of a National Conference, trade unionists and others to introduce multiparty democracy and convene a National
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Conference to discuss the country's future. Government opponents repeatedly held meetings in defiance of a government ban, and called for strikes in support of their demands. In April trade imions representing government employees went on strike and a further major strike in the private sector followed in Jime. The government then banned trade unions in July, accusing them of acting like opposition parties. The ban was lifted in November. Demonstrations were frequent and some led to violent clashes between protesters and the seciuity forces. One, in August, reportedly resulted in at least eight students being killed.
In the face of these protests, President Kolingba agreed in April to allow political parties other than the ruling Rassemblement démocratique centrafricain (rdc), Central African Democratic Alliance, but refused to hold a National Conference. A commission was established, chaired by the President of the Supreme Court, to amend the 1986 one-party Constitution to permit other political parties. At least 10 had been formed by the end of 1991. In August an extraordinary congress of the rdc recommended holding a National Conference and in October President Kolingba annoimced that one would be convened in February 1992.
Twenty ccccn members who had been arrested in September 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991] were brought to trial in February before the High Court of Justice, charged with state secinrity offences. They were acquitted and released in March. Five others who had been arrested in October 1990 were charged with public order offences and with holding an illegal meeting in October 1990 which led to violence. They had not been tried when they were released in April under a pardon granted by President Kolingba. All 25 were prisoners of conscience.
General François Bozize, who had been forcibly repatriated with 11 others from Benin in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990], also appeared before the High Coiut of Justice on state security charges between January and April, but his trial was adjourned each time. The 11 others were freed in April. General Bozize and six co-defendants were eventually acquitted of endangering state security, complicity to murder and other offences in September. However, General Bozize and three of his co-defendants were rearrested and
held at Ngaragba central prison in Bangui for unspecified reasons. He was freed on 1 December by presidential order. It was unclear whether his three co-defendants were also freed. After his release, General Bozize said his ribs had been fractured by beatings in custody, but no action was known to have been taken by the authorities to investigate or pimish those responsible.
At least 45 political prisoners were released in April's presidential pardon. Those freed included prisoners of conscience such as Thomas Koazo, a journalist, and Jeanne-Marie Ruth Rolland (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Among those arrested for political reasons in 1991 was Joseph Bendovmga, an opposition party leader, who was detained in March after he wrote a letter to the authorities seeking permission to hold a political meeting. Charged with insulting the Head of State, he was tried in April before Bangui's Criminal Court, convicted and given a suspended prison sentence of one year.
At least 38 trade imionists were arrested in July and August and many of them appeared to be prisoners of conscience, held for participating in strikes or for continuing their trade imion work despite the ban imposed by the government in July. Five were tried in August, convicted of involvement in riots and given suspended prison sentences. They included Jackson Mazette, a former prisoner of conscience and Secretary General of the Central African Teachers' Trade Union Federation. They were released at the end of August.
Other detainees who also appeared to be prisoners of conscience included André Gombako, an agricultural engineer, and Freddy Gaudeille, a medical doctor. They were both arrested in July while visiting Abel Goiunba, an opposition leader and former prisoner of conscience, but released after a few days.
The authorities ordered an investigation into the death in custody of Pierre Wanga in December 1990, which was apparently the result of beatings, but its findings were not disclosed. Three others arrested with Pierre Wanga, who had also required hospital treatment, were still being held at the end of 1991, apparently on suspicion of involvement in the murder of a presidential adviser.
Ten people under sentence of death had
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC/CHAD
their sentences commuted to hfe impris' onment by President Kolingba in August. The identities of those who benefited were not disclosed, but they were believed to include three political prisoners who had been sentenced to death in 1982.
Amnesty International welcomed the April releases, urged the authorities to free odier prisoners of conscience and sought information about the continued imprisonment of General Bozize and others following their acquittals in September. Amnesty International also welcomed the commutation of death sentences.
