PHILIPPINES
Scores of people were believed to have been extrajudicially executed and dozens reportedly "disappeared" in police or military custody. At least 12 prisoners of conscience remained in prison; possible prisoners of conscience were among about 700 other political prisoners held. Some
PHILIPPINES
political detainees were reportedly tortured or ill'treated. The Senate again postponed a vote on legislation seeking the restoration of the death penalty.
The government continued to face armed opposition from the New People's Army (npa), the armed wing of the banned Communist Party of the Philippines (cpp), as well as from the Moro National Liberation Front and other groups seeking independence for predominantly Muslim areas of Mindanao. Unofficial paramilitary forces and vigilantes engaged in counter-insur-gency operations with the support or acquiescence of security forces. Members of lawful political and social organizations were publicly accused of being members of armed opposition groups and their organizations labelled by the authorities as "fronts" for the cpp/npa.
Tens of thousands of people were forced to leave their homes and widespread destruction from bombings and military operations occurred in the Cordillera region of northern Luzon, northern Mindanao, and other areas reportedly occupied by armed opposition groups.
The npa was apparently responsible for the deliberate and arbitrary killing of dozens of police officers, government officials, trade unionists and others. Cerilio Cariaga, a former town mayor, and two others died in May when suspected npa members fired upon a group seeking peace talks with insurgents in Camarines Sur. In July the official Commission on Human Rights (chr) reported that Eduardo Federico, a trade union leader killed in December 1990, had previously received death threats from the npa.
The government took some steps to protect and promote human rights. The Philippine Constabulary (pc), previously under direct military control, ceased to exist in January. A new force, the Philippine National Police (pnp), was established under formal control of the civilian authorities. A Witness Protection Act, signed into law in April 1991, provided for protection and material assistance to witnesses in serious criminal cases, although it remained unclear whether the act would protect witnesses testiiying in human rights cases. Presidential Decree 1850, granting military personnel immunity from prosecution in civil courts, was repealed in June. A July presidential guideline reportedly specified that Philippine Army (pa)
officers required clearance from the chr before being considered for promotion.
The Presidential Human Rights Committee was instrumental in drafting guidelines on the release of detainees. The guidelines were signed in June by the Secretaries of the Departments of National Defense and Justice, and the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. They specify that the release of detainees must be witnessed by family members, an independent lawyer or a chr representative. Security forces must also prove that those reported to have "disappeared" or been found dead after abduction by security forces had been released according to the established procedures.
However, effective investigation of alleged human rights violations and related prosecutions continued to be obstructed by security forces. This included intimidation of judges, lawyers, witnesses and complainants; and refusal of access to information, personnel or military premises, chr investigations continued to be impeded by cumbersome, lengthy procedures and by the chr practice of placing the burden of evidence on complainants or witnesses, despite the risk of reprisals or the lack of resources at their disposal.
Failure by the authorities to exert effective control over tens of thousands of official and semi-official paramilitary forces also impeded human rights protection.
Scores of people were victims of apparent extrajudicial executions by government and government-backed forces. Many were accused of supporting armed opposition groups. The victims included priests, peasant and urban activists, trade unionists and civilians living in zones of armed conñict.
Narciso Pico, a parish priest of the Philippine Independent Church, was shot dead by two armed men believed to be members of the paramilitary Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit (cafgu) in Pontevedra, Negros Occidental, on 10 January. Active in a number of religious and human rights organizations and an advocate of land reform, he had received death threats, apparently from military sources. A chr investigation found three witnesses who identified the alleged killers, one reportedly connected with the pnp. In April the chr submitted a resolution to the public prosecutor asking for murder charges to be filed against the two alleged killers. One of the suspects reportedly surrendered to
PHILIPPINES
police authorities in July, but was released on bail in August. The other remained at large.
Edilberto Bensen, his pregnant wife, Haydee, and their 10-year-old daughter, Mary Grace, were shot dead by alleged members of the 61st Infantry Battalion (ib) of the pa on 28 August in Murcia, Negros Occidental. Neighbours believed that the family was killed because of trade union activities.
Renato Tabasa Zabate, a member of the United Farmers' Organization, was abducted on 8 September by unidentified armed men in Mandaue City, Cebu, and reportedly taken to the Cebu District headquarters of the pnp for questioning. His body was found on 13 September by school children some 62 kilometres north of Cebu City. He had been tied with electrical wire and gagged with his own towel. The body bore signs of torture and an autopsy indicated that strangulation was the probable cause of death.
A number of people, including priests and human rights lawyers, received death threats believed to have been issued by the security forces or vigilantes acting with their support. In January Gregorio Patino, a priest in Bacolod City. Negros Occidental, received a death threat signed by the Concerned Citizen Group Fighting Insurgency. At a public meeting held in his neighbourhood, he had been accused by the military of being a communist. Also in January human rights lawyer Nerio Zamora was reportedly threatened with death by the provincial commander of the pc in Bohol Province while being denied access to three clients who had allegedly been ill-treated in custody at the Bohol pc centre in Tagbilaran City. Attorney Wilfred Asis, acting as defence counsel for six suspected npa members, received a death threat in August believed to have been issued by members of the security forces.
At least 25 people "disappeared" or were held incommunicado by members of government or government-backed security forces; at least six were believed to have been killed in custody. The fate and whereabouts of the majority had not been clarified by the end of the year.
Manuel Capitulo, Almar Lusong and Antonio Bondoc were abducted on 8 February by pa soldiers in Pampanga province. Military authorities denied the arrests until 13 February, when they revealed that the three were at an army camp in Angeles
City. A military official at the camp reportedly told a relative, "if (hej and his friends are members of the npa, then we just kill them, not keep them". The chr reported in April that Manuel Capitulo and Antonio Bondoc had been released from detention. The whereabouts of Almar Lusong remained unknown at the end of the year. Despite the authorities' initial denial of custody and the military official's threat to kill the detainees, the chr concluded that there had been no "disappearance" and closed the case.
Ronaldo Regencia, a farmer who had "disappeared" after abduction by 42nd ib soldiers and cafgu members in December 1990, was reportedly seen in February at an army camp in General Luna City, Quezon province. Military officials had consistently denied that he was in custody. According to a chr report, military officials acknowledged "inviting" Ronaldo Regencia for questioning on 22 December 1990, but said they had released him the same day. His whereabouts remained unknown at the end of 1991. Relatives and local human rights advocates believed he was in military custody.
The charred bodies of Nory Aballa and Leonardo Plohimon, both farmers, were found on 4 March, two days after their abduction by members of the 66th ib. Marks on the bodies indicated that they had been stabbed and shot before being burned.
At least 12 prisoners of conscience remained in prison in Cebu City. They and one other, released on bail in December 1990. were among a group of 25 farmers from Leyte charged with rebellion in 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1991). Despite a number of court hearings, no final verdict had been reached by the end of the year.
Hundreds of people were arrested for suspected political offences, the majority under provisions of a July 1990 Supreme Court decision authorizing the arrest without warrant of suspects in crimes of rebellion or subversion (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991). Most were released after brief periods in detention. Some of about 700 political prisoners remaining in detention were believed to be prisoners of conscience. Most were accused of supporting the armed opposition and charged with criminal acts such as illegal possession of firearms in furtherance of rebellion.
PHILIPPINES/POLAND
There were continued reports of torture or ill-treatment of those detained for their real or imputed political views. In January Edmundo Mission, chairman of an urban poor organization cind a former political detainee, alleged that he and five others had been severely beaten while in police custody in Metro Manila. Cherry Mendoza, a political prisoner accused of subversion and released on bail in March, alleged that she had been raped in December 1990 while in military custody in Bataan province. At least six other women alleged rape by members of government or government-backed forces conducting counter-insur-gency operations. In June a pregnant woman, Julia Espiritu, reported being raped after cafgu members had entered her home in Bayombong. Nueva Vizcaya. The family was apparently suspected of supporting the npa.
In May Amnesty International sought clarification from the Department of National Defense and from the chr of a government list of 43 military personnel reportedly convicted for human rights violations (see Amnesty International Report 1991). It was unclear whether the convictions were for human rights-related offences or common crimes. No reply was received from the Department of National Defense but the chr responded by stating that it could not provide "very accurate information ... since all offences, with very few exceptions ... are triable by courts martial". A further list, naming 15 different military officials "convicted in human rights cases", received from the Department of Labor and Employment in July, also failed to specify the exact nature of the convictions.
A bill introducing the death penalty for certain drugs-related offences was debated by the Senate during August and September although no vote was taken. There were continued calls for restoration of the death penalty for certain "heinous crimes".
Amnesty International appealed to the government to ensure independent and impartial investigations into all reported extrajudicial executions or "disappearances", and called for those responsible for such violations to be brought to justice. It called for the release of all prisoners of conscience and for all other political prisoners to be given fair trials, or released. It urged the government to dismantle civilian paramilitary forces, prohibit the use of vigi-
lante groups in counter-insurgency operations and stop the practice of political labelling of real or suspected political opponents. It appealed to all senators to respect constitutional provisions abolishing the death penalty and to vote against the proposed legislation.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International referred to the "disappearance" of Maria Nonna Santa Clara and Angelina Llena-resas in AP"! 1989. In August an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities included reference to Amnesty International's concern at the use of paramilitary groups and to the government's failure to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations.
An Amnesty International report entitled Philippines: "Disappearances" in the Context of Counter-insurgency, published in February, described a pattern of enforced "disappearances" in 1990 and provided details of some 25 victims of "disappearance" including three who died or were killed while in custody. A further report, Philippines: Human Rights Violations and the Labour Movement, was published in June documenting the cases of 34 trade unionists believed to have suffered human rights violations, including killing, "disappearance" and arbitrary detention by government or government-backed forces.
