SWAZILAND
Five prisoners of conscience were released from administrative detention in March. One prisoner was partially paralysed, allegedly as a result of beatings in police custody, and juveniles convicted of criminal offences were subjected to whippings. At least three prisoners were sentenced to death but there were no executions.
Intemational and domestic criticism was directed against the government's use of administrative detention. After the release of detainees in March, Prime Minister Obed Dlamini stated that the govemment would review the 1978 law which permits detention without charge for successive 60-day periods. However, by the end of the year no changes had been announced. In August King Mswati III set up a committee to review the workings of the tinkhundla, the country's system of indirectly elected govemment. The committee's hearings led to increased demands from sections of the population for the legalization of political parties. All political activity, including attending meetings, continued to be outlawed by the King's Proclamation of 1973.
In March 60-day detention orders against five prisoners of conscience were lifted. Four of the five - Sábelo Dlamini, Dominic Mngomezulu, Ray Russon and Mphandlana Shongwe - had been among six people convicted in October 1990 of attending an illegal political meeting (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991). They were on bail pending appeal when they were detained in November 1990 after disturbances at the University of Swaziland. The fifth, Boy Magagula, was on bail on the
original charge when he was detained. The 60-day detention orders against the five were renewed twice, in January and March. The five undertook successive hunger-strikes to protest against their detention.
In October the Coiut of Appeal set aside the convictions of all six people convicted in 1990 of attending an illegal meeting. By then, however, three of the released prisoners of conscience and five others had been arrested and charged with attending another illegal meeting. The govemment withdrew charges in the second case in November.
Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini, who had been detained under a 60-day order in August 1990 immediately after being acquitted of treason, was also released in March. At the end of the year no other prisoner was known to be detained without charge.
Sibusiso Simelane, a criminal suspect, was partially paralysed, apparently as a result of beatings in police custody. He alleged that he had been kicked, punched and beaten with electric cable and hosepipe. He laid formal charges of assault against two police officers, but the case had not been heard by the end of the year.
According to research carried out by the Swaziland Association for Crime Prevention and Rehabilitation of Offenders, some 42 per cent of convicted juveniles received sentences of whipping. Many of these sentences were imposed by the "traditional" Swazi National Courts, which allow no right of appeal.
In March the govemment established a commission of inquiry chaired by a High Coxut judge to investigate events at the University of Swaziland in November 1990, when police and soldiers had beaten students, leaving at least 80 needing hospital treatment (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Earlier reports that some students had died at the hands of the police could not be confirmed. The commission of inquiry had apparently completed its investigations by the end of the year, but its findings had not been made public.
The death penalty remained mandatory for murder if there were no extenuating circumstances. At least three prisoners were sentenced to death in 1991, but no executions had been carried out since 1983.
An Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Swaziland in March to meet the Prime Minister and other senior govemment
SWAZILAND/SWITZERLAND
officials and to press for the release of the prisoners of conscience. In the event, these prisoners were released unconditionally shortly before Amnesty International's delegates arrived. Amnesty International called for a review of the detention law to bring it into line with international human rights standards and for the withdrawal of charges related to attendance at political meetings.
