NAMIBIA
Several criminal suspects were reportedly tortured in police custody. Steps were initiated to clarify the fate of hundreds of people who "disappeared" before independence in the custody of the South African authorities in Namibia or in detention camps run by the South West Africa People's Organisation (swapo) in Angola.
Six of the white men arrested in 1990 for plotting to overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1991] escaped after being released on bail. The remaining three were convicted of high treason in August: two were jailed, for two and four years; the third was fined.
Several criminal suspects were reportedly tortured by the police. Eunice Molestan, a suspected drugs offender arrested in March, alleged that members of the police Narcotics Division had handcuffed her, beaten her with a hose-pipe and suspended her on a pole thrust between her elbows and knees while holding her incommunicado. She petitioned the High Court, which ruled that a legal provision allowing police to hold suspected drugs offenders incommunicado for up to 14 days was contrary to the Constitution and issued a restraint order against the police. The Attorney General subsequently indicated that the law would be revised but no action was known to have been taken to investigate Eunice Molestan's allegations.
In another case three miners detained on suspicion of stealing uranium complained they were tortured during interrogation at a police station in Swakopmund in August. One of them, Ewerhardt
NAMIBIA/NEPAL
Mokatu, alleged that police officers had placed a plastic bag over his head five or six times and suspended him by the elbows and knees. A police investigation was initiated but its outcome had not been made public by the end of the year.
The government of President Samuel ShaEifishima Nujoma, which had come to office at independence in March 1990 following a swapo election victory, continued to face pressure for an inquiry into "disappearances", torture and killings of Namib-ian prisoners both by SWapo in Angola and by South African forces in Namibia in the years before independence. However, no further information came to light during 1991 about the victims of such abuses, The National Assembly, which in November 1990 had resolved to ask the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) to investigate the "disappearances" (see Amnesty International Report 1991), again debated the matter in May. It rejected a proposal to establish a judicial commission of inquiry into the "disappearances", torture and killings, opting instead for measures intended to facilitate investigation by the icrc. In particular, the Assembly asked the government to request the cooperation of the Angolan, Botswana, South African and Zambian governments in seeking information about missing Namibian prisoners. In October the Assembly nominated a swapo liaison officer to provide information about prisoners who had been held by swapo. The icrc's role was to be to trace those missing, not to investigate the circumstances in which prisoners had "disappeared" or been killed. The icrc said it would only continue to trace the missing people if satisfactory progress was made in investigations into a first group of about 100 cases, but it was not clear at the end of the year what progress had been made.
Amnesty International continued to urge the government to undertake an independent and impartial inquiry to clarify the fate of Namibians reported to have "disappeared" or been killed in South Afncan or swapo custody before independence. While welcoming the steps taken to initiate some investigation. Amnesty International remained concerned that those responsible for perpetrating grave human rights abuses in the past might once again be in positions where they are responsible for prisoners and could again violate hiunan rights. It urged the authorities to
ensure that members of all law-enforce-ment agencies are given adequate training in upholding human rights.
