LEBANON
During the year hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested by government forces. Many were released, but scores were believed to
LEBANON
be still held at the end of the year. Over 1,400 detainees arrested in previous years and held in Syria were released. The tor-ture of detainees continued to be reported. Two death sentences were commuted to terms of imprisonment. At least 113 detainees and hostages abducted or detained in previous years by various militias were released in prisoner exchanges, but the fate of thousands of others remained unknown.
A "government of national unity" was formed in January led by President Elias Al-Hrawi. It included representatives of seven groups, among them the Druze Progressive Socialist Party (psp); the predominantly Shi'a Muslim Amal movement; the Lebanese Forces (lf), a Christian militia; and the pro-Syrian Ba'th Party. Some steps were taken to implement provisions of the 1989 Ta'if Accord (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990], including the appointment in Jime of 40 members of parliament, which was enlarged to provide an equal number of seats for both Muslims and Christians.
In March the government ordered all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias to disband and to surrender their weapons to the central authorities in accordance with a set timetable. By December all such groups with the exception of Hizbullah (Party of God) and the South Lebanon Army (sla) had surrendered part of their weaponry. The government also announced a plan for the phased integration of up to 20,000 former militia fighters into the army and other state institutions, but less than 4,000 had been integrated by December.
Areas previously controlled by groups such as the lf, Amal, the psp and the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo) were progressively placed imder government control through the deployment of Lebanese army troops. However, the sla retained control over the Jezzine region; Israeli military forces with the sla maintained control of the so-called "security zone" along the Lebanese/Israeli border; and Syrian military forces remained deployed throughout most of the country.
In June Syria and Lebanon signed a Treaty of Brotherhood. Cooperation and Coordination, providing for cooperation between the two countries on military, security, economic and other matters. In September the two governments signed a Defence and Security Agreement that
provided for. among other things, the exchange of information about political suspects (see Syria entry).
In August the government announced a general amnesty covering a wide range of crimes committed before 28 March, including politically motivated killings. Ten categories of offences were excluded, among them offences against external state security and the murder or attempted murder of political, diplomatic or religious personalities. However, death sentences imposed for such offences were to be commuted to 20 years' imprisonment with hard labour. By October, 317 untried detainees and sentenced prisoners were reported to have been released under the amnesty.
Hundreds of people, among them suspected government opponents, were arrested by the army and military police. Some were possible prisoners of conscience, including six supporters of former president Amin Gemayel who were reportedly arrested by military police in May at B'abda after distributing leaflets criticizing the Treaty of Brotherhood, Cooperation and Coordination. All six were released after interrogation. In another case, Marie Rose Yusuf was arrested by the army in June in the al-Batrun region after distributing leaflets critical of the Ta'if Accord and of several Lebanese politicians. Her case was referred to a military court, but it was not known whether she was charged or released.
In early July Lebanese army units clashed with plo forces near Sidon while attempting to regain control of the area. According to official figures, 574 people suspected of opposing or fighting against the army's deployment were arrested, the majority of them Palestinians. Of these, at least 213 had been released imcharged by
LEBANON
late August, but an unknown number were still held at the end of the year. Scores were apparently awaiting trial.
Other arrests in July involved scores of supporters of General Michel 'Aoun, the former interim prime minister whose forces were driven from their East Beirut bases by S5Tian forces and Lebanese army units in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. Those detained, who included possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested by military police in Beirut, al-Metn and Kesrouan. They were apparently suspected of distributing leaflets and of other actions in support of General 'Aoun. Some were reported to have been tortured, including Fadel al-Tayyar, who was held for five days in July, severely beaten and burned with cigarettes. Most of those arrested were released uncharged within a month, but four were still held at the end of 1991: Raymond Ad, Francis al-Qa'i, Ziad Karam and Jean Mu'avmad. They were believed to be awaiting trial on charges including the distribution of leaflets. General Aoun, who had obtained refuge in the French Embassy in October 1990, left Lebanon for France in late August following the announcement of the general amnesty.
In September, seven people were reportedly arrested by the Lebanese army and handed over to the military police after attending a carnival organized by the lp in the town of Harisa. Among them were Tony Khadra, Michel Salim and Joseph Francis. Their whereabouts were unknown by the end of the year.
Over 1,400 detainees arrested in Lebanon by Syrian forces and held in Syria were released during the year. At least 700 Palestinians previously taken prisoner by Syrian forces in Lebanon as suspected plo supporters were among some 1,300 political prisoners released by the Syrian Government in March. Seven Lebanese army officers, supporters of General 'Aoun who had been held in Syria since October 1990, were also released in March (see Amnesty International Report 1991). They included Brigadier General Fu'ad Aoun and Colonel 'Amer Shihab. Further releases occurred in September and December when more than 120 Lebanese previously detained by Syrian forces were released. They included 40 supporters of Harakat al-Tawhid al-Islami, Islamic Unification Movement, and 70 members of the pro-Iraqi Ba'th Party in
Lebanon. None of them had apparently been charged or tried by the Syrian authorities.
At least two people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder and attempted murder, but their sentences were commuted to imprisonment. No executions were reported.
Information about people taken captive in previous years by the various militias and armed political groups was difficult to obtain. At least three of these groups - the lf, the psp and Amal - annoimced in 1991 that they were no longer holding prisoners, but the fate of those previously known to have been in their custody remained unclear.
Some prisoners who had been held as hostages by armed political groups were released. In July, 13 prisoners were freed as a result of a prisoner exchange between the lf and Hizbullah. Between August and December, six United States (us] and three British nationals who had been held hostage for up to six years were released by Islamic Jihad and other groups. Two German nationals abducted in 1989 - Heinrich Striibig and Thomas Kemptner - were still being held at the end of the year.
A number of Arab detainees held by the sla at Khiam detention centre in South Lebanon were released in the same period. Between September and December, 91 detainees were released from Khiam, but at least 200 were still held there by the sla at the end of 1991. The us and British hostages and the detainees released from Khiam reported that they had been subjected to beatings and ill-treatment during their captivity. Those freed from Khiam said that they and others had been tortured with electric shocks, beaten with cables and subjected to sleep deprivation and prolonged isolation. The us and British hostaetieges also said that they were subjected to prolonged isolation, mock execution and being kept in chains for long periods.
Information was received during the year about some 2,000 people whose fate and whereabouts remained unknown following their abduction or detention by various Lebanese militias between 1975 and 1983. The victims included over 880 Lebanese, 840 Palestinians and 70 Syrians: women and children were among them. In all, however, thousands of people were believed to be still unaccounted for after
LEBANON/LESOTHO
being detained by both government forces and armed political groups in Lebanon dm-ing the previous 15 years. Information was also received about 25 people who remain unaccoimted for following their abduction by the lf in 1982 and 1983, All were members or supporters of the Syrian Social Nationalist Party (ssnp).
Between July and November, an Amnesty International delegate paid visits to Lebanon to assess the human rights situation there. Dining these visits, discussions were held about the organization's concerns with government officials, members of the judiciary and representatives of nongovernmental groups. Amnesty International sought information about the detention of political activists, the fate of "disappearance" victims, places of detention and judicial procedures.
