LIBYA
SOCIALIST PEOPLE'S LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA
Head of state: Mu'ammaral-Caddafi Death penalty: retentionist International Criminal Court: not signed UN Women's Convention: ratified with reservations Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: ratified
The country was reopened to international human rights monitors, namely AI. Over the course of the year, the authorities announced several reform initiatives, including the possible abolition of the People's Court and a restriction of the scope of the death penalty. However, limited progress was made in establishing the truth about how prisoners died in custody in past years. No significant steps were taken to shed lighten other past human rights violations, including "disappearances". Prisoners of conscience detained in previous years remained in prison. Legislation criminalizing peaceful political activities remained in force. The security forces continued to arbitrarily arrest people for political reasons and to detain them incommunicado for long periods without charge. Migrants and asylum-seekers were not protected. Unfairtrials before the People's Court continued to take place. The death penalty continued to be handed down.
Background
Libya restored diplomatic relations with the European Union (EU) and the USA following its announcement at the end of 2003 that it would dismantle its programmes for weapons of mass destruction. Normalization of relations was also enabled by the conclusion of negotiations with Germany and France on two separate bombings; the first of the La Belle nightclub in Berlin, Germany, in 1986, which killed three people and wounded about 250; and the second of UTA flight 772 over Niger in 1989, which led to 170 deaths. In April, in his first official trip to Europe for 15 years. Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi visited the European Commission in Belgium. In October the EU announced the lifting of its embargo on sales of weapons to Libya in the context of enhanced cooperation against illegal immigration.
In March a cabinet reshuffle took place and the Secretariat of the General People's Committee for Justice and Public Security was divided into two separate entities, one for Justice and the other for Public Security.
In April Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi called for a number of legal and institutional reforms. These included the abolition of the People's Court, a special court known to try political cases, and the transfer of its jurisdiction to ordinary criminal courts; a more stringent application of Libyan law; and a reduction in the scope of the death penalty to cover only the most serious crimes.
In June Libya ratified the Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention and in August the authorities informed AI that Libya was in the process of ratifying several other international and regional human rights treaties.
Amnesty International visit
In February an AI delegation went to Libya to research and discuss the human rights situation, the first such visit for 15 years. The organization was granted unprecedented access to prisoners of conscience and political prisoners. Delegates had lengthy meetings with Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi and senior Libyan officials as well as members of the judiciary and lawyers. At all levels, Libyan officials showed a willingness to discuss issues of concern to the organization.
In August the authorities provided a detailed response to Al's report, published in April, Time to make human rights a reality. The response showed the authorities' willingness to engage with concerns raised by AI. Positive indications in the letter included plans for legal and institutional reforms, many of which had already been signalled in April by Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi.
Freedom of expression and association
Legislation continued to prohibit the formation of associations or political parties outside the existing political system. With the exception of the Human Rights Society of the Gaddafi International Foundation for Charitable Associations, which is headed by Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, the son of Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi, human rights organizations or individuals wishing to carry out human rights work continued to be prevented from operating freely.
A draft Penal Code, which was announced by the authorities in 2003, was examined by a committee of legal experts assembled by the then Secretariat of the General People's Committee for Justice and Public Security. It was subsequently sent for discussion by Libya's local decision-making bodies, the Basic People's Congresses. The draft, which was obtained by AI in February, retained numerous provisions that contravene Libya's obligations under international law, including provisions that prescribe the death penalty for activities solely amounting to the peaceful exercise of freedom of expression and association.
164
Amnesty International Report 2005
LIB
Despite the authorities' categorical denial of the existence of prisoners of conscience, scores of prisoners of conscience continued to be held for their non-violent political views or activities. Q In December the People's Court of Appeal upheld the death sentences against Abdullah Ahmed 'Izzedin and Salem Abu Hanak, as well as prison terms ranging from 10 years' to life imprisonment against some 83 others, which were originally handed down in 2002. Al considered all 85 to be prisoners of conscience as they had not used or advocated violence. The Court also confirmed the acquittal of 66 men. According to Libyan law, the two death sentences will be considered by the Supreme Court and, if confirmed, will go before the Supreme Council for Judicial Bodies, Libya's highest judicial body, for final approval.
The sentences were reportedly pronounced in absentia after the accused apparently refused to attend the court as a mark of protest. This followed earlier protests in the form of hunger strikes in April and October 2004 that called for an end to their continued detention, among other things.
Those on trial were professionals and students arrested in and after June 1998 on suspicion of supporting or sympathizing with the banned Libyan Islamic Group (al-Jama'a al-islamiya al-Llbiya), also known as the Muslim Brothers. They were charged under Law 71 of 1972 banning political parties. They were sentenced, after a trial which fell short of international standards for fairness, solely on account of the peaceful expression of their ideas and for secretly meeting to discuss those ideas with others.
There were continuing reports of people being held Incommunicado by the Internal Security Agency. Torture and ill-treatment were widely reported during incommunicado detention, apparently with the primary function of extracting confessions. Q In March prisoner of conscience Fathi al-Jahmi was released after the People's Court of Appeal handed down a suspended sentence of one year's imprisonment. He had been detained since 2002 in connection with his reported calls for reform at a session of the Basic People's Congress in al-Manshia, Bin Ashour, Tripoli.
Two weeks after his release, the authorities reportedly took him from his home in Tripoli along with his wife, Fawzia "Abdullah Gogha, and eldest son, Muhammad Fathi al-Jahmi. Throughout their detention, they were reportedly denied access to the outside world, including to lawyers and relatives, and their exact whereabouts were unknown. The authorities told Al that Fathi al-Jahmi was being held for his own protection because of alleged public outrage generated by media interviews he conducted following his release from prison.
Muhammad Fathi al-Jahmi and Fawzia "Abdullah Gogha were released in September and November respectively- However, Fathi al-Jahmi remained in detention. In November he reportedly appeared before the People's Court, charged with defaming the Leader of the Revolution and communicating with foreign entities.
Unfairtrials
Cases continued to be heard by the People's Court, despite calls by Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi for its abolition. Trials before the court continued to fall short of minimum standards for fair trial. A draft law to abolish the People's Court was being examined by Libya's local and national legislative bodies. Q In December some 20 men were reportedly sentenced to death and some 158 others to life imprisonment by the People's Court in connection with their alleged affiliation to the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group. Those sentenced to life imprisonment included Mustapha Muhammad Krer, a Libyan national with Canadian citizenship. He allegedly first saw a lawyer when his trial opened, nearly two years after his arrest and detention. Subsequently, he was reportedly denied the right to a lawyer of his own choosing.
Mustapha Muhammad Krer had left Libya in 1989 because he was reportedly being sought by the authorities and following the arrest of his brother, al-Mukhtar Muhammad Krer. He returned to Libya in 2002 after his family was informed of the death in custody of al-Mukhtar Muhammad Krer.
Death penalty
Despite Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi's stated opposition to the death penalty, which he reiterated to Al in February, death sentences continued to be handed down, including after unfair trials. Q In May, six health professionals arrested in 1999 - five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor - were sentenced to death by firing squad. They were accused of deliberately infecting 426 children with the HIV virus while working in al-Fateh Children's Hospital in Benghazi. A sixth Bulgarian defendant was sentenced to four years' imprisonment. Nine Libyan defendants were acquitted. The defendants had told Al delegates in February that their confessions, which they later retracted, had been extracted under torture, which included electric shocks, beatings and suspension by the arms. Their appeal case before the Supreme Court was expected to open in 2005. On the basis of the allegations of torture, eight members of the security forces and two others (a doctor and a translator) employed by them were charged. They had faced trial alongside the foreign and Libyan health professionals before the same criminal court in Benghazi. In May, the court pronounced that it was not competent to examine their cases. By the end of the year, the alleged torturers had not been tried.
Migrants and asylum-seekers
In a welcome step, Libya ratified the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in June. However, it had not ratified the 1951 UN Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol, nor had it established national asylum procedures by the end of 2004. In the absence of a legal protection framework, the effective guarantee of refugee rights was seriously undermined.
Amnesty International Report 2005
165
LIT
Widespread arrests of individuals from sub-Saharan Africa, including possible asylum-seekers, were reported. Some faced the threat of deportation to their countries of origin where they would be at risk of serious human rights violations. Ill-treatment of those detained was widely reported. Q In October, hundreds of individuals, predominantly of North African origin, were removed from Italy to Libya undera bilateral agreement. On arrival in Libya, they were reportedly detained and denied access to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Q In July the authorities forcibly returned over no individuals detained in Libya to Eritrea, where they were at risk of torture. On arrival In Eritrea, they were detained and held incommunicado in a secret prison. Q In August the authorities attempted to forcibly return to Eritrea 76 Eritrean nationals, including six children. Some of the Eritreans hijacked the plane that was carrying them and forced it to land in the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, where they all applied for asylum. Many said they had been ill-treated and denied medical attention in custody in Libya. Update
Q Seven Eritrean nationals, who were unlawfully detained after the expiry of their three-month prison sentences for illegal entry into Libya in 2002, were released. They had fled from Eritrea to Libya via Sudan and were arrested in 2002 as they attempted to travel by boat to Italy where they planned to seek asylum.
Legacy of past human rights violations
The authorities continued to fail to address human rights violations committed in previous years, including long-standing cases of political imprisonment, "disappearances" and deaths in custody. Q In August an investigation was opened in Lebanon into the "disappearance" of imam Musa Sadr—a prominent Shi'a cleric who "disappeared" with two others in 1978 in Libya - after his family filed a lawsuit before the Lebanese courts. Lawyers working on behalf of Imam Musa Sadr's family called for the indictment of 18 senior Libyan officials. The Lebanese Public Prosecutor summoned the officials for questioning in March 2005.
The fate of many prisoners who were killed or "disappeared" in Abu Salim Prison in Tripoli in 1996 remained unknown. In February Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi told AI that there had been armed clashes between prisoners and guards—the first official recognition known to AI that any incident had taken place in the prison. In April Colonel Mu'ammar al-Gaddafi affirmed the right of families to know what happened to their relatives during the incidents. However, by the end of the year no thorough, independent and impartial investigations were known to have been opened into deaths in custody in the past, including those that allegedly took place in Abu Salim Prison in 1996.
AI country reports/visits
Report
• Libya: Time to make human rights a reality (AI Index:
MDE19/002/2004)
