ARGENTINA
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Néstor Kirchner Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes International Criminal Court: ratified UN Women's Convention: ratified with reservations Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: signed
There were numerous complaints of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement and prison officers. Treatment of detainees amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Progress was made in bringing to justice those responsible for past human rights violations in the context of Operation Cóndor.
Background
Despite some recovery from the recent economic crisis, poverty and unemployment remained high. According to the Statistics and Census institute the unemployment rate in 2004 was 19. i per cent and 70 per cent of the working people earned less than the minimum required to cover an average family's food expenses.
11 l-treatment of demonstrators
Protests by piqueteros (unemployed workers) continued during the year, some turning violent. Piqueterossex up roadblocks and in some cases occupied workplaces. Demonstrators and popular leaders were arrested and charged. Several of them were released but most were charged and awaiting trial at the end of the year. Arrested demonstrators complained of ill-treatment. Q In October, more than 30 people detained by the police and army following demonstrations in Caleta Oliva, Santa Cru2 Province, filed judicial complaints stating that members of the provincial police and the gendarmerie hooded them, kicked and punched them and beat them with sticks. According to reports some sustained fractures as a result of blows to the face.
Ill-treatment
Ill-treatment of detainees, including minors, in police stations was reported. There were repeated reports of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners in provincial jails, including in Buenos Aires and Mendoza Provinces. Investigations into such allegations were subject to long delays and there were concerns that they were not independent or exhaustive.
Seventeen prisoners died in Mendoza prison in suspicious circumstances. There were reports that prisoners were kept in extremely overcrowded conditions with poor sanitary facilities and inadequate medical care. Inmates also complained that prison guards beat them and imposed harsh and degrading punishments, such as making detainees stand naked for hours. In September reports appeared in the press
Amnesty International Report 2005
43
ARM
of statements made by the Mendoza provincial authorities criticizing the work of human rights lawyers who provided legal advice to prisoners' families and submitted official complaints at the provincial, national and international level about deteriorating prison conditions and the ill-treatment of prisoners.
In November the Inter-American Court of Human Rights called on Argentina to protect the lives and physical integrity of all detainees. It urged the authorities to investigate complaints of ill-treatment, identify those responsible and apply the appropriate punishments.
In November, following its examination of Argentina's periodic report, the UN Committee against Torture issued its conclusion and recommendations. These highlighted how the discrepancy between the large number of torture and ill-treatment complaints and the very few convictions in such cases "contributes to the prevailing impunity" on this issue.
Operation Cóndor
Positive steps were taken during the year to investigate past human rights violations committed in the context of Operation Cóndor, a plan jointly organized by six South American military governments in the 1970s and 1980s. InJuly, a federal judge ordered the arrest of 12 former members of the armed forces. In August the Supreme Court ruled, in the case of the killing of Chilean General Carlos Prats and his wife in Buenos Aires in 1974, that there was no statute of limitations for crimes against humanity.
AI country reports/visits
Reports
•	Open letter from Amnesty International to the Governor of Santa Fe Province, Sr. Jorge Obeid (Ai Index: AMR 13/003/2004)
•	Argentina: Journalists: Press accreditation—the wrong credentials? Threats, attacks and intimidation against members of the press (AI Index: AMR 13/005/2004)
•	Argentina; Concrete action is required to end torture (AI Index: 13/010/2004)
•	Argentina: LettertoJulioCobos.Governorofthe Province of Mendoza (AI Index: AMR 13/012/2004)
