MONGOLIA
MONGOLIA
Head of state: Bagabandi Natsagiin
Head of government: Elbegdorj Tsahiagiin (replaced
Enkhbayar Nambariin in August)
Death penalty: retentionist
International Criminal Court: ratified
UN Women's Convention and its Optional Protocol:
ratified
Journalists exposing corruption and abuse of power and lawyers defending victims of torture were at risk of intimidation and criminal charges because of their work. Detention conditions remained harsh. Violence against women was widespread.
Background
Neither the government party, the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party, nor the opposition Motherland Democratic Coalition gained a majority in elections in June. They formed a "Grand Coalition" government.
Attacks on freedom of expression
Journalists, particularly those reporting on abuse of power or corruption, were at risk of investigation by the police on charges of criminal defamation. Q In April, Erdenetuya Altangerel, a journalist, was detained for 23 days in a pre-trial detention centre. She was sentenced to three months' imprisonment by a district court for using the media to defame a member of parliament. Around 1,000 journalists protested against the court decision. On appeal, her sentence was reduced to a fine.
Human rights defenders
Human rights lawyers were at risk of intimidation and criminal proceedings.
Q In November, L. Sanjaasuren, lawyer for Enkhbat Damiran, who was forcibly returned from France to Mongolia in 2003, was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment in a closed trial. He was convicted of revealing a state secret while defending his client.
Detention conditions
Conditions in the holding cell in the City Police Department were cruel and inhuman. Throughout 2004, around 300 people were held together in the cell, which has a normal capacity of 120. Access to medical treatment and sanitary facilities were inadequate. Tuberculosis was reportedly on the increase among prisoners, although this was contradicted by an official statement in March.
Death penalty
According to a National Human Rights Action Plan adopted in December 2003, the practice of delaying executions for three years was to be reviewed at an unspecified date.
Amnestylnternational Report2005
179
MOR
There were no published statistics about the death penalty, but according to media reports the number of people on death row was increasing.
Impunity
The state failed to provide reparations to individuals wrongly imprisoned.
Q A district court awarded compensation to a herdsman, Erdene-Ochir, after seven years' wrongful imprisonment, but did not compensate him for the damage to his health. Due to poor prison conditions, most of his teeth were broken and he had arthritis and kidney disease.
Violence against women
According to a study carried out by the National Centre Against Violence, domestic violence was the third most common cause of death and injury in Mongolia. The police lacked training on how to handle such cases. Impunity for sexual violence was widespread; 88 per cent of rape cases taken to court were dismissed.
Media reports of women being trafficked to China increased, and the police apparently took little action to deal with such cases.
Al country visits/ reports
Visit
Al delegates visited detainees in the holding cell in the City Police Department in April and October.
