DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Leonel Fernández Reyna (replaced Hipólito Mejía in August) Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes International Criminal Court: signed UN Women's Convention and its Optional Protocol: ratified
Several people shot dead by police, principally during demonstrations over the economic crisis and power shortages, were apparently victims of unlav/ful killings. There were continuing allegations of torture and ill-treatment in detention centres. Concerns about the administration of justice persisted. Many women were subjected to domestic violence.
Background
The economic crisis caused by a 2003 banking scandal deepened. A 48-hour general strike was called in late January. In a pre-emptive move, the authorities arrested more than 40 popular movement leaders before the strike. Seven demonstrators were reportedly killed by police. The Dominican Liberation Party's candidate Leonel Fernández Reyna won the presidential elections in May and took office in August. Shortly after, he initiated a major purge of the police force and police presence on the streets was increased.
Alleged unlawful killings by police
Excessive use of force by police reportedly led to a number of deaths, particularly during demonstrations or as a result of shoot-outs. Q Arlene Pérez Simsar. aged 25, died after being shot in the head allegedly by a police patrol in Arroyo Hondo 111, Santo Domingo, on 8 January. She was ina car with her boyfriend when four policemen approached the vehicle but, according to the boyfriend, failed to identify themselves. The boyfriend reportedly began to drive away, fearing a robbery, and the policemen opened fire on the car killing Arlene Pérez Simsar. Four policemen were later charged in connection with the killing.
Q On 30 September, 21-year-old José Alfredo Méndez Diioné, a member of the Broad Front for Popular Struggle, was reportedly shot dead by a police officer while taking part in a demonstration against power shortages in Navarrete, Santiago province.
Prison conditions
Prison conditions often amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Poor living conditions, lack of medical attention and serious overcrowding were commonplace. Reports persisted of widespread abuse
94
Amnesty International Report 2005
ECU
by prison authorities. Safeguards to protect the right to life and prevent violence between prisoners were inadequate.
Q On 21 August, Robinson Michael Rosario Hernández was reportedly burnt alive at Mao detention centre, Valverde province, after a dispute broke out with other inmates over the control of drug trafficking. Two other prisoners died later, also as a result of severe burns.
Q Benito Simón Gabriel, 19, stated that he was suspended from a wall in the sun for seven hours at Monte Plata prison. Police captain Salvador López Garcia was later arrested in connection with the torture.
Administration of justice
Scores of prisoners remained jailed after serving their sentences because they could not afford to pay administrative fees. Thousands of criminal cases were stagnant because the Public Ministry failed to refer them to the courts and the accused were released. In September, a new Penal Procedure Code came into force outlawing any arrest without a warrant issued by ajudge.
Violence against women
Domestic violence was apparently widespread and affected women from all backgrounds. According to data collected by the Women and Health Collective, at least 89 women were killed in domestic disputes. Q On II January, Siria Sena Ferreras, aged 33, died reportedly after being stabbed in the street by her husband in Villa Duarte. Santo Domingo.
Al country reports/visits
Report
• Dominican Republic: Human rights violations in the context of the economic crisis (AI Index: AMR 27/001/2004)
