TRI NI DAD AND TOBAGO
REPUBLIC OFTRINIDADANDTOBACO
Head of state: George Maxwell Richards
Head of government: Patrick Manning
Death penalty: retentionist
International Criminal Court: ratified
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed
Prison conditions remained poor and in some instances amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment Death sentences continued to be imposed. There were continuing reports of torture and ill-treatment by the police.
Abuses by police
Torture and ill-treatment by police continued to be reported. At least 24 people were fatally shot by police. Q Injanuary, Kevin Cato was shot dead by police officers reportedly after he intervened in an altercation between officers and his friends. A police officer was charged with murder. Q In April, Galene Bonadie was shot by police in disputed circumstances. Eyewitnesses alleged that she attempted to intervene as police officers beat a man and was then shot in the head. Police officers stated that she was shot while attempting to take a gun from a police officer. In June the Director of Public Prosecutions ordered an inquest. The inquest opened in December but was adjourned until 2005.
Death penalty
In July, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the UK, the highest court of appeal for Trinidad and Tobago, overturned its own 2004 ruling in the case of Balkissoon Roodal that the mandatory death penalty was in violation of the Constitution.
The mandatory death penalty therefore continued to be the only sentence available for those convicted of murder. However, the court commuted the sentences of all 86 prisoners then under sentence of death to terms of imprisonment on the grounds that they had expected to benefit from the previous ruling-
Death sentences continued to be imposed. At least three people had been sentenced to death by the end of 2004 but no executions had been carried out.
Abuses in detention
Conditions in places of detention continued to cause grave concern and in some cases amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. A task force on prison reform announced in 2003 failed to address the vast majority of problems.
In April, after the government granted an Al delegation unrestricted access to all the major prisons
Amnesty International Report 2005
253
TUN
of Trinidad, delegates witnessed appalling conditions of detention in Port of Spain Prison and Golden Grove Remand Prison. Both suffered from severe overcrowding and prisoners were forced to defecate and urinate into containers and then place the human waste in buckets outside the cells. Cells of approximately 3m x 3m contained up to 17 prisoners.
Violence in prisons persisted. In October Kern Phillips was stabbed to death by another prisoner. In September, Ignatius Owen died after allegedly being beaten by other inmates. Both men were held at Golden Grove Remand Prison.
Corporal punishment
Laws allowing corporal punishment for crimes including rape remained. No known sentences of flogging were imposed. The government informed Al that corporal punishment had not been imposed on any prisoner since 2002.
Al country reports/visits Visit
An Al delegation visited Trinidad in April and met the Minister of National Security and the Acting Commissioner of Prisons.
