MALAWI
REPUBLIC OF MALAWI
Head of state and government: Bingu w/a Mutharika Death penalty: retentionist International Criminal Court: ratified UN Women's Convention: ratified Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: signed
The food crisis intensified during 2005. Prison conditions remained a significant concern. There were instances where freedom of expression was threatened. The government began investigations into child prostitution.
Background
Following a split within the ruling United Democratic Front (UDF), the President left the UDF to form the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). Opposition parties were drawn into this conflict, distracting government and legislators from national priorities such as the hunger crisis. This culminated in October in moves to impeach the President. The impeachment did not proceed. This political insecurity appeared to fuel a disturbing tendency to crack down on critics of the government.
Policing
Torture and ill-treatment of suspects in police custody were reported.
Q On 6 June, 12-year-old Mabvuto Bakali, who was detained on suspicion of theft, died in police custody following severe beatings at Ngabu Police post. When villagers confronted police, live ammunition was used to disperse the crowd, killing 16-year-old Anock Sande. A police investigation into the deaths had not been completed by the end of the year.
Police arrested individuals critical of those in the President's immediate circle. Q In October, members of parliament instrumental in the impeachment process were arrested on charges of falsifying documents in what the President described as "tit for tat" arrests.
Prisons
Conditions in prisons remained a serious concern. According to official figures, on average more than 14 people died every month in an average prison population of 9,700 people.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) considers that more than 15 deaths per month in a prison population of 10,000 in sub-Saharan Africa requires urgent remedial measures. Many of the deaths were HIV-related, but many were treatable and avoidable. Overcrowding, poor diet and poor sanitary facilities in prisons exacerbated AIDS-related conditions and other illnesses. The prison authorities continued to work within severe resource constraints.
Freedom of expression
In March, two journalists were arrested in Blantyre in connection with an article about the President's fear of ghosts in r/?e War/0/7 newspaper and broadcast on BBC World Service. They were transferred to the capital and detained for two nights before being released without charge by the Inspector General of Police.
Women's rights
Child prostitution remained widespread. Girls, including many under the age of 13 which is the legal age of consent, were "bought" from their parents for as little as US$3 or^ l^he promise of working as waitresses and then in effect indentured in brothels. The Ministry of Gender and Children's Affairs initiated investigations.
Food
Malawi faced severe food shortages after an extremely poor harvest. Despite repeated warnings by the World Food Programme of an imminent food crisis, by the end of the year food aid pledges for Malawi still fell far short of need. Concern was expressed by civil society and faith-based groups that the continuing political feud between the UDF and President wa Mutharika's DPP diverted attention and national resources from the food crisis.
