KUWAIT
STATE OF KUWAIT
Head ofstate:al-Shaikh Jaberal-Ahmad al-Sabah Head of government: al-Shaikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Sabah
Death penalty: retentionist International Criminal Court: signed UN Women's Convention: ratified with reservations Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed
Women gained the right to vote and stand for political office. Clashes between armed groups and security forces resulted in 12 deaths. At least 30 people were detained for alleged links to armed groups; one died in custody and others, when broughtto trial, alleged torture. Fourteen people were charged with trying to form a political party. Migrant workers faced a wide range of abuses. At least 15 people were sentenced to death and at least seven people were executed.
Women's rights
Women gained the right to vote and stand for political office under a new electoral law which took effect on 16 May. Under the law, women are required to abide by Sharia (Islamic law) when voting or standing for election.
In June, the government appointed two women to the 16-member Municipal Council, and women's rights activist Massouma al-Mubarak became Minister of Planning and Minister of State for Administrative Affairs,
Political arrests and imprisonment
The authorities detained 14 people in May for questioning about their links to the Ummah Party, which was formed in January despite the ban on political parties and apparently advocates pluralism and peaceful political change. They were released but reportedly charged with establishing a political party to promote a change of government, punishable by up to 15 years' imprisonment. Their trial had not taken place by the end of the year.
At least 29 prisoners continued to serve sentences imposed in 1991 after manifestly unfair trials before Martial Law and State Security Courts for "collaborating" with Iraqi forces during their occupation of Kuwait, Sentences ranged from 15 years to life imprisonment.
Abuses in the context of the 'war on terror'
Gun battles in January between security forces and Islamist armed groups left 12 people dead.
In February, the authorities detained at least 30 people for suspected links to al-Qa'ida and related groups. Amer Khlaif al-Enezi, the alleged leader, died in custody eight days after his arrest in unclear
Amnesty International Report 2006
KYR
circumstances; the Interior Minister later denied that he had been tortured- Others were among 37 people brought to trial in May, including 11 in absentia, on terrorism-related charges. They were accused of belonging to the Peninsula Lions Brigade, allegedly linked to al-Qa'ida, calling for war against the state and attempting to kill members of Kuwait's security forces and other "friendly forces". Some defendants said they had confessed under torture and showed the court what they said were torture injuries. Following repeated requests by defence lawyers, the court appointed an independent medical commission to probe the torture allegations. On 27 December, six were sentenced to death, one was sentenced to life imprisonment, others received prison terms of between four months and 15 years, and seven were acquitted.
Twenty-four suspected militants arrested in previous years were tried on charges of recruiting people to join terrorist groups, including groups fighting US-led forces in Iraq. One received an eight-year prison sentence, 19 received three-year terms and four were fined and released.
Six of 12 Kuwaiti nationals held for over three years in the US prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, were released and returned to Kuwait, where they were detained. Nasser Najd al-Mutairi, aged 28, was acquitted by the Lower Court on 15 June of belonging to al-Qa'ida, seeking to take up arms against a friendly state, and possessing weapons. The Appeals Court overturned the verdict on 2 November and sentenced him to five years' imprisonment. The other five were being detained pending trial.
Abuse of migrant workers
Migrant workers, who constitute a large part of Kuwait's workforce, protested against working conditions, non-payment of wages, arbitrary pay cuts, ill-treatment, unsatisfactory living conditions, and non-renewal of residence permits. The authorities said they were considering changes to the country's labour laws to improve conditions for migrant workers. In October it was announced that a new contract stipulating a minimum wage for domestic workers would come into effect at the start of 2006.
Women migrant workers in domestic service were especially vulnerable to abuse because of discriminatory legislation and practices, and the exclusion of domestic workers from the protection of labour laws. They suffered gender-based violence, including rape by employers or their associates, and had little recourse given the prevailing climate of impunity for perpetrators of crimes against migrant domestic workers.
Al country reports/ visits
Reports
•	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries; Women
deserve dignity and respect (Al Index: MDE
04/004/2005)
•	Kuwait: Time to release the remaining prisoners of
the 1991 unfair trials (Al Index: MDE 17/003/2005)
