ANZANIA
UNITED REPUBLIC OFTANZANIA
Head of state: Jakaya Kikwete (replaced Benjamin Mkapa in December)
Head of government: Edward Lowassa (replaced
Frederick Sumaye in December)
Head ofZanzibar government: AmaniAbeid Karume
Death penalty: retentionist
International Criminal Court: ratified
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not
signed
There were reports of human rights abuses during elections in Zanzibar. Female genital mutilation continued. Up to 400 people were under sentence of death; there were no executions.
Background
Elections for the Union (national) President and parliament scheduled for October were postponed until December. Jakaya Kikwete, candidate of the ruling Party of the Revolution (Chama Cha Mapinduzi, CCM),
252
Amnesty International Report 2006
THA
was sworn in as President after defeating the Civic United Front (CUF) and other opposition candidates. The CCM won 206 of the 232 parliamentary seats.
Zanzibar elections
Elections in semi-autonomous Zanzibar for the Zanzibar President, parliament and local councils were held in October. Amani Abeid Karume, the CCM candidate, was re-elected as President, defeating the CUF candidate. The CCM won 30 seats in the parliament, as against 19 for the CUF.
The CUF alleged that numerous human rights abuses, including beatings and arbitrary arrests of their supporters, were carried out by security forces and pro-CCM youth mihtias (known as "Janjaweed") during the voter registration process in early 2005.
Later there were violent clashes between CCM and CUF supporters in the weeks before the October elections, with scores of people injured. Police shot and wounded eight opposition supporters at a reportedly peaceful rally which took place on 9 October despite a ban.
For three days after the poll, CUF supporters alleging election fraud - some throwing stones and burning tyres, others protesting peacefully- confronted the security forces, who used tear gas and water-cannon to disperse protesters. Dozens of people were arrested, and two protesters reportedly died. Some detainees were charged with criminal offences but none had been tried by the end of the year.
There were allegations of widespread beatings and looting by the security forces targeting CUF supporters on Pemba island, including a reported shooting.
In November, several CUF leaders were briefly detained.
Violence against women
Female genital mutilation continued to be practised in many mainland areas, although the practice is illegal for girls under 18 years. There were no prosecutions reported.
Human rights defenders
Christopher Kidanka, an official of the Legal and Human Rights Centre, and Mpoki Bukuku, a photographer of the Citizen newspaper, were among dozens of people severely beaten by prison officers in Dar es Salaam on 10 September, The two men were investigating the forcible eviction of illegal tenants on Ukonga Prison property. Several prison officers involved were subsequently charged with assault.
Death penalty
Several death sentences were imposed by courts. There were no executions. Up to 400 people were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
