Romania
Amnesty International's main concem has continued to be the punishment by imprisonment or forced labour, sometimes on false criminal charges, of those who sought to exercise internationally accepted human rights in a non-violent manner. In June 1980 Amnesty International published Amnesty Intemational Briefing: Romania, outlining its concerns and documenting human rights violations.
The majority of cases adopted by Amnesty Intemational during the year were of people imprisoned as a result of their attempts to obtain official permission to emigrate. Some were members of Protestant sects who had previously been harassed for trying to practise their religion at places and times not authorized by the state. They have generally been sentenced to up to six months' imprisonment or forced labour, officially termed "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty", on charges of "parasitical" or "anarchic" conduct under Decree 153/1970. This decree allows for a summary trial without right of legal defence. In April 1980 Ene Chelam, Valerian Palocoser, Vasile Bilanca and Dumitm Nemesneciuc, four Pentacostalists from Suceava and Radauti, were arrested when they went to militia offices to apply for passports to emigrate. Within 24 hours they were sentenced under Decree 153/1970 to imprisonment of from four to five months. Between 23 and 27 March 1981 Emil Dumitm, Solomon Sidea, Gabriel Culea, Manea and Dumitm Stancu and Petre Varvara, six members of a Protestant sect from Constanta, were arrested and sentenced to six months' corrective labour under Decree 153/1970 after they had declared that they would go on hunger-strike in Bucharest unless they were allowed to emigrate.
Decree 153/1970 also contains provisions against soliciting for prostitution. Amnesty International believes it was used to imprison Mia Berecz, a 19-year-old Baptist from Constanta on false charges. After several unsuccessful attempts to obtain permission to emigrate to the United States to join her parents, she travelled to Bucharest to make a further application. While drinking coffee in a milk-bar she was reportedly accosted by a young man, a foreign student. State security officers instantly appeared and accused her of offering sexual relations for payment. She was sentenced on 26 March 1980 to five months' imprisonment by the court of sector 3 in Bucharest.
Romanian citizens who publicly demonstrate in support of their
315 	
human rights are Hable to imprisonment under Article 321 of the criminal code for "disturbing the public peace". In September 1980 Gerhard Kloos and Doru Bodnariuc, two young men from Medias whose applications to emigrate had repeatedly been refused, demonstrated in the market-place of Medias. They carried banners and posters demanding that the Romanian authorities respect their fundamental human rights by allowing them to emigrate. It was reported they they were immediately arrested and shortly afterwards sentenced to five years' imprisonment by a court in Medias. The trial reportedly took place in camera, and the defendants were denied access to defence counsel. Both men were reportedly beaten by police after their arrest, and suffered from poor health in the prison of Aiud where they were detained.
A number of Romanians whose applications to emigrate have repeatedly been refused have tried to leave the country without official permission, an offence punishable under Article 245 of the criminal code with from six months' to three years' imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational has adopted several such people as prisoners of conscience. In March 1981 two young women from lasi, Silvia Tamicem and Elena Boghian, were sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment for illegally crossing the border into Yugoslavia, where they were arrested by Yugoslav border guai^ds and retumed to Romania.
Amnesty Intemational has adopted as prisoners of conscience a number of religious believers imprisoned in connection with the peaceful pursuit of religious activities. A group of Christians were arrested near Radauti in October 1980 while attempting to take Bibles across the border into the Soviet Union. They were then allegedly beaten by police to extract information and confessions from them. According to sources in Western Europe, a 26-year-old man died as a result of this beating; Amnesty International has not been able to verify this report. In January 1981 at least five of these Christians — Michael Kloos, Manfred Herberth, Gheorghe Hofman, Mathias Fackner and Paul Gross — were tried in camera by a court in Radauti and reportedly sentenced to prison terms of between one and a half and four years, and fined, on charges of illegal possession of foreign currency and smuggling. Amnesty Intemational believes that the real reason for their conviction was their attempt to distribute Bibles despite the official restrictions on printing and distributing religious literature in Romania and the Soviet Union.
Amnesty Intemational has sought the release of a number of Reformed Seventh-Day Adventists sentenced for insubordination to prison terms of three to four years for refusing, on grounds of conscience, to perform military service on their Sabbath (Saturday).
316 	
They included loan Maris, Mircea Dragomir, Ion Anghel, Viorel Ardelean, Petre Anghelus and Lucian Bistriceanu.
Amnesty Intemational received a detailed report on the arrest and confinement to a psychiatric hospital of Eugen Onescu, a 21-year-old worker from Bucharest. In spring 1979 he joined an independent trade union movement called the Sindicatul Liber al Oamenilor Muncii din Romania (SLOMR), the Free Trade Union of Romanian Workers. On 26 May 1979 he was forcibly brought to the Kula Annexe of the Dr Marinescu psychiatric hospital No. 9 where he was held for three weeks and given heavy doses of sedatives with painful side effects. Mihai Moise, a 45-year-old former teacher, returned to Romania in July 1980 after some years in France. On 15 August he stood before the building of the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party with a document complaining that assurances by the authorities that he would be provided with work and lodging had not been met. He was arrested, and after four days' detention without food or contact with anyone outside, forcibly confined in Constanta psychiatric hospital. Amnesty Intemational appealed for his release which reportedly took place in December 1980.
Amnesty Intemational did not leam of other such cases during the year and it is possible that this form of repression of dissent may have decreased. Amnesty International was keenly interested in the application of a new decree, No. 313/1980, dealing with "assistance to dangerously mentally ill persons", which replaced Decree 12/1965, under which a number of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International in the past had been forcibly confined to psychiatric hospital.
Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release, before the expiry of their sentences, of prisoners of conscience Gheorghe Brasoveanu, Dr lonel Cana, Gheorghe Rusu and Robert Damboviceanu. However despite appeals by Amnesty International Father Calciu, an Orthodox priest and former political prisoner, continued to be imprisoned. At Christmas and Easter 1980 his food rations were repK)rtedly greatly reduced for 10 days. His health was believed to be extremely poor. On 11 Novem.ber 1980 Father Calciu went on hunger-strike to demand a retrial in public. In December, despite forcible feeding, he had reportedly suffered a severe loss of weight and his life was in danger, he was transferred to Jilava prison hospital where he was believed to be at the end of April 1981.
Conditions of detention and trial procedures for prisoners of conscience have seriously infringed intemationally accepted standards. Amnesty International has received many reports of prisoners of conscience being beaten and threatened during investigation to extort confessions. Some have been held incommunicado; others have had
317 	
only minimal access to family and defence counsel. The right to defence counsel of the defendant's choice has frequently been denied. Defendants have complained of hasty, prejudged trials, and of being deliberately humiliated by the court Amnesty International continued to be concerned at the use of Decree 153/1970 to imprison dissenters by means of summary trial without right of legal defence.
Prison conditions, as described by former prisoners of conscience, fell well below the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Over-crowding, poor diet and insanitary conditions have severely impaired prisoners' health. Medical care has been inadequate, a matter of particular concern to Amnesty International since many prisoners of conscience had health problems before being imprisoned. Prisoners of conscience were made to work in conditions which were often primitive and were punished if they failed to meet production targets. Amnesty International has received several reports that prisoners have been kept in chains in cells.
Under the 1969 criminal code 28 crimes carry a discretionary death sentence. The only death sentence known to Amnesty International was that of a murderer executed by firing-squad in Bucharest on 13 November 1980.
