Somalia
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, unfair trials, allegations of torture, harsh prison conditions, and the use of the death penalty;
Somalia continued to receive large numbers of refugees fleeing from the armed conflict in the Ogaden region and other parts of Ethiopia. The number of refugees — about 1.3 million — was equivalent to one third of Somalia's population. There were also a number of armed confrontations between Somali forces and Ethiopia-based Somali exile opponents — the Somali Salvation Front (SOSAF).
President Siyad Barre decreed a state of emergency on 21 October 1980 and reconstituted the military Supreme Revolutionary Council, which had ruled the country from the overthrow of the civilian government in 1969 until it was replaced by the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP) in 1976. The President said that the state of emergency was needed because "a few opportunists were threatening stability at a time when Somalia was menaced by Ethiopia".
New regional and district revolutionary committees consisting of security officials and SRSP party officers were created throughout the country and empowered to detain or sentence people to three months' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary offences", including suspicion of "engaging in such actions as have brought about the need for a declaration of the state of emergency". These powers were not subject to judicial constraints.
Sixty-eight prisoners had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International or were being investigated in April 1981. Most were held in indefinite detention without charge or trial under the National Security Law of 1970. No independent detention review mechanism exists, and the government publishes no details of those it detains. Some had been tried and convicted by security courts whose proceedings do not accord with international standards of fair trial. The prisoners included Mohamed Abshir Musse, a police brigadier general, detained under house arrest after the 1969 coup, released in 1975, arrested two months later and since then detained; Abdullahi Farah Ali "Holif', also a police brigadier general, detained in 1975 after holding ambassadorial posts under the military government; Mohamed Haji Ibrahim Egal, former Prime Minister, detained under house arrest after the 1969 coup, released in 1975 and appointed Ambassador to India, detained since 1976; and Yusuf Osman Samantar "Barde Ad", Secretary General of the Somali Democratic
77
Union until 1969, arrested several times since then for short periods, and detained since 1976.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of other prisoners arrested over the last few years. They included businessmen, civil servants, former politicians, and several members of the armed forces detained after the April 1978 coup attempt, but not charged in the subsequent treason trial in which 17 defendants were condemned and executed. Some of the prisoners were allegedly arrested because they belonged to the Majarten tribe, which is a target of persecution.
Many arrests followed a series of bomb blasts in Mogadishu in January 1981, in which two people were injured. It was alleged that some of those arrested were tortured but Amnesty Intemational was unable to verify this. Those detained without charge or trial included prominent public figures such as members of parliament Mohamed Yusuf Weirah (former Finance Minister), Mohamed Ah Warsame (former Education Minister, and SRSP central committee^ member), and Colonel Abdullahi Warsame (former Auditor General); former Labour Minister Abdulaziz Nur Hersi; Abukar Hassan Yare, a university law lecturer; Mohamed Farah Hassan, a trade union leader; Warsame Ali Farah, Mayor of Mogadishu; and a director general in the Ministry of Justice and Religious Affairs, Ahmed Abdi Hashi.
Only a few prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty Intemational were released including Jama Khalef Farah and Colonel Mohamud Mohamed Gouled, and a businessman who retumed to Somalia in 1979 under an amnesty for exiles, but was detained on arrival.
In November 1980 Amnesty Intemational issued an urgent action appeal on behalf of seven detainees known to be seriously ill. They included Yusuf Omer Azhari (former Ambassador to the United States of America), Yusuf Ah Barre (teacher and poet), Yusuf Osman Samantar "Barde Ad", and Saida Botan Elmi, who had allegedly been assaulted several times in detention. Amnesty International called for full medical treatment and asked for their release to be urgently considered on medical grounds. It said their medical complaints could be caused by harsh prison conditions, poor diet, lack of exercise, and absence of prompt qualified medical attention. The Minister of Justice and Religious Affairs replied that all prisoners were given full medical attention, with regular visits by prison doctors, but made no comment on individual cases or prison conditions generally. None of the prisoners were released.
Most prisoners of conscience and political detainees were held in Labatan Jirow prison near Baidowa or Lanta Bur prison near Afgoi. In these remote maximum security prisons diet was poor and medical
78
attention inadequate. Visits and correspondence with relatives, lawyers or religious representatives were not allowed. Reading material, association with other prisoners, exercise and access to the open air were permitted to some detainees but not others. The most prominent political detainees such as Mohamed Abshir Musse and Mohamed Haji Ibrahim Egal, were reportedly held in permanent solitary confinement, in small, permanently lit, underground cells. Conditions in Mogadishu central prison were less rigid, but detainees complained of overcrowding and poor hygiene.
The death sentence was imposed and carried out a number of times during the year for offences including mutiny, embezzlement and homicide. Four students sentenced to death by a security court in June 1979 for demonstrating against the government in Garowe had their sentences commuted and were released in late 1980. Amnesty International had appealed to President Siyad Barre for commutation of the sentences.
