Nicaragua
Amnesty International concerns centred on the trials of former National Guardsmen and others charged with criminal offences committed under the authority of the government of General Anastasio Somoza Debayle that was overthrown in July 1979. A further concern has been the situation of prisoners held for contravention of the Law of the Maintenance of Public Order and Security (Decree No. 5 of 20 July 1979).
From 19 to 27 August 1980 an Amnesty International mission visited Nicaragua to observe trials, examine new legislation, and study the cases ofindividualprisoners. This was the second of a series of missions to observe trials following invitations extended to Amnesty International by the new government of Nicaragua.
InDecember 1979Decree 185 established TribunatesEspeciales de Justicia (special courts) to try National Guardsmen and others associated with the previous government detained after the revolution. These special courts were to apply the terms ofthe penal code in force at the time of the prisoners' alleged crimes.
In the first months of the new government an estimated seven to eight thousand prisoners were held in prisons, command posts and improvised jails. One year later, in August 1980, the number was estimated to be about six thousand. In October 1980 the authorities provided Amnesty International with a list — believed to be complete — of 5,598 prisoners held under the authority of the special courts including those held in the headquarters of the State Security police, Departamento de Seguridad del Estado, Department of State Security. Since then 573 prisoners have been pardoned, 503 of them on 10 December 1980, International Human Rights Day (Decree
171
589). Several hundred others are believed to have been released on expiry of their sentences.
On 19 February 1981 the special courts were dissolved and 160 prisoners whose trials were still pending were ordered to be released; 15 others were transferred to the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts.
Although a list of the sentences passed by the special courts has apparently not yet been made public, the authorities announced that 4,331 of the 6,310 prisoners held under the special courts'jurisdiction were sentenced to prison, and that 28 per cent, or about 1,213, received terms from 21 years to the maximum of 30 years.
Amnesty International's concerns in these cases was largely with trial procedures. Although none have been adopted as prisoners of conscience, significant trial irregularities have occurred. In some cases the defendant was charged with no specific criminal act Some prisoners were convicted of murder {asesinato) although the prosecution had not named an individual victim, or the victim was said to have been "the Nicaraguan people" ("elpueblo nicaraguense"). Members of National Guard units which inflicted torture or summary executions — murder under Nicaraguan law — were held to be responsible for crimes committed by the unit Former National Guardsmen who had been stationed in the rural northeast of the country where thousands of campesinos (peasant farmers) were tortured and murdered by guardsmen between 1974 and 1979 generally received the maximum 30-year prison sentehce for "atrocious murder" {asesinato atroz). Others considered less responsible were generally charged with "criminal association", for having been members of a criminal organization — the National Guard.
The special court system established both courts of first instance and appeal courts completely separate from the ordinary judicial system. In some cases severe sentences passed by the lower courts were reduced and convictions overturned by the appeal courts. Seized documents showed that Salvador Baltodano Conrado had been a collaborator of the Oficina de Seguridad Nacional{0^^), Office of National Security. The prosecution told the court that there were "thousands and thousands of Nicaraguans murdered by the agents of death of the OSN" and that the prisoner's "conscious and vohintary" membership of the OSN was proof of guilt of criminal association and complicity in murder, for which he was sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment The judgement was overturned by the appeal court which accepted the defence that no specific crime had been shown, and that the defendant had only served the OSN as a draftsman after a period of unemployment; and the sentence was reduced to one year for "criminal association" which was completed on 18 February 1981.
Although a not entirely ineffective appeals procedure existed
172
within the special courts system, verdicts confirmed by the special appeals courts could not go to appeal before an ordinary court; the 4,311 prisoners sentenced by special court had no further legal remedy against alleged miscarriages of justice. Amnesty Intemational was examining a number of cases heard by the special courts and pressing for a procedure of judicial review of verdicts where the trial before ^e special courts appeared to have been unsatisfactory.
A wide range of offences related to national security are punished with imprisonment under recent special penal legislation: notably the Ley Sobre el Mantenimiento del Orden y Seguridad Publico, Law for the Maintenance of Public Order and Security, (Decree No. 5 of 20 July 1979), the public order law. Categories of offences against public order and security include the illegal possession of firearms, explosives or "war materials" and crimes against morals. The public order law outlines broad categories of crime which encompass conspiracy and violent opposition to the state. Article 4 of the law as modified by Decree No. 488 of 9 August 1980 makes certain oral or written "expressions, proclamations or manifestos" punishable by 10 days to two years of detention and public works. These include statements intended to undermine national security; the economy; public order; health; morals; the judicial power; and "the dignity of persons, the reputation and rights of others".
The public order law was originally decreed as an extraordinary measure to meet an extraordinary national crisis; it was to remain in force only so long as Nicaragua remained in a state of national emergency. Despite this, Decree 383 of 29 April 1980 declared that the public order law would remain in force, even though the state of emergency had been lifted, and that it would be incorporated into the ordinary penal legislation.
The definitions of crimes provided by the law are imprecise, relating to conspiracy and the freedom of expression, and they are therefore open to arbitrary interpretation. Although the ordinary courts have jurisdiction in cases under the public order law a special truncated procedure is prescribed for public order law trials. The defence is allowed only two days' preparation after an accusation has been made to the court After the trial has lasted three days, sentence must be passed within 48 hours (Article 5, Decree No. 34). Courts hearing pubhc order cases are also exempted from the normal rules of evidence (Article 2, Decree No. 149).
About 100 prisoners are believed to have been convicted of serious offences under the public order law. Several were prosecuted for involvement in recent political violence; from armed clashes with the army and the militia in the Honduran border area and some parts of the Pacific coast to the murder of several teenagers taking part in the
173
national literacy campaign.
Amnesty International has made inquiries about several public order cases of prisoners convicted of conspiring to carry out acts of violence, who were not accused of specific violent actions. Alejandro José Salazar Elizondo, Leonardo Somarriba González and six other Nicaraguan businessmen were convicted in December 1980 of conspiring to form an armed group to overthrow the government, and sentenced to one to nine years* imprisonment. According to trial documents almost the only evidence was the statements allegedly made by three of the accused while in the custody of the State Security police. These statements were made without the presence of a lawyer and were disavowed in court Defence lawyers pointed out during an appeal that the court had accepted these written statements prepared by the State Security police rather than sworn statements by the accused made directly to the court, and had refused to insist on the presence in court of the responsible officers of the State Security police.
In a further appeal pending before the Supreme Court of Justice the defence has contended that while the eight were convicted on arms charges, no arms were produced in evidence and that the charge of having "disseminated orally or in writing proclamations or manifestos that undermine public security and the national economy" was not substantiated as no material evidence of such writings or testimonies of such statements had been produced.
The defence alleged that it had been hampered by the court's refusal to make proper arrangements for calling defence witnesses, in part because of the summary procedure used in the trial. The accused were notified of the general nature of the charges on a Tuesday (2 December 1980), had to name a defence lawyer and prepare liieir defence within 48 hours, and were sentenced the following Wednesday (10 December). The defence claimed that the sole basis for prosecution was "severe criticism [of the government] made during a social gathering".
Colonel Bernardino Larios Montiel and 12 alleged accomplices were similarly convicted of having organized an armed opposition group and having planned the abduction or killing of government leaders. Colonel Larios was a former N ational G uard officer who was jailed and exiled by the Somoza government and later joined the revolutionary forces; he served as Minister of Defence from July to December 1979. The prisoners were detained in September 1980, and convicted in October; Colonel Larios received a sentence of seven years' imprisonment Amnesty International has not yet determined whether Colonel Larios and others convicted in similar cases could be considered prisoners of conscience, but concern has
174
been expressed over irregularities in trial procedures in these cases, and appeals were being followed closely.
José Esteban González, National Coordinator of the unofficial Permanent Commission on Human Rights of Nicaragua, and Vice-President of the Partido Social-Christiano, a Christian Democratic Party, was detained on 19 February 1981 by order of the First District Criminal Court of Managua on charges under Article 4 of the public order law. He was accused of having made public statements that were "intended to disrupt national security and integrity, public safety, and the national economy" and to abuse the "dignity of persons, and the reputation and rights of others". He had visited Europe, met political groups and international organizations, and had an audience with Pope John Paul II. He was accused of "slandering" the Nicaraguan people when press reports quoted him as claiming that "torture and repression" in Nicaragua was as bad as under President Somoza — statements he later claimed had been misinterpreted.
On 20 February 1981 Amnesty International expressed its dismay at the arrest of José González, whom it considered a prisoner of conscience, and two days later was informed that he had been detained on a court order and that his trial would be rapidly concluded. On 3 March José González was acquitted and released after a two-hour hearing.
During preceding months leading members of the government had accused the Permanent Commission on Human Rights in the press of orchestrating a campaign against Nicaragua for political purposes. On 12 February 1981 Nicaraguan police had occupied the commission's building, after the Ministry of Justice ordered the organization "suspended" on the grounds that it was not legally registered.
The following day Amnesty International cabled the five members of the Nicaraguan executive, XhQ Junta de Reconstrucción Nacional, to deplore the ruling of the Justice Minister and to urge the junta to overturn the decision. An international press release was issued on the same day, emphasizing that measures by governments to obstruct or repress human rights organizations were incompatible with international standards for freedom of expression.
Amnesty International was informed the following day that the Justice Ministry decision had been reversed, and that the commission would be permitted to reopen immediately to continue its work in "the promotion of human rights". No further government harassment has come to the attention of Amnesty International.
Since 21 August 1979 the Estatuto sobre Derechos y Garantías de los Nicaragüenses, Law of the Rights and Guarantees of the Nicaraguans, has abolished the death penalty, and prohibited torture.
175
and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Although the use of torture was endemic under the govemment of President Somoza (see The Republic of Nicaragua: an Amnesty Intemational Report, 1976), Amnesty Intemational has received no convincing accounts alleging systematic ill-treatment or torture of prisoners under the present govemment
A memorandum detailing Amnesty Intemational's concems was in preparation for submission later in 1981, incorporating the findings of its missions.
