Venezuela
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the alleged ill-treatment of detainees by civil and military political police. Wilmer Ramos, said to have been a member of the Venezuelan Communist Party, was detained without warrant by the Dirección de los Servicios de Inteligencia y Prevención (DI SIP), the civilian political pohce, and died in custody two days later. He was detained on 23 December 1980 without violence or injury, but was taken from the DISIP headquarters in Portuguesa the next day with serious internal injuries; he died in hospital one day later, and his death was attributed to injuries caused by severe beatings. The Attorney-General, Dr Pedro J. Mantellini, responsible for the government response to abuses by security forces, appointed a special investigator to examine the case.
Six Colombian citizens whose small private plane made an unauthorized forced landing inside Venezuela in November 1980 were held for five days by the Dirección de Inteligencia Militar (DIM), military intelligence, at San Cristobal, Apure state. After the six returned to Colombia, pilot Ernesto Gaviria alleged that they had been tortured with electric shocks during an interrogation in which they had been charged with both spying and drug trafficking. It is not known whether the charges have been investigated by the Attorney General.
In December 1980 several officials commented on the Amnesty Intemational Report 1980. Although they recognized the organization's impartiality they stressed that abuses reported in Venezuela were not government policy. Attorney-General Mantellini said measures had been taken to investigate abuses cited in the report and to punish the guilty. Dr Mantellini said that he would "not deny" that "there have been tortures and there have been disappearances", but he stressed these were generally cleared up and "their authors submitted to the action of justice".
However the fate of two people cited in the 1980 report remained unknown. Angel Rodriguez Perez, a member of the Partido de la Revolución Venezolana (PRV), Party of the Venezuelan Revolution, headed by former guerrilla leader Dou¿as Bravo, "disappeared" in February 1980 when he was allegedly seen in the custody of the Po/ic/a Técnica Judicial, the national detective corps. Former political prisoner
189	
Nicolas Montes Beltran, reportedly seen in DIM custody after visiting prisoners in the Caracas Cárcel Modelo (model prison) in March 1980, has also "disappeared". Security officials have denied that the two were ever detained, and investigators from the Attorney-General's office have failed to provide satisfactory explanations.
