South Africa
The main concerns of Amnesty International were detention without trial and the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, bannings, torture and the death penalty.
There were changes in the constitution during the year. The exclusively white Senate was abolished by legislation enacted during the 1980 parliamentary session and replaced by a new body, the President's Council, which includes representation from the "Coloured", Indian and Chinese communities as well as the white population group. Representatives of the majority African population were, however, specifically excluded from participation in the President's Council which, unlike the former Senate, has advisory and not legislative powers.
This constitutional change coincided with a long and bitter boycott of schools by "Coloured" and black students protesting at in-equaUties in education. The boycott began and received wide support in the Western Cape area, where the majority of the "Coloured" population lives.
Black opposition to government policies was not confined to education. Black trade unionism grew rapidly, and there was an almost unprecedented number of strikes and industrial disputes. Violent opposition to the government also grew, particularly by
79
members of the banned African National Congress (ANC).
The government's response to black protest, non-violent as well as violent, was marked by large-scale violations of human rights. The schools boycott, the rash of strikes and industrial disputes and the upsurge of ANC activity were met by waves of arrests and detentions, political trials and bannings. The press also came under renewed pressure. Post, the main newspaper for blacks since the banning of The World in October 1977, was effectively suppressed by the govemment in late 1980. Five black journalists, all leading members of the Media Workers' Association of South Africa (M WASA), were restricted under banning orders and thus prevented from working as joumalists. Among them were MWASA President Zwelakhe Sisulu, the son of a jailed ANC leader, Walter Sisulu, serving life imprisonment on Robben Island, and Albertina Sisulu, a veteran opponent of apartheid who has been held under repeated banning orders for over 16 years. The banned joumalists were all adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational.
The ruling National Party govemment of Prime Minister P. W. Botha also took strong action against its opponents abroad. In January 1981 South African military forces entered Mozambique attacking and destroying houses occupied by ANC members in the Matóla area of Maputo. At least 15 people, mainly refugees from South Africa, were killed in the raid and several others were captured and taken back to South Africa. In February 1981 Dhaya Pillay, a South African refugee employed as a schoolteacher in Swaziland, was abducted and secretly repatriated by agents apparently acting on behalf of South Africa. He was subsequently handed back by the South African authorities after several of his abductors were arrested by police in Swaziland, but no information was given by the govemment in Pretoria to indicate why, or at what place, he had been detained incommunicado for some three weeks. Amnesty International's inquiries about Dhaya Pillay's abduction and detention received no response from the South African Govemment.
The authorities continued throughout the year to use detention without trial extensively against critics and opponents. In mid-1980 several hundred people were arrested in the Westem Cape and other areas where the schools boycott had spread. As well as school students, many of them children under 16 years of age, the arrested included teachers, community leaders and others who supported the boycott or in other ways backed the students' stand. More than 130 detainees were placed in preventive detention under Section 10 of the Internal Security Act. They were generally allowed regular visits from close relatives and most were released by mid-August 1980. They were not charged. Many of the detainees were adopted as prisoners of
80
conscience by Amnesty Intemational. Those who remained in detention beyond August 1980, some of whom went on hunger-strike to protest against their continued imprisonment without trial, were also adopted by Amnesty International.
Most of those detained in connection with the schools boycott were held under other detention provisions, such as Section 6 of the Terrorism Act, which stipulate that detainees be held incommunicado and permit the security police to withhold all information about those detained. After interrogation a number of detainees were charged and brought to trial. Others were not charged but were kept in detention for long periods because they were considered potential state witnesses. For example at least 10 school students aged between 13 and 17 years, who were the subject of a concerted Amnesty Intemational appeal shortly after their arrest in August 1980, were still believed to be detained more than seven months later.
Trade unionists in a number of industrial disputes were also detained without trial. Joseph Mavi, President of the Black Municipal Workers' Union (BMWU), was detained incommunicado in late July 1980 during a strike by some 10,000 black employees of the Johannesburg municipality, many of them BMWU merribers. He and two other BMWU officials were later charged with sabotage. This charge was withdrawn and replaced by a lesser charge, of which they were acquitted in March 1981. The strike was broken when large numbers of black workers were forcibly removed from Johannesburg to their respective "homelands". In the Eastem Cape at least 15 leading members of unregistered black trade unions were detained for several weeks at the end of 1980. They were held in the Ciskei "homeland" under legislation authorizing incommunicado detention without trial. Several went on hunger-strike. More Eastem Cape trade unionists were detained in April 1981.
Bonisile Nomshe, an official of the African Food and Canning Workers Union was arrested in June 1980 and detained incommunicado until Febmary 1981 when he was required to testify as a state witness in a political trial. He refused to do so and was then jailed for one year by the trial judge for contempt of court. He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. Mandla Gxanyana, the defendant against whom he was required to testify, was convicted, fined and sentenced to six months' imprisonment
Many other suspected opponents of the government were detained during the year. They included leaders of political organizations such as the Azanian People's Organisation (AZAPO), Natal Indian Congress (NIC) and the Labour Party. Leading members of the black Congress of South African Students (COSAS) and the white National Union of South African Students (NUSAS) were also
81
detained, as were several journalists, church and community workers. Among the latter were Alfred Metele and Mzwandile Msoki, employed by the South African Council of Churches to assist political prisoners and their families. Alfred Metele was twice detained in the Ciskei; Mzwandile Msoki was detained without trial for more than nine months.
Amnesty Intemational campaigned against detention without trial and intervened with the authorities on behalf of many of those detained, urging that they should be released if not charged.
There were many political trials during the year. At a number defendants and witnesses made allegations of torture. Almost without exceptioft, it was impossible to verify these rei>orts since the alleged victims were held in incommunicado detention by security police. However one claim was resolved when the Minister of Police agreed an out-of-court settlement for damages with Cynthia Montwedi, a former political detainee who claimed that she had been,tortured by security police in Johannesburg in April 1978.
One of the most significant political trials, and one in which torture allegations were made, was of nine alleged members of the ANC charged with treason and offences under the Terrorism Act The trial came after several violent acts earlier in the year, including an attack on a police station in January 1980 and tíie seizure of a bank in Pretoria the same month, which resulted in the deaths of three ANC guerrillas and several civilian hostages. In November 1980 all nine defendants were convicted of treason: three were sentenced to death and the others received prison sentences ranging from 10 to 20 years. This was the only political trial to result in the imposition of the death penalty.
In a number of other major political trials defendants charged under the Terrorism Act or the law against sabotage received severe prison sentences upon conviction for non-violent offences. Some were adopted as prisoners of conscience. The Terrorism Act and the law goveming sabotage carry a five-year mandatory minimum sentence. Several young people under the age of 18 were among those convicted at such trials and sentenced to terms of imprisonment on Robben Island.
In February 1981 the Minister of Justice announced that certain categories of convicted prisoners would be granted additional remission of sentence at the end of May 1981 to mark the 20 th anniversary of the Republic. However prisoners convicted of political offences were specifically excluded from this amnesty. It is government policy to deny political prisoners any remission of sentence, although most convicted criminals receive up to one-third remission. E arlier, in mid-1980, a major campaign in South Africa for the release of ANC leader
82
Nelson Mandela, imprisoned on Robben Island since he was jailed for life in 1964, proved unsuccessful. Paul David, a lawyer and one of the campaign organizers, was detained without trial and the Prime Minister stated pubhcly that Nelson Mandela would not be released.
Several new banning orders were imposed during the year. The Minister of Justice banned Curtis Nkondo and Fanyana Mazibuko, respectively Chairman and Secretary of the Soweto Teachers' Action Committee, in mid-1980. Helen Joseph, a well-known opponent of apartheid, was banned for the fourth time in June 1981. Aged75, she had first been placed under a restriction order in 1957 and in 1962 had been the first banned person to be placed under partial house arrest. She had previously been under a banning order until 1971. Saravanan Chetty, who had also been banned before, was served with a new order in February 1981. Among other restrictions, he was subjected to partial house arrest with only two specified relatives allowed to visit his home. His banning order was imposed after he apparently called for the NIC to boycott official anniversary celebrations. Most banned people were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
Two conscientious objectors were also adopted by Amnesty International. Peter Moll and Richard Steele were both sentenced to one-year terms of imprisonment in detention barracks following their refusal to undertake military service in the Defence Force. They were prosecuted as military defaulters because, as Baptists, they did not belong to one of the "peace" churches recognized by the government when granting conscientious objector status. During their imprisonment both men refused treatment different from that accorded to recognized conscientious objectors, and as a result they were punished and placed in solitary confinement. After some time the authorities conceded their recognition as conscientious objectors. Peter Moll was released in December 1980; Richard Steele was freed in February 1981.
The death penalty remained a major concem. It was extensively used and may be applied for a wide range of offences. According to official statistics, a total of 130 executions were carried out at Pretoria prison in 1980. Forty-three of those hanged were officially classified as "Coloured" and 85 were black. One white and one Indian were also executed. None of those hanged had been convicted of political offences, they had mostly been convicted of murder. James Mange, an alleged ANC member who had been sentenced to death for treason in November 1979, had his sentence commuted to 20 years' imprisonment by the Appeal Court in September 1980. Ncimbithi Johnson Lubisi, Petrus Tsepo Mashigo and Naphtali Manana, the three alleged ANC members convicted and sentenced to death in
83
November 1980, also on treason charges, were awaiting the outcome of their appeal in April 1981.
Amnesty International appealed to the government to grant clemency to these prisoners. Similar appeals had earlier been made on behalf of James Mange. Appeals for commutation of sentence were also made on behalf of people sentenced to death for non-political offences. For several months in mid-1980 Amnesty International campaigned against the death penalty and tried to influence the authorities towards abolition, but by April 1981 no reduction in the use of the death penalty had become apparent. In February 1981 Helen Suzman, an opposition member of the House of Assembly, called for a committee of inquiry into the death penalty when the Minister of Justice announced that 130 executions had taken place in 1980, but this was not accepted by the government.
Amnesty Intemational made formal submissions concerning human rights in South Africa to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and the United Nations Special Committee Against Apartheid.
