Japan
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of the death penalty as a punishment for criminal offences. On 18 November 1980 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki and to Minister of Justice Seisuke Oku-no expressing concern at the number of executions — 44 during the five-year period 1974 to 1978 — and at the large number of offences — 17 — for which the death penalty is provided in Japanese law. It
226	
urged the Prime Minister and Minister of Justice to support legislation to abolish the death penalty, and, pending abolition, to use their influence and authority to stop executions and commute death sentences.
Amnesty International has the names of 38 prisoners under sentence of death in Japan. A special appeal was made for the commutation of the death sentence on Hirasawa Sadamichi because of his age and deteriorating health. He was sentenced to death in 1950; by 1981 he was 89 years old. His third appeal for pardon was turned down in December 1980.
At least five death sentences have been pronounced for murder since May 1980. Amnesty International recently learned that one execution was carried out in December 1980.
Kampuchea
Amnesty International was concerned about the forcible return in May 1980 of Kampuchean refugees in Thailand to Kampuchea where they risked possible imprisonment, ill-treatment or execution by either the Government of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) or by resistance groups along the Thai-Kampuchean border. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports of political imprisonment and of political trials in the PRK, and believed that some prisoners of conscience might be detained by the PRK authorities for "reeducation".
The armed forces of the former Government of Democratic Kampuchea (DK) overthrown in January 1979 and the anti-com-munist resistance groups, the largest of which is the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) or Sereika, continued to fight the armies of Viet Nam and the PRK from bases along the Thai-Kampuchean border. The Government of the PRK, which controls the capital Phnom Penh and most'of the country, held local elections in March 1981. On 10 March 1981 it circulated a draft constitution for pubhc discussion.
In July 1980 the PRK authorities announced that between 23 June and the beginning of July they had captured 600 people among Kampuchean refugees repatriated from Thailand, who, they claimed, had been sent by resistance groups to conduct propaganda or sabotage.
227	
Some were later released. "Treason" trials of partisans of the KPLNF took place in June and in November 1980. On 5 June 1980, 17 people, mostly PRK officials who had been arrested in August 1979, were tried under Decree Law No. 2-DL of 15 May 1980 "for treason against the revolution and other crimes". The charges against them under Articles 3(a) and 4(a) of Decree No. 2-DL included: propaganda against the political program of the Kampuchea National United Front for National Salvation (KNUFNS); opposition to the relations between the PRK and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam; attempts to establish a political and military network; affiliation and contact with the KPNLF; and communications with Thai and United States intelligence agencies. They were sentenced on 7 June to terms of imprisonment ranging from three years to 20 years. Amnesty International was concerned at the delay between the prisoners' arrests and their trial, and at the retroactive application of legislation. It has not been able to assess whether the prisoners were given a fair trial. In November 1980 the trial took place of a group called "the nationalists", most of them reportedly public servants or soldiers imder pre-1975 governments. They faced charges of plotting to overthrow the government in liaison with resistance groups on the Thai-Kampuchean border. They were sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging between two and 20 years. Their leader, tried in his absence, was sentenced to life imprisonment
In late 1980 the authorities of the PRK stated that their only prisoners y/ere Khmer Rouge, that is supporters of the DK, and armed counter-revolutionaries. However Amnesty International received reports throughout the year that people had been detained on suspicion of criticizing the government or the Vietnamese or for attempting to leave the country. Some were apparently sent for "reeducation" in accordance with a memorandum of the Interior Ministry of 29 November 1980 which gave instructions on the arrest and "re-education" of "any person carrying out propaganda campaigns to sabotage internal unity and Kampuchea-Vietnam-Laos solidarity". According to some reports hundreds of people were detained without trial in prisons in Phnom Penh for criticizing the government Amnesty International was investigating these reports.
On 2 December 1980 and on 7 January 1981, the anniversaries of tlie foundation of the KNUFNS and of the overthrow of the DK, a number of prisoners who had "reformed" themselves were released or had their sentences reduced. Details were not known.
Decree Law No. 2-DL provides the death penalty for counterrevolutionary activities and treason, as well as for other criminal offences. Reports that seven civil servants were executed for "anti-Vietnamese activities" in October 1980 were denied by the PRK
228	
authorities.
The Government of Democratic Kampuchea, overthrown in January 1979 but still recognized by the United Nations, signed the International Covenant on-Civil and Political Rights on 17 October 1980.
