Viet Nam
Amnesty International's main concerns were the continuing detention without charge or trial of tens of thousands of members of the pre-1975 South Vietnamese administration and armed forces; arrests on political grounds and the absence of adequate legal safeguards; the lack of proper medical care for detainees in need of specialized treatment; the psychological and physical effects of long-term detention for an indeterminate period; and the death penalty.
Following a mission to Viet Nam in December 1979 Amnesty
270	
International submitted a memorandum outlining its concerns to the government in May 1980. The memorandum focused upon Amnesty International's long-standing concern for the thousands of prisoners held without charge or trial in "re-education" camps after the end of the war in 1975. Although the transfer of power in Viet Nam in April 1975 took place without summary trials and executions Amnesty International was concerned that thousands of prisoners were still detained with no indication from the government as to when they could expect to be released.
The poUcy of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Viet Nam, which ruled from the end of April 1975 until the reunification of the country on 2 July 1976, towards personnel of the former government was outlined in a policy statement of 25 May 1976. This decree stated that "re-education" would last three years and that those individuals charged with criminal acts would be tried. However in discussions with the Amnesty International delegation the Vietnamese authorities stated that the 26,000 prisoners acknowledged to be in "re-education" camps were detained under the provisions of Resolution 49 NQ/TVQH of 1961 which stipulates that although the period of detention for"re-education" is three years, this may be extended.
In its memorandum to the government in May 1980 Amnesty International pointed out that it had consistendy opposed prolonged administrative detention without trial throughout the world. Such detention was incompatible with internationally recognized standards of human rights and basic principles of justice; it led inevitably to a severe curtailment of civil liberties and deviations from normal procedural safeguards. Amnesty Intemadonal recommended that the system of compulsory detention without trial for the purpose of "reeducation" be abolished. It advised as a first and urgent step the establishment of an independent commission with full power to examine the grounds of detention in each individual case. Where there were not sufiïcient grounds for specific criminal charges the individual should be immediately released, and the decisions of the commission should be binding on the executive.
In September 1980 the government replied in writing to the memorandum. In its reply, and in the course of further discussions between Amnesty International and Vietnamese officials in Lx)ndon, the government argued that the policy of "re-education" which it had pursued was more humane than resorting to trials and judicial condemnation. Moreover those still detained in "re-education" camps were held to be guilty of "national treason" and to "have committed acts detrimental to public security".
In its reply the govenmient announced that some 6,000 detainees
271	
had been freed between December 1979 and September 1980 leaving 20,000 prisoners remaining.in "re-education" camps. It said that "the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is thinking about measures to encourage those of the former regime who are still in camps to actively reform and re-educate themselves ... to open ways for those who would show real repentance to go back to their families and to society." The government also promised to "examine seriously the problem of ratification of intemational covenants suggested by Amnesty International".
Amnesty Intemational sent an aide mémoire to Prime Minister Pham Van Dong in January 1981 welcoming the news of further releases of detainees from "re-education" camps and the repeated assurances of the strict prohibition of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, which was reflected in Article 69 of the new 1980 Vietnamese Constitution. However Amnesty Intemational pointed out that most prisoners in "re-education" camps had spent some five and a half years in detention without charge or trial. Amnesty International maintained that individuals should not be detained indefinitely merely because of their rank or position in a former administration. Nor could it be said that all those who had formerly held high positions were by that very fact "guilty of national treason". This was particularly true since many of the cases known to Amnesty International were people whose positions could not be said to have involved them in the prosecution of the war. The aide mémoire cited several examples including adopted prisoners of conscience Buu Huong and Dr Vu Quoc Thong. Buu Huong was a diplomat whose entire career had been spent in the financial branch of the Foreign Service of South Viet Nam: Dr Vu Quoc Thong had been Dean of the Faculty of Law in Saigon University; not only had he not occupied an official position in the former administration but he had openly criticized it Dr Vu Quoc Thong and Buu Huong have since been released from detention.
Amnesty International's aide mémoire pointed out that the detainees had been deprived of the right to presumption of innocence. Detainees had to accept the need for their own "re-education" as a precondition for their release. Since they had not been convicted by a court of any offence this could not be reconciled with respect for the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty, proclaimed in Article 11 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and guaranteed in Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In addition, the retroactive application by the Vietnamese Government of legislation violated an important principle of intemational law that no one should be penalized for an act which was not designated a crime at the time it was committed. This principle finds clear
j
Ill
expression in Article 11 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In view of these factors Amnesty International recommended that detainees in "re-education" camps against whom there were no grounds for specific criminal charges should be released as speedily as possible.
Amnesty International also raised in the aide mémoire the cases of several prisoners of conscience who had no connection with the former administration of South Vietnam and who were arrested after 1975. Among these were the lawyer Trieu Ba Thiep; Duyen Anh, a well-known Vietnamese writer (see Amnesty International Report 1980)\ Pham Van Tam, a former senator and Secretary-General of the Vietnamese League of Human Rights; and Cao Giao, ajoumalist. Trieu Ba Thiep and Cao Giao have since been released from detention.
In March 1981 the Vietnamese Government replied by citing historical precedents such as the Nuremberg Tribunal of 1946, the Tokyo international tribunal of 1948 and the trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961 to justify its retroactive appliction of" laws punishing counterrevolutionary crimes". The "application of DRV (North Vietnamese) law against those Vietnamese in the South who collaborated with the enemy with a view to consciously betraying their homeland is both legitimate and legal."
Although the Vietnamese reply spoke of an increased rate of releases no definite commitments were made. In December 1980 there had been unconfirmed reports from Hanoi that most of the 20,000 prisoners still held by the government would be released in 1981. No further details have been forthcoming although there has been a steady stream of individual releases throughout the year.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of more than 150 prisoners in Viet Nam. Among them were Do Lai Ky and Dr Truong Van Quynh. Do Lai Ky, 56 years old, was a professional diplomat and at the time he was sent to a "re-education" camp in 1975 a senior civil servant in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He has been detained for more than six years and was being held in the camp at Nam Ha, Ha Nam Ninh province in northern Viet Nam. Dr Truong Van Quynh was a distinguished Vietnamese physician and former director of the Nhi Dong Children's Hospital in Saigon and of the Cho Quan Psychiatric Hospital. He is believed to have been detained because he was a member of the Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang (VNQDD), the Vietnamese Kuomintang or Nationalist Party.
Other detainees who have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience were arrested months and even years after the end of military conflict in April 1975. Amnesty International believes that many were detained for the non-violent expression of
273	
views critical of the present government, for example Nguyen Sy Te and Vu Ngoc Truy. Nguyen Sy Te was a writer and formerly a Professor of Education at Saigon University. His writings are believed to have been classified as "reactionary". At the time of his arrest in February 1976 Nguyen Sy Te was reportedly writing an essay entitled "A Humanist Ideology" critical of the policies of the government. He was detained for two years in Chi Hoa prison in Ho Chi Minh City and then transferred to a camp in Gia Trung in the central highlands where he remained a prisoner. He was reportedly in extremely poor health. Vu Ngoc Truy was a lawyer detained^ Amnesty International believes, for his anti-communist views. Arrested in June 1978 he has now been held for more than three years without charge or trial.
The cases of Nguyen Sy Te and Vu Ngoc Truy illustrate the inadequacy of legal safeguards for people arrested in Viet Nam. Under Article 5 of the Provisional Revolutionary Government Decree No. 02/SL/76 of 23 March 1976, a person may be detained for up to 12 months for interrogation and investigation by the security authorities. Even this long period has been exceeded by the Vietnamese security authorities. For example the journalist Cao Giao was detained for more than two and a half years without charge or trial before being released in February 1981. In its memoranduin of May 1980 Amnesty International pointed out that this lengthy period of investigation was not compatible with accepted standards of human rights because it allowed a person to be deprived of liberty without any judicial proceedings and without being charged. Amnesty International urged the government to limit the period for interrogating people suspected of political offences.
A major concern of Amnesty International during the year has been conditions in "re-education" camps and in particular the inadequacy of medical care for prisoners needing specialized treatment. Despite shortages of both medical personnel and drugs the government has an obligation to ensure that medical conditions in "reeducation" camps at least match those recommended in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Amnesty International brought several cases of sick or aged prisoners to the attention of the authorities and urged their release on humanitarian grounds.
Amnesty International has received reports of prisoners detained in "re-education" camps after the prison authorities knew they had terminal diseases. Truong Van Truoc died in August 1980 of cancer of the stomach in detention camp 90A TD 63/TC, Thanh Hoa. Writer Ho Huu Tuong, whose case had been raised by the Amnesty International delegation in December 1979, was transferred from
274	
Xuyen Moc "re-education" camp to the hospital of Ham Tan in Thuan Hai province on 2 June 1980. Only three weeks later he died, just after he was finally given permission to return fo his family in Ho Chi Minh City. Truong Van Truoc and Ho Huu Tuong died after having been chronically ill for several months. Amnesty International recommended to the Vietnamese Govemment in January 1981 thatit undertake an urgent review of medical conditions in all "re-education" camps, and of the cases of all sick prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the right to visits and correspondence seemed to depend on detainees' progress in "reeducation" and general good conduct. Amnesty Intemational pointed out in its May 1980 memorandum that these basic rights should be seen as minimum standards and all detainees should be entitled to them without discrimination. Amnesty Intemational recommended that a system should be set up for regular inspection of prisons and camps by an independent body.
Viet Nam retains the death penalty although few executions have taken place. Most death sentences that have come to the attention of Amnesty Intemational appeared to be of people convicted of murder while attempting to flee the country.
A report was in preparation detailing Amnesty Intemational's concerns for publication in 1981.
