Laos (the Lao People's Democratic Republic)
Amnesty International's main concern was the continuing detention without charge or trial of thousands of people held in "re-education" camps since 1975. It was also concerned by new arrests and the lack of legal safeguards for those detained on political grounds. However a significant number of people were freed in late 1980 and, although precise figures and details were unavailable, there were further releases in early 1981.
Since the publication in April 1980 of its TQ\>ov\.Political Prisoners in the People's Democratic Republic of Laos, Amnesty International has continued to work on behalf of 80 political detainees whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International for adoption as prisoners of conscience or for investigation. Many were former civil servants (including a few military officers), and professional people, who had been detained in camps without trial since the change of government which marked the end of the "neutralist" coalition in Laos in 1975. Most high-ranking civil servants and military officers who were assigned to "re-education" at that time were sent to camps in Houa Phan ( Sam Neua) province, in the northeast of the country along the border with Viet Nam.
Among the prisoners of conscience for whom Amnesty International renewed its appeals was BaUene Khamdaranikom, the former Director of Civil Aviation and reportedly a member of a small "neutralist" party, the Neo Thang Noum, Youth Party. In March 1981 Amnesty International learned that Baliene Khamdaranikom had been recently released and had returned to the capital, Vientiane.
His release was one of a number that have taken place since the autumn of 1980. It was reported that about 200 people had been released from camps in Houa Phan province by the end of November 1980, and it appeared that released detainees were returning to Vientiane in small groups. A number attended the celebrations of National Day in Vientiane in December 1980. Among those known to Amnesty International whose release was later confirmed were Oudong Souvannavong, the 64-year-old former Director of the National Bank of Laos, and his brother Ouday; Soukpraseuth Sithimolada, a 4 8-year-old former diplomat and chef de cabinet in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and Chansamone Voravong, a 50-year-old cartographer-engineer and former Director of the National
237	
Agricultural Institute of Laos on whose behalf appeals had been made for proper medical treatment.
Those released were held in various camps in Houa Phan province, including camps 04,05 and 06. Some were reported to have been reintegrated into the civil service and others to have applied for administrative posts. Still others were said to have been released because of their old age or ill-health. The releases were reported to have been based on an official assessment, in each case, of whether the detainee could be reintegrated into society in view of the degree of "re-education" attained and the technical skills possessed. Although detainees continued to be released from the northeast in small groups during the first four months of 1981, it was not known how far this process would continue and what would happen to those not considered sufficiently "re-educated". Amnesty Intemational was concemed that they might be held indefinitely although they had already been detained for nearly six years without charge or trial.
In a letter to Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihane on 17 March 1981, 'Amnesty Intemational welcomed the releases, and asked whether they were part of a long-term process which would aff"ect everyone detained in "re-education" camps because of their opinions or functions under the former government. Inquiring about two groups released in January and February 1981 reportedly containing more than 100 people. Amnesty Intemational asked the govemment to make public the names and circumstances of all the people involved. It submitted a list of 99 people who had been adopted or investigated by Amnesty Intemational. Amnesty International stressed that there seemed to be no justification for continuing to detain them without charge or trial. They included Khamchanh Pradith, a 50-year-old diplomat and former Ambassador to Australia who has been held in northeast Laos since November 1975; and Viboun Abhay, Phom Bounlytay, Houmphan Norasing and Vannavong Rajkhoun, all former members of the National Coalition Consultative Council who in November 1975 were asked to go to Viengsay in Houa Phan province for a meeting of the council, but were then held there. A few members of the council were released from the northeast in 1976 but the others have been detained since then. The list included detainees of whom nothing has been heard for several years or who have been rumoured to be dead. Prasongsith Boupha, a fifth-year medical student in his mid-twenties at the time of arrest, was sent for "reeducation" at the Chinaimo military camp in Vientiane in October 1976. Despite many inquiries no official information has been disclosed about Prasongsith Boupha or other medical students sent for "re-education" at the same time.
Amnesty Intemational has also been concemed about the fate of
238	
Tiao Souk Bouavong, a 77-year-old former member of the National Assembly, who is reported to have been arrested on 15 October 1975 in Vientiane and accused of planning a coup. According to information received by Amnesty Intemational, these accusations were unfounded After his arrest he was first held in Samkhe prison, near Vientiane, and later moved to an unknown destination. Concem increased because of his age and poor health. As far as is known, he has not been tried or charged with any offence.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed by the absence of any legislation providing safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention despite statements made by the Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihane in a report to the Supreme People's Council (SPC) on 26 December 1979 in which he called on the Justice and Interior Ministries to draft laws on arrest and detention for adoption by the SPC, and stressed that "those arrested with complete evidence should be brought to court for trial immediately" and "those arrested without valid evidence must be freed". Since then governmental decrees and regulations have been reported, but have not been published, and their nature and content are not known. Although a National Congress of People's Representatives appointed the SPC to draft a new constitution, this task has not been completed and no new laws have been adopted since 1975.
In its letter to Premier Kaysone Phomvihane on 17 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational referred to these statements and asked about reports that between 200 and 400 people were arrested in Vientiane in October 1980 in a political purge within the administration.
Observers in Vientiane noted that these arrests came shortly before the anniversary celebration on 2 December of the establishment of the present government in 1975. A similar wave of arrests had taken place before the celebrations in autumn 1979. Those arrested in October 1980 were reported to have been mainly junior civil servants, but students and teachers were also held. It was later reported that a large number of those arrested were released during the following weeks and that most of the civil servants detained were charged with corruption. However it appeared that a few remained in detention on political grounds. Amnesty Intemational urged the government to make public the names of all those held and the precise charges against them, but no further information has been received.
239	
