Haití
Amnesty International was concerned about arbitrary arrests, prolonged detention without trial, allegations of ill-treatment in police custody, torture and poor prison conditions.
Sylvio Claude, who foimded the Parti démocrate chrétien haïtien (PDCH), Haitian Christian Democrat Party, in 1979, was arrested twice in 1979, released in April 1980, and again arrested in October 1980. Many supporters of his party were arrested in the following few weeks, including his daughter Marie-France Claude, Vice-President of the PDCH, on 27 October, and his son Clervio Claude on 24 November. They were considered prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational.
Between October and December 1980 a wave of arrests took place, the largest and most significant since the amnesty granted to political prisoners by President-for-Life Jean-Claude Duvalier in September 1977. Amnesty Intemational estimated that several hundred politically-motivated detentions took place. Many of those arrested were later expelled from the country, including Pierre Clitandre and Jean-Robert Hé rard, editor and deputy editor respectively of Peí// Soir, the most important opposition weekly magazine; Grégoire Eugène, íounáQi oí the Parti démocrate chrétien d'Haïti du 27 juin, Haitian Christian Democrat Party of 27 Jime, and editor of Fraternité; Richard Brisson and Michèle Montas from the independent radio station Radio Haiti-Inter; Marc Garcia from Radio Métropole; and Yves Richard, a trade unionist and Secretary-General of the Centrale autonome des travailleurs haïtiens, Autonomous Congress of Haitian Workers. Yves Richard later gave the following account of his arrrest:
"I was arrested without warrant at 10 o'clock in the morning during a meeting I was holding at the office of the well-respected Salesian fathers with 35 exploited workers from the textile company DESDAN. Without warning, a group of tontons-macoutes [Haitian paramilitary forces] burst in, and, without more ado, started beating up the workers. Fellow trade unionist Siméon Jean-Baptiste was killed by a bullet from the guns of the tontons-macoutes of Jean-Claude Duvaher. I was taken with the other workers to Casernes Dessalines (an army barracks) where we were interrogated under torture and accused for the first time of being arsonists and communist agitiitors. From that moment, I was kept completely separate from the other workers
158
and transferred to the underground cells hidden below the Palais national [National Palace], where there is no daylight. Thanks to the electric torch of the prison guard, however, I was able to distinguish skeletons, probably those of former prisoners, lying here and there on the groimd. It was like living a nightmare inside a mass grave under the Palais national."
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of about 80 prisoners in detention, most of whom were arrested during 1980. Almost all independent journalists, broadcasters, human rights activists, lawyers defending political detainees and opposition leaders in the country were arrested or expelled during 1980, putting an effective end to the already limited rights to freedom of assembly, association, expression and information. On 30 November 1980 Colonel Jean Valmé, the Chief of Police, explained that the arrests were necessary because "national and international communist agitators connected with the media have for several months been undertaking subversive activities both in the capital and in certain provincial towns with a view to creating a suitable climate for carrying out terrorist and criminal activities". However, with the exception of four people accused of arson whose confessions were allegedly obtained under torture, and Marie-France and Sylvio Claude, the detainees have not been charged or brought before a judge. The so-called "anti-communist" law of 28 April 1969 punishes "communist activities" with the death penalty.
Amnesty International received many allegations of ill-treatment and torture. Lafontant Joseph was arrested on 28 November 1980; a lawyer and the General Secretary of the Ligue haïtienne des droits humains, Haitian Human Rights League, he had defended four Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience (Ulrich Désiré, Emmanuel Noël, Gustave Colas and Robert-Jacques Telusma) during their trial in August 1980 when they were sentenced to 9 years' imprisonment He was leaving the Law Courts in Port-au-Prince where he was attempting to represent 60 workers from the national brewery who were under threat of arrest when he was forcibly detained by five men in civilian clothes. He was reported to have been severely ill-treated before being released in December 1980. A demonstration outside the Law Courts by 48 members of the Centrale autonome des travailleurs haïtiens in support of the workers from the national brewery was broken up by the tontons-macoutes and all 48 workers were arrested. They were taken to Casernes Dessalines where they were reportedly tortured. It is believed they were still in detention at the end of the year.
Ev^ns Paul, a radio journalist, was arrested on 16 October at Port-au-Prince airport after returning on a flight from New York, held
159
incommunicado for 10 days and tortured. He was released without being given any explanation of his arrest. He later described how he was tortured. After being stripped,
"I was hit in the face. I was slapped (fingers were poked in my eyes and my ears were beaten with the lower part of the palm near the wrist). It's a demoralizing sort of punishment which makes you lose your calm. Almost without a break, several people with sticks took over and gave me a severe beating. A man known as 'Baron' or 'nég marron' came into the room and said, 'But he's too comfortable here. Wait a minute.' Then he took a nylon thread and tied my wrists behind my legs (the scars are still visible). He pushed a long stick between my legs and arms. I was like a ball. I felt as if my body was going to break ever3rwhere. At that point I was beaten with sticks. At one point I felt as though I was going to die. They gave me something to drink. Then they started again even worse. The skin on my buttocks had been torn away. The blood was running down. They weren't put off. On the contrary, you could say that the sight of my blood excited them even more. When I was on the point of dying, they untied me and dragged me to a dark cell. You couldn't see anything. My buttocks felt as if they'd become as big as pumpkins. Next day I had a terrible fever."
Among the people reported to be in detention were several workers and trade unionists who were arrested in July and August 1980 either during industrial disputes or for trying to set up independent trade unions. They included: Antoine Baptiste, Gabriel Marcel, Maurice Lafontant, Massillon Jean, Louis Brutus, Wilner St.-Fort, St.-Armand Mondésir, Ricot Lemoine, Georges Mondésir and Jean-Robert Désir. Two people, René Ermonce (or Hermance) and Ansélus Noël, were held after the Government of the Dominican Republic deported them. They had been refused entry by both the French and Spanish authorities. Amnesty International has expressed its concem to the French authorities about deportations of Haitians back to Haiti where they may face persecution.
Ex-prisoners have described the overcrowded and generally poor conditions found in Haitian prisons. It has been reported that children have been imprisoned for poking their tongues out at the police. Although Amnesty International has not confirmed this, it was consistent with the powers enjoyed by the paramilitary forces known as tonton-macoutes, officially named Volontaires de la sécurité nationale. National Security Volunteers. They have reportedly arrested people arbitrarily, ill-treated them and then released them for money. One refugee now living in France told Amnesty International
160
that she had been detained by a tonton-macoute because she had refused to have sexual relations with him.
A delegation from the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights which visited Haiti in August 1978 published its report during 1980. The findings were consistent with Amnesty Intemational reports on Haiti.
Some of the conclusions were as follows:
"3. There are reliable indicators that many individuals were victims of torture inflicted in certain cases by the neighbourhood chiefs, both during interrogations after arrests and during imprisonment.
4.	It has been proven that numerous persons are detained without having benefitted from any form of legal procedure, and without having access to an attomey. There is no clear-cut separation of powers in Haiti. Legal guarantees are seriously restricted by virtue of the 'state of seige' which is in effect on an almost permanent basis, and by virtue of the Security Court instituted by the law of August 25,1977, establishing procedures with limited guarantees as to the right of a legal defence. The Judiciary does not appear to have the independence necessary to exercise its functions.
5.	It may be said that freedom of inquiry, opinion, speech and dissemination of thought does not exist. There are taboo questions which cannot be discussed, such as all matters concerning the President's family, the dictatorship, the extra-budgetary revenues of the Règie du Tabac, [state-controlled tobacco industry] etc. There is recourse to procedures such as warnings and admonitions of increasing severity to journalists, issued by the Ministry of the Interior; there is also prior censorship, closing of newspapers, threats, assaults and incarcerations . . .
7. Freedom of association is extremely restricted. Article 236 (bis) of the 1948 Penal Code, which requires govemment authorization to form a group of more than twenty people, prevents the creation of any literary, political or other type of association. Trade union freedom does not exist as such. There are neither federations nor confederations or trade unions; the right to strike is limited. The govemment has made it difficult to form political parties and associations in general."
Amnesty Intemational made a statement to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States held in Washington in November 1980 on human rights violations in Haiti.
161
Amnesty International has been deeply concerned about Haitian refugees who have fled from their country, often taking great risks, because of the repressive climate. Amnesty International has written to the governments of the United States of America, Jamaica and the Bahamas about the dangers of ill-treatment and imprisonment facing Haitians if they are sent back. In October 1980 the Haitian police fired on Haitians who were trying to board a boat in Cap-Haïtien. Several people were reported drowned or injured in the panic which followed. Amnesty International asked the President-for-Life for a thorough inquiry.
