Argentina
Amnesty International's concerns focused on "disappeared" prisoners; the arbitrary arrest and detention without triid of prisoners of conscience; the subjection of political prisoners to torture and to cruel, inhuman ^d degrading treatment; and the failure of the authorities to conform to internationally recognized standards for a fair trial.
A total of 6,800 people have been registered as "disappeared" by the national human rights organization, the Permanent Assembly of Human Rights. Neither the outgoing administration of President Jorge Rafael Videla nor that of the newly-appointed head of state, General Roberto Viola (who took office on 29 March 1981), has made any move to account for them. High-ranking military authorities have repeatedly said that they will not tolerate any inquiry into these cases, which they claim were caused by the internal disorders. Amnesty Intemational has been investigating the cases of 91 "disappeared" prisoners. Despite evidence to show that these people "disappeared" after being taken into custody by police or military personnel, the authorities have provided no information about their place of detention. Amnesty International also submitted a number of cases to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearance. In its first report, which was published in January 1981, the working group indicated that it had inÎFormation on between 7,(XX) and 9,000 "disappearances" in Argentina. An analysis by the working group of 500 "disappearances" showed that it was highly improbable that the abductions were not
109
carried out by official agents. The working group specifically asked for information on 65 cases where it had a detailed description of the circumstances of the "disappearance" and the people involved had been clearly identified. The government failed to provide any details on these cases but gave assurances that "in cases where ... the cause of the disappearance is abduction of the person concerned ... the steps required for all criminal proceedings are taken". Yet of the thousands of habeas corpus writs filed by desperate families over the past six years not one has led to the discovery of the victim. Amnesty Intemational is not aware of a single case in which an alleged abductor has been brought to justice by the authorities.
In November 1980 the General Assembly of the Organization of American States considered the report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) on the state of human rights in Argentina. The Assembly urged governments to preserve and safeguard the full exercise of human rights, and cited specifically "disappearances". It recommended that central records be established to account for all people detained so that their relatives and friends might promptly learn of any arrest. It also called for arrests to be made only by competent and duly identified authorities, and for detainees to be kept only on premises recognized for that purpose.
Even appeals to the authorities to publish their own list of the "disappeared" have met with a firm refusal. On 25 March 1981 General Albano Harguindeguy, in his last press conference as Minister of the Interior, stated that although the authorities could publish an official list of "disappearances" they had no intention of doing so. However in April 1981 an important precedent was set when the remains of Roberto Daniel Rigone, who was abducted in 1977, were retumed to his family. As well as trying to establish what has happened to the people who "disappeared" during the past six years Amnesty Intemational monitored recent abductions which followed the pattern usual in "disappearance" cases. The number of new cases reported has significantly decreased by comparison with previous years: during 1980 about 30 "disappearances" were reported. Since May 1980 Amnesty International has made urgent appeals on behalf of 18 individuals seized in operations usually associated with "disappearances". Three of the victims were subsequently released, another was acknowledged to be in official custody, and the body of a fifth person was found although the cause of death could not be established.
On 24 August 1980 Gervasio Martin Guadix failed to return home. The following day a group of men in civilian clothes, believed to be members of the security forces, raided his home in Villa Lugano, Buenos Aires. A writ of habeas corpus was issued on his behalf but
110
received no response from the authorities. It is believed that he was being held in the Campo de Mayo (military barracks) in Buenos Aires province. On 18 September Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal ofi his behalf. In December 1980 the Argentine authorities stated that he had committed suicide on 2 December 1980 near Paso de los Libres, a town in Corrientes province, near the Argentine-Brazil border. It was alleged that he had been a member of a subversive organization. The statement did not clarify the circumstances of his suicide nor has his body been returned to his family.
There is evidence that Argentine military and security forces are carrying out illicit operations outside Argentina. On 30 June 1980 Amnesty International denounced the abduction of four Argentine nationals in the Peruvian capital, Lima. Julia Inés Santos de Acabal, Julio César Ramírez, Noemi Esther Gianetti de Molfíno and one other were kidnapped on 12 and 13 June by a group of Argentine security agents who were allegedly helped by members of the Peruvian army inteUigence corps. It appears that Federico Frías, a prisoner from Buenos Aires, was brought from Argentina to identify the others. He tried to escape but was wounded in the attempt and has since "disappeared". On 20 June the Peruvian Ministry of the Interior announced that three Argentines, who were not named, had been expelled to Bolivia because their documents were not in order. Amnesty International received unconfirmed reports that one of the kidnap victims, Julia Inés Santos de Acabal, died under torture in Peru. On 21 July the body of Noemi Gianetti de Molfino was discovered in a Madrid flat after an anonymous phone call to the Spanish police. The cause of her death could not be established, nor has there been any satisfactory explanation of how or why she went to Spain without notifying members of her family living in France.
Amnesty International intervened with the authorities to establish the whereabouts of two factory workers who had been abducted from their homes on 11 and 13 March 1981 in Haedo, Buenos Aires province. Armed men in plain clothes abducted Jorge Magrino, and Héctor Orlando Piñón. Although the men were taken away in front of witnesses, local police refused to note formal complaints by relatives. Both men were released after a few days; Amnesty International has received reliable reports that Jorge Magrino had been tortured with electric shocks.
Amnesty International protested against the abduction of 30-year-old Ángel Romano on 27 March 1981 from his home in Quilmes, Buenos Aires province, by armed men in plain clothes. His wife was told that he was being taken to the local police station, but writs of habeas corpus presented on his behalf were rejected. For eight days his family had no news of his whereabouts. On 4 April the chief of
Ill
police of Buenos Aires province stated that Angel Romano had been officiálly detained. However he was released on the order of a judge. It was reported that he had been tortured during incommunicado detention.
On 25 March 1981 the government said that they were holding 980 political prisoners: 186 were women, 99 detained before the military coup of March 1976; 803 were men, 475 detained by the previous government; 233 prisoners had been tried and sentenced, 135 charged; 616 were detained without charge in administrative detention a la disposición del Poder Ejecutivo Nacional (PEN), at the disposal of the executive power. There is doubt whether these figures were entirely accurate.
Amnesty International has adopted 185 prisoners of conscience and was investigating the cases of a further 115 political prisoners. During the year Amnesty International learned of the release of 30 prisoners of conscience; a number of others were allowed to leave prison but placed under surveillance and restrictions. The official information revealed that the majority of political prisoners had never been charged but remained in prison by presidential decree under Article 23 of the constitution which provides for a state of siege. Most adopted prisoners of conscience fell into this category. The state of siege, in force since November 1974, has been used to justify arbitrary detention without trial of non-violent opponents of the government. In September 1979 the Argentine authorities assured the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (lACHR) that the problem would be gradually resolved, but there has been no evidence of any moves to reduce substantially the number of people detained. In December 1980 the Minister of the Interior announced that 40 prisoners held under PEN would be released. Moreover the right of option — the constitutional right of people detained under PEN to go into exile — was virtually suspended. Only four people were panted the option to leave the country in the month of December 1980. Amnesty International provided information on a number of cases to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe which on 25 November 1980 adopted a resolution expressing "grave concern" on behalf of 80 prisoners with visas for European countries whose application for the right of option had been rejected.
On 23 September 1980 a group of Argentine lawyers lodged a collective writ of habeas corpus on behalf of 329 prisoners, challenging the right of the government to keep them in detention without trial. On 23 February 1981 the Federación Argentina de Colegios de Abogados (FACA), Argentine Federation of Bar Associations, published a statement in La Nación drawing the government's attention to the
112
limitations on the power of the executive: "an arrest or transfer by virtue of the state of siege may not be converted by its duration or the nature of its application into a real punishment or sentence". On 13 April 1981 the FACA again called for the state of peige to be lifted and deplored the fact that citizens were being indefinitely deprived of their freedom and denied their constitutional right to a fair trial.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that political prisoners had been subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. In December 1980 prisoners transferred in handcuffs from Unidad 6, Rawson, to Unidad 9, La Plata were severely beaten by military personnel. The physical and mental health of 21 politick prisoners is reported to have deteriorated seriously over the past year. Half the prisoners concemed were reported to have serious psychiatric problems. During 1980 Amnesty Intemational made frequent appeals after reports that political prisoners had not received adequate medical treatment and that the prison regime was causing psychological disturbances, particularly among long-term detainees. Gabriel Francisco de Benedetti killed himself in Rawson Prison on 20 June 1980 after serving seven years of a 23-year sentence. Eduardo José Schiavone hanged himself in Caseros Prison in Buenos Aires on 10 July 1980; he had been given a four-year sentence but had been in prison for seven years. Raúl Luis Cominoto who had been in administrative detention for four years hanged himself in La Plata Prison on 19 August 1980 after a month in a special punishment cell. These deaths brought the number of suicides of political prisoners reported since October 1979 to five. Conditions of imprisonment for political prisoners were much harsher than those for ordinary criminal prisoners, and prison conditions failed to comply with Article XXV of the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man and Article 18 of the Argentine Constitution.
In October 1980 Amnesty Intemational campaigned for the release of Eduardo Foti, an adopted prisoner of conscience, arrested in 1975 and held without charge or trial by presidential decree under PEN. During a raid on his home he had been shot in the head and part of his skull was later replaced by a plastic plate. One side of his body was paralysed, he had epileptic attacks and was said to be unable to move or to dress himself unaided. He has been repeatedly punished and denied medical treatment.
Amnesty Intemational has become increasingly concemed about the operations of the consejos de guerra especiales y estables, special standing military tribunals, which the military junta established in 1976 by Decree 21.264. They not only flout Article 18 of the Argentine Constitution but also fail to conform to internationally recognized standards.
113
Amnesty International was investigating a number of cases of prisoners sentenced by the military courts. They were mostly convicted on the basis of confessions given to military personnel during interrogation, and there were strong reasons to believe that these statements were extracted by coercion and under torture.
Nicolás Antonio Zárate a 54-year-old Argentine trade union official, was detained in Mendoza on 11 April 1976 and sentenced by a military tribunal on 6 July 1976 to 21 years' imprisonment. The charges, which related to possession of a revolver and subversive documents, were based on evidence allegedly found in his house and which apparently was never fully investigated. His lawyer, appointed by the court, was an army dentist whose defence was limited to endorsing the sentence passed by the tribunal. His trial lasted two days and was held in camera in the Police Headquarters in Mendoza, where he had been illegally detained for 60 days during which he was reportedly tortured continuously. His wife, Ana Beatriz Corcino, was aMucted in Buenos Aires between November and December 1977 and has "disappeared".
In October 1980 the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Adolfo Pérez Esquivel, a former prisoner of conscience who founded Servicio Paz y Justicia, the Peace and Justice Service, a non-violent civil liberties organization. He has been closely associated with work for "disappeared" prisoners. Despite his international recognition, individuals and organizations inside Argentina trying to investigate and monitor human rights abuses have been harassed, intimidated and arrested. On a nimiber of occasions demonstrators supporting the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo — a group of relatives of missing people who have been peacefully petitioning for information for the past four years — were detained for short periods. On 10 December 1980, International Human Rights Day, a group of 15 people were arrested and charged with disturbing the peace. They were released after a few days. On 12 March 1981 after another demonstration about 20 people were detained and held for questioning for some hours before being released.
On 28 February 1981 Amnesty International publicly condemned the arrest of six leading human rights activists. On 27 February plainclothes police raided the Buenos Aires office of the human rights organization. Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS), Centre for Legal and Social Studies. They arrested two members of CELS: the physicist, José Federico Westerkamp and Carmen Aguiar de Lapaco. During the night of 27/28 February four other prominent members of CELS were arrested: the lawyers Emilio Fermín Mignone, Augusto Conte MacDonell, Boris Pasik and Marcelo Parrilli. Police also confiscated important material documenting
114
human rights violations. The judge in charge of the case, Doctor Martin Anzoátegui, claimed that he had ordered the arrests and seizure of the documents because he had received information that CELS possessed plans of military installations, in violation of Law 224 of the penal code. All were held incommunicado forfive days and were released pending further investigation after a week. On 6 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational sent a formal complaint to the Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) asserting that these arrests curtailed the rights to freedom of expression and association. Another judge ordered the return of most of the documents. At the end of April 1981 Amnesty Intemational was informed that the public prosecutor, Dr Mugabum, had called for the case against the members of CELS to be closed and asked a military judge to examine whether military personnel had committed offences. He referred specifically to the case of Elena Holmberg, an Argentine diplomat murdered in December 1978.
Amnesty Intemational made a formal submission to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights under the confidential procedures set up to examine allegations of a "consistent pattem of gross violations". Complaints were presented to the lACHR on behalf of Guillermo Díaz Lestrem, María Antonieta and Rory Céspedes Chung, who met violent deaths after being taken into custody.
On 29 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the new President, General Roberto Viola, outlining its concerns and making four recommendations which included the publication of information about "disappeared" prisoners and the release of prisoners detained without charge. No reply was received.
