Chile
Amnesty International concerns in Chile were arbitrary detentions, including prisoners of conscience, administrative banishment {relegación), torture and political killings.
On 11 March 1981 a new constitution came into force. It replaced the 1925 Constitution which had been largely eroded since the 1973 coup by numerous decrees and four constitutional acts adopted by the military junta under General Augusto Pinochet. The new constitution was drawn up by a special commission appointed by the military junta with no independent lawyers participating. It was adopted by a referendum which took place on 11 September 1980 under the state of emergency, without electoral registers, with all political parties banned, and supervised by returning officers appointed by the government. Dozens of people were arrested for short periods when trying to hold meetings or speak out against the referendum.
The new constitution consists of 115 articles and 29 interim provisions and will not fully come into force until 1997. It incorporates many of the provisions contained in previous decrees and constitutional acts and severely restricts freedom of association, thought and expression. Many of the articles of the new constitution contradict the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Chile is a party. For example Article 8 stipulates that all organizations that advocate violence, totalitarian concepts or the class struggle are unconstitutional. Article 23 states that trade union leadership is incompatible with membership of a political party.
President Pinochet has been appointed for a renewable term of eight years. During the transition period to 1997, in addition to the authority granted by the constitution (under the states of exception, Articles 40 and 41 ), he will exercise extraordinary powers. According to interim provision No. 24 "if... acts of violence aimed at disturbing public order occur or if there is danger of internal peace being disturbed, the President of the Republic will thus declare it and will have, for six months renewable, the following powers:
(a) to arrest and detain people for up to five days, in their own homes or in places that are not prisons. If terrorist acts with serious consequences occur, this period can be extended for a fijrther fifteen days;
123
(b)	to limit the right of assembly and freedom of information, the latter being only in as far as the founding, publishing and circulation of new publications is concerned;
(c)	to prohibit the entry into national territory, or to expel from it, those who propagate the doctrines mentioned in Article 8 of the constitution, those who are suspected or have a reputation of being followers of those doctrines, and those who carry out acts contrary to the interests of Chile or which constitute a danger for internal peace; and
(d)	to order individuals to forcibly remain in an urban locality within the national territory for a period of up to three months. . . . The measures adopted by virtue of this provision are not subject to any kind of appeal, except reconsideration by the authority that ordered them."
Interim provision No. 24(a) extends the scope of Decree 3451 issued on 16 July 1980, a few days after the killing of Lieutenant Colonel Roger Vergara, Director of the Army Intelligence School. Decree 3451 lengthened from five to 20 days the period that suspects could be held without charge by the security forces when investigating offences against the security of the state in which people were killed, injured or kidnapped. The security forces, supported by the Minister of the Interior and the Supreme Court, have applied Decree 3451 to many political activists who had not been involved in such offences. José Benado Medvinsky was detained on 16 July 1980, together with Claire Frances Wilson, and held in incommunicado detention at a secret location and tortured for 15 days. After being tortured with electric shocks for several days and at one point being rushed to see a doctor, he was taken away by car. On arriving at an unknown destination:
"they made me get out and put shackles on my feet, they gave me a pick and a spade, I was still blindfolded, and they made me walk a little and took off the blindfold. They all stood behind me with lanterns. It was night time; they made me go down a slight slope... they offered to let me say something before they killed me; I replied that I had nothing to say. Then with the pick and spade they made me dig a hole.... Every so often they made me stop and offered to let me speak to save my life; I kept saying that I had nothing to add. When I had finished, they made me lay down on my side in the ditch. I heard someone loading a gun and felt it being pointed at my forehead. Someone else said to him: 'Pull the gun back, otherwise you'll blow his brains out'. Before putting me in the hole, they had removed the shackles from my ankles, and told me that they were going to tie them with wire so
124
that it would be known that the DINA [secret police, later replaced by CNI] had killed me. After a wtdle they took me out of the hole . . . and I was taken back to the same place." He was brought before a court on 31 July 1980. José Benado was not charged with any of the offences set out in Decree 3451. Many other people were illegally detained for 20 days by the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), Chilean secret police, such as Carlos Montes Cisternas, arrested at the end of December 1980 (see below). Where Decree 3451 refers to people being killed, injured or kidnapped, interim provision 24(a) of the constitution refers simply to "terrorist acts with serious consequences".
In March 1981 the President declared a state of emergency under Article 41 of the constitution, and proclaimed that Chile was in the state described in interim provision No. 24. The combined effect of these measures amounted to a virtual state of siege.
Under the powers the President gave himself, Gerardo Espinoza Carrillo, an ex-member of the late President Allende's Popular Unity Government, was arrested and expelled from the country for "criticizing the government" and "propagating totalitarian doctrines" in a speech at the grave of former Popular Unity Minister José Tohá González.
About 150 people, mostly students, have been sent into internal exile by the Minister of the Interior on the orders of the President in accordance with Decree 3168 of February 1980, which has been incorporated into the new constitution. There is no right of trial or appeal. Conditions were reported to be harsh: many of the places were remote and inhospitable; the exiles were restricted in their movement; they had to support themselves and it was virtually impossible for them to find work, especially if they were in tiny villages. At least two people have been banished for two three-month periods within a year.
On 21 February 1981 \ht junta passed Decree 3627, under which regional military commanders are to set up war tribunals to deal with "crimes of any kind that, as their main or subsidiary action, had resulted in the death" of government officials or members of the armed forces or police. The decree lays down that the penalties are to be those applicable in time of war. On 10 March 1981 the decree was amended (by Decree 3655) to cover crimes resulting in injury to (as well as the death of) officials, when it could be assumed that they were injured or killed because of the office they held. Chilean human rights groups have said that this will further restrict the right to a fair trial. The Code of Military Justice states that sentences passed by war tribunals can be reviewed only by a military commander — there is no right of appeal to a civiUan court This would be particularly serious with death sentences since military legislation calls for execution to be
125
carried out within three days of sentence. Military courts have functioned in Chile since the 197 3 coup and have been widely criticized by independent lawyers and human rights groups for their arbitrary treatment of opposition members on trial. By contrast members of the security forces found guilty of serious crimes have often been granted amnesties by miUtary courts, under the Amnesty Law of April 1978.
Amnesty Internationa! received numerous allegations of torture by the security forces. A consistent pattern emerged from the detailed reports: agents of the CNI, the army or the navy seized people in their homes or on the street; they took Üiem, blindfolded, on the floors of vans or cars to torture centres in military barracks or secret locations. There, they were interrogated and tortured for days at a time: commonly with the parrilla, a metal grid to which the victim is tied while electric shocks are administered. Severe beatings, threats and humiliation were also reported.
At the end of May 1980, 33 people were arrested in the towns of Antofagasta, Calama and Taltal by members of the regional security forces, presumed to be from the CNI. They did not identify themselves or produce warrants, nor did they carry out legally established formalities such as informing the detainees' families of the arrests. The 33 were accused of being leaders and members of political parties banned under Decree 77 of 1973. They were taken to secret places of detention, of which two were in Antofagasta: one near a beach; the other formerly the property of a religious order, the Sisters of Divine Providence. The detainees were tortured. They were kept hanging upside down by their feet for hours at a time; they were stripped naked and taken outdoors where icy jets of water from a high-pressure hose were turned on them (it was winter in Chile); they were punched and kicked, and given electric shocks in the most sensitive parts of their bodies. Two detainees, Julio Carrillo Cortes and Nolberto Rivera Videla, were treated with particular cruelty: Nolberto Rivera was forced to swallow himian excrement and urine; after eight days their limbs were so swollen and bruised that they could barely move about without help from their companions.
Eduardo Andrés Arancibia Muñoz was arrested on 6 September 1980 and kept incommunicado in a secret place by the CNI until 26 September. In a letter to the Supreme Court, he described the treatment he suffered:
"I was stripped and moved onto a kind of iron bedstead, to which they tied me ..they then proceeded to place electrodes on my arms, legs, nipples, stomach and around the anal zone. I felt unimaginable pain causing me uncontrollable convulsions. Such torture went on for eight days."
126
Eliana Victoria Bravo, detained for several days in September 1980, declared in a writ of habeas corpus: "They put me in a bath and held my head under water so that I almost drowned." The high probability of torture being inflicted on political detainees during the first few days after their arrest led Anmesty International to issue 27 urgent appeals on behalf of more than 180 people.
In February 1981 Amnesty International submitted information on torture and other human rights violations to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Chile. In its statement to the Tenth General Assembly of the Organization of American States held in Washington in November 1980 Amnesty International expressed concern about the repeated abuses of human rights in Chile.
All political parties have been banned in Chile. Those which supported the government of the late President Salvador Allende were banned by Decree 77 in 1973. During the interim period established by the new constitution all political parties and political activities are forbidden until new government regulations come into force, but in any event no Marxist or allegedly Marxist parties will be tolerated. Many people have been convicted of violating Decree 77. Amnesty International was working on behalf of 48 arrested on that charge in Santiago, Antofagasta, Talca and Linares. Some have been adopted as prisoners of conscience, and others were imder investigation. On 31 December 1980 economist Carlos Montes Cisternas was arrested; he was held incommunicado for 20 days and reportedly tortured. He was charged with participating in a clandestine political meeting and being a leader of the banned Movimiento de Acción Popular Unitario (MAPU), United Movement of Popular Action. Amnesty International has adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Under Chilean law (Decrees 1877, 3168, 3451 and Constitutional Acts 3 and 4) detentions can only be carried out after an arrest warrant has been issued by a competent authority. However the CNI have detained people without warrants. Arrest or remand orders were only given after detentions began, sometimes with explicit instructions that the initial 20-day period after which detainees have to be presented before a judge or released was to begin several days after the actual detention, thus "legally" extending the period during which the prisoner was in the hands of the security forces. This is reported to have happened in the cases of Pedro Drago Domancic Kruger and Patricio Pérez Rosales, who were arrested in October 1980.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of the many political prisoners who "disappeared" in Chile between 19^3 and 1977. In a few cases bodies have been found (see Amnesty International Report 1980) and each time the investigating judges have identified members of the armed forces as responsible. However,
127
the military courts have ruled that those found guilty are covered by the Amnesty Law of April 1978. In January 1981 more bodies were found in Alto Molle east of the northern city of Iquique. PreUminary information gathered by the Association of Relatives of Disappeared Prisoners indicated that the remains of several people had been found, and that there were bullet holes in the skulls. The famihes of 62 "disappeared" prisoners in the region have asked the Court of Appeal to nominate a special investigating judge to examine the case.
More people have died as a result of torture at the hands of the security forces or in so-called " armed confrontations" with them. On 2 August José Eduardo Jara Aravena, a student of journalism, died after he had been kidnapped and tortured by the so-called Comando Vengadores de Mártires (COVEMA), Commando for the Vengeance of Martyrs. It was later disclosed officially that the group was made up of members of the Servicio de Investigaciones, detectives, who were, according to the authorities, acting on their own initiative. A COVEMA statement dated 6 August announced that they had acted " because of the inability of the security forces and the police" to deal with the violent activities of opposition groups, such as the killing of Lieutenant-Colonel Roger Vergara Campos in July 1980. On 31 July COVEMA kidnapped and ill-treated two journalists, Guillermo Hormazábal from Radio Chilena and Mario Romero. They were released after 10 hours. Although the Chilean authorities themselves revealed the involvement of individual members of the security forces in the kidnapping, torture and death of Jara Aravena, so far nobody has been charged or remanded in custody.
Disturbing facts surrounded the deaths of Oscar S alazar Jahnsen (28 April 1980), Santiago Rubilar Salazar (2 August 1980), Juan Olivares Pérez and Rubén Eduardo Orta Jopia (8 November 1980), Alejandro Rodrigo Sepülveda Malbrán (24 December 1980) and José Leandro Arratia Pérez (18 January 1981). Alejandro Sepülveda was the brother of one of the leaders of the Coordinadora Nacional Sindical, a trade union confederation that has been declared illegal by the government In all these cases, relatives' testimonies and eyewitness reports have led the families and human rights groups in Chile to demand investigations. According to the police, Santiago Rubilar Salazar was shot dead in an armed confrontation with the security forces on 28 July 1980 after taking part in a bank robbery. His family maintained that he was arrested on 26 July, together with his wife and brother, by a group of armed civilians. In other cases preventive writs of habeas corpus had been filed by the victims shortly before their deaths, because of heavy surveillance by security forces around their homes.
Political prisoners in the Santiago Penitentiary and their families
128
continued to be harassed and several prisoners went on hunger-strike in protest At the end of January 1981,55 prisoners held in Calle 5 of the penitentiary were transferred to other prisons in Santiago and the provinces. Most of the prisoners were being tried in Santiago courts and were awaiting sentence or the results of appeals. The transfers made it difficult for relatives to visit and also seriously hampered the work of defence lawyers. In addition, the political prisoners were no longer segregated from the ordinary criminal prisoners. Although Amnesty Intemational does not ask for special treatment for political prisoners, it was concemed that the Chilean Government had violated an undertaking to separate political from ordinary criminal prisoners made to the United Nations Ad-Hoc Working Group which visited Chile in 1978. The undertaking was confirmed in letter No. 1954 of21 August 1978 from the Minister of Justice to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The letter said, "In accordance with the undertaking which I gave to the United Nations Ad Hoc Working Group on Human Rights on 24 July last, I immediately issued instructions for the physical segregation, in all gaols and prisons throughout the country, of persons indicted or convicted by military courts and/or for offences against the Control of Firearms Act. .
Three prisoners, José Benado Medvinsky, Ulises Gómez Navarro and Nelson Arambum Soto, were later transferred without waming once again. José Benado and Ulises Gómez were said to be in poor health as a result of hunger-strikes in protest at harassment and poor prison conditions. Nelson Aramburu Soto, adopted as a prisoner of conscience, has been in prison since 1974 and should have qualified for release under the 1978 Amnesty Law. After each transfer his whereabouts were unknown for several days and there were fears for his physical safety. He has still not received his final sentence and Amnesty Intemational was dismayed to leam that his trial dossier had reportedly been "lost", which would further delay and complicate the task of his defence lawyer.
The Chilean Government has been criticized for its human rights record by the United Nations General Assembly, the Inter-American Human Rights Commission of the Organization of American States, the Intemational Commission of Jurists, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and other organizations.
129
