Jordan
Amnesty International's concerns during the year included the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the prolonged detention without trial of political prisoners, the lack of legal safeguards in military court trials and the death penalty.
Martial law has been in force in Jordan for the last 14 years. Its provisions suspend a broad range of constitutional guarantees and invest the Prime Minister, in his, capacity as martial law governor, with wide powers of arrest and detention. Under martial law political prisoners were either held for long periods without trial or were tried before military courts.
During the year Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of 16 political prisoners and leamed of the release of 10. Four of the 16, who had each been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for alleged membership of the Communist Party, prohibited under the Anti-Communist Law of 195 3, were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. One of these, Hashim Gharaibeh, a 31-year-old student from Yarmuk, was granted an amnesty in August 1980. The others, Nabil Ja'anini, Muhammad Abu-Shama'a and Imad Mulhim, were still serving their sentences. The Prime Minister's Office responded to appeals for the release of Nabil Ja'anini, who had featured as Prisoner of the Month in the Amnesty Intemational Newsletter in February 1981, by stating that "Ja'anini is currently serving a 10-year sentence for his involvement in subversive activities and organizing illegal cells to undermine the security of the state . .. Ja'anini was only arrested when he began organizing a Communist cell." Nabil Ja'anini was officially charged and sentenced for membership of the Communist Party and for possession of prohibited communist leaflets.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the prolonged detention without trial of political prisoners. Between June and August 1980 it took up for investigation the cases of nine untried detainees. They included two members of the Palestine National Council:
368
Oussama Shannar, who was detained in October 1977; and Taysir al-Zabri, detained in May 1979, who was also a member of the Secretariat of the Rassemblement des forces populaires en Jordanie (RFPJ), Assembly of Popular Forces in Jordan. Hamadeh Fara'neh, another member of this group, was in his fifth year of detention without trial at al-Ma'an Prison in southern Jordan. All nine prisoners were among 83 prisoners, mostly untried detainees, who were, released on 10 August 1980 after an amnesty was proclaimed to commemorate the 'Id al-Fitr (end of Ramadan) in Jordan.
In a letter to Minister of Interior AU al-Bashir on 13 April 1981 Amnesty Intemational repeated its concem about detention without trial and referred to assurances given to an Amnesty Intemational delegation to Jordan in March 1978 that all prisoners were brought to trial within a reasonable time. Amnesty Intemational submitted 131 names of untried detainees at al-Mahatta Central Intelligence Prison in Amman and asked the Minister of Interior to investigate the status of their cases and to give details of any planned trial procedures. The Jordanian Ambassador in London, Ibrahim Izziddin, has since informed Amnesty Intemational that he has asked the authorities in Jordan to provide him with the information.
Over the past year there have been a number of reports of death sentences and executions. On 22 September 1980 a military court sentenced to death five Palestinian members of al-Fatah, the largest group within the Palestine Liberation Organization. They had reportedly been arrested after returning to Jordan from Israeli occupied territory. They were Musa Mahmud Fadillat, Mahmud Abbas Abu-'Ubaid, Salameh Mahmud Shatrat, Lutfi Muhammad Alloush and Salih Muhammad Alloush. In the same month two Arabs, Halwa Khalil Hammudeh and Ahmad Hassan, were sentenced to death in their absence for selling their property in Jemsalem to Israelis. Although they have not been executed, their sentences have not been commuted and fears remained that they might be executed at any time.
In a letter of 4 November 1980 to King Hussein Amnesty Intemational said it was disturbed at the growing number of reports of death sentences and expressed its grave concern at the executions on 28 October 1980 of two Syrians, Muhammad Walid Muti'al-Ijaz and Muhammad Yusuf Hasan Sha'ibi, at al-Mahatta Prison in Amman. The two had been found guilty of the murder of Abdul Wahhab al-Bakri, a Syrian political refugee in Jordan and a senior member of the Mushm Brotherhood. It has appealed to King Hussein to commute all remaining death sentences.
369
