Brazil
Amnesty International was concerned by the use of the Lei de Seguranqa Nacional (LSN), law of national security, to curb trade union activity and stifle dissent. Although there have been persistent violations of the rights to freedom of expression and association, Brazil showed some improvement in the protection of human rights. President Figueiredo's policy of abertura, a program of gradual liberalization, has come under increasing attack from terrorist
acts allegedly committed by right-wing extremists.
119
Amnesty Intemational has no adopted prisoners of conscience in Brazil. It has been concemed about legal proceedings brought under the LSN against a number of joumalists, trade union leaders and parliamentarians. In 1979 after a general amnesty which released most of Brazil's political prisoners, the LSN was reformed. Although the penalties for crimes of subversion were reduced, the scope of the security legislation was not limited, and the LSN has been used to restrict legitimate civil and political rights. In February 1981 three joumalists working on the left-wing newspaper, Hora do Povo, were sentenced by a military court to 18 months' imprisonment for publishing allegations that govemment officials had misappropriated public funds. The journalists were freed pending the result of an appeal. Joâo Cunha, a member of tlie Brazilian Congress, was charged with offending the honour of the President after making a speech in April 1980 accusing him of showing "democratic cynicism" towards a strike by metalworkers in Sâo Paulo. Joào Cunha's case was to go before iJie Superior Military Tribunal. ^
On 25 Febmary 1981 a military tribunal sentenced Luis Inacio da Silva, the President of Sao Bernardo and Diadema Metalworkers Union, to three and a half years' imprisonment for his part in a strike in April 1980 which stopped car production in Sao Paulo. As a result of the conviction Luis Inacio da Silva, who was also the leader of the newly formed Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT), workers party, has been permanently barred by an electoral court from holding any union or political office. Trade union leaders Djalmo de Souza Bom, Enilson Simôes de Moura and Rubens Teodoro de Armda, were also sentenced to three and a half years' imprisonment. Seven others were given sentences of two or two and a half years' imprisonment. On 4 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern about the conduct of the trial to the Minister of Justice, Ibrahim Abi Ackel. Although the foreign minister had given assurances that the trial would be open to foreign observers, the judge excluded them. The defence lawyers petitioned unsuccessfully for the trial to be adjoumed, and althou^i neither they nor their clients were in court the judge proceeded to try the accused in their absence.
In March 1981 a judge in the military court in Amazonas summoned Luis Inacio da Silva, other members of the PT and two leaders of Confederaçào Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricul-tura (CONTAG), mral workers' union, to face charges under the LSN of "having incited class struggle by violent means". In July 1980 Luis Inacio da Silva had participated in a meeting in Brasileia, Acre, to protest about the killing of Wilson de Souza Pinheiro,a leader of the mral workers' union. A few days later, a group of peasants killed a local landowner's foreman who was suspected of having killed the
120
trade union leader.
On 4 August 1980 Amnesty International called on the Minister of the Interior, Mario Andreazza, to instigate an inquiry into the murder by gunmen of two leaders of CONTAG Wilson de Souza Pinheiro and Raimimdo Lima. On 10 November 1980 Agenor Martins de Carvalho, a legal adviser to CONTAG and the Secretary General of the Partido do Movimento Democrático Brasileiro, Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, in Rondonia, was shot dead.
Amnesty International has become increasingly concerned about violence in the interior directed against smallholders and peasants by landowners trying to expel them from their lands. It has received reports of torture and killings. Those responsible were said to be gunmen hired by the landowners, and their illegal actions to have been tolerated by the local police.
Under the Indian Statute, the demarcation of tribal lands should have been finalized by 1979. But only a few reserves have been defined and the lack of clear boundaries has led to many conflicts between Indians and settlers. On 21 August 1980 21 people, including small children were killed by Kayopó Indians in the state of Para, who feared that settlers were moving in to clear their forest lands. In August 1980 a police captain and a soldier in Maranhao were accused of killing members of the Guajajaras tribe by Colonel Nobre de Veiga, the head of FUNAI (the Brazilian Indian Foimdation). On 11 September 1980, Norberto de Paula, an Indian leader from Mangueirinha known as "Paraguai", was killed in a mysterious car accident. Amnesty International has asked the authorities to investigate.
In September 1980 after a series of violent attacks by extreme right-wing groups on politicians and lawyers Amnesty International urged the Minister of Justice to investigate. On 4 July 1980, Dalmo Dallari, a prominent lawyer and member of the Justice and Peace Commission, was kidnapped briefly in Sao Paulo. He was stabbed and badly beaten before being released. On 10 July a bomb destroyed the car of a Federal Deputy, Marcelo Cerqueira, in Rio de Janeiro. On 27 August 1980 a bomb exploded in the offices of the Brazilian Bar Association in Rio de Janeiro killing a 65-year-old secretary. There is evidence that some attacks were the work of individuals attached to the DOI-CODI (the special anti-guerrilla unit). New evidence has come to light about the illicit activities of those involved in past repression. In October 1980 the Sao Paulo Regional Medical Council ruled that Harry Shibata, the head of the Sao Paulo Medical Legal Institute, should be struck off the medical register. Shibata had falsified the death certificate of the journalist, Vladimir Herzog, who died after being tortured in the DOI-CODI headquarters in Sao Paulo
121
in 1975. (See Amnesty International Report 1976.) Inés Etienne Romeu, a former {political prisoner and torture victim identified a house in Petropolis used by DOI-CODI agents in Rio de Janeiro as a torture centre. She alleged that nine political prisoners detained in that centre had later "disappeared". She named a doctor who had participated in torture by advising her captors about her state of health. Her allegations, reported in the Brazilian press in February 1981, led to a statement from the ministers responsible for the armed forces deploring the "campaign of revenge" by the press.
In December 1980 Amnesty International supported efforts by the Brazilian Bar Association to investigate the case of two students who "disappeared" in 1973. In July 1980 the bodies of Maria Augusta Thomas and her husband, Marcio Beck Machado, were discovered on a small farm in the state of Goias. Following the discovery a local judge ordered an investigation, but before a full examination could be made the bodies were removed by men claiming to be police agents.
The government has continued to shelter political refugees from neighbouring countries who are awaiting resettlement. However on 30 July 1980 Amnesty International expressed its concern that the new law on foreigners would enable the summary deportation of de facto refugees in Brazil without proper papers, and would not allow them to appeal against the decision or seek resettlement in another country.
Security agents from neighbouring countries were still apparently operating in Brazil. On 1 August 1980 Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of Father Jorge Oscar Adur, an Argentine national, who "disappeared" in southern Brazil. There were fears that he might have been forcibly returned to Argentina.
