Mexico
The concerns of Amnesty International continued to be irregular arrest, detention and trial procedures, including the use of confessions obtained under torture as the only evidence to convict people on criminal charges, when the real reasons for arrest were political, trade union or peasant activities. Deaths in custody, in some instances as a result of torture, and the killing and "disappearance" of former prisoners shortly after release have also been reported during the year. It has also been alleged that former prisoners reported to have been released have merely been transferred from one prison to another, or have been rearrested.
On 23 September 1980 Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of eight people detained by the authorities in Guadalajara. Among them wäs ArmandoRenteira Castillo, who had been released from prison the previous year after having served six years for alleged guerrilla activities. He allegedly "disappeared" for some days after his rearrest, and was tortured.
Throughout the year Amnesty International received reports of
166
regular security forces and paramilitary units in the service of landowners and manufacturers collaborating to repress peasants and workers; one security unit frequently cited was the so-coW^d Brigada Blanca (White Brigade), the 9th Army Brigade, based in Campo Militar Niimero 1 in Mexico City. Although some "disappeared" people who later reappeared have given highly detailed information about their detention and ill-treatment by this unit, the government has continued to deny its existence.
In early 1981 one such paramilitary group, the Frente Patriótico Anticomunista Nacional (FPAN), National Patriotic Anticom-munist Front, claimed responsibility for the killing of Ismael Núñez, an activist in the teachers' union in the Valle de Mexico. In April 1981 another unofficial paramilitary group, the so-called Liga 16 de septiembre, 16 September League, said to be part of FPAN, issued death threat leaflets directed at leaders of the Partido Revolucionario de los Trabajadores (PRT), the Revolutionary Workers' Party, one of the minority parties represented in Parliament as a result of the new electoral system introduced by the government of President López Portillo. One of those named on the list was Rosario Ibarra de Piedra, president of the Comité Nacional pro-Defensa de Presos, Perseguidos, Desaparecidos y Exiliados Políticos (CNPDPPDEP), the National Committee for the Defence of Prisoners, the Persecuted, Disappeared and Political Exiles, who was under consideration by the PRT as their candidate for the 1982 elections. On 22 April Amnesty International called on President López Portillo to guarantee the physical safety of Rosario Ibarra, whose son was among the "disappeared" the CNPDPPDEP was trying to locate. Throughout the year the CNPDPPDEP punctuated requests for investigations into the whereabouts of the "disappeared" with hunger-strikes and occupations of churches and embassies. Demonstrators were sometimes forcibly dislodged by the security forces.
Amnesty International continued its inquiries into the fate of the estimated 300 to 400 people taken into custody in recent years whose whereabouts were unknown. On 9 April 1981 during a meeting with the Frente Estatal contra la Represión, State Front against Repression, another group pressing for an official investigation, the new governor of the State of Guerrero reversed the stand of his predecessor that the "disappeared" must be considered dead, and stated that there was evidence that some of the missing persons were alive and held in secret cells. Others however were feared dead, and are believed to have been buried in secret cemeteries, particularly in the State of Guerrero. One such clandestine burial place was apparently found by workers digging under the Mexico City police headquarters in June 1980 who uncovered at least 10 bodies, believed to have been buried
167
for at least five years.
The possibility that some of the "disappeared" might be held in secret jails, and the difficulty of obtaining details of mass arrests reported in remote rural areas where indígenas (indigenous people) and campesinos (peasants) were held in provincial jails, made it difficuh to estimate the number of political prisoners held in Mexico. This was compounded by the authorities' frequent insistence that as Mexican law did not provide for political crimes there were no political prisoners, but only people detained in connection with ordinary criminal offences. For example the former governor of the State of Hidalgo denied that there were any political prisoners held in the state, despite allegations by local peasant leadere that conflicts over land had led to the murder or "disappearance" of 200 peasants and the detention of approximately 370 others overthe last four years. However, in February 1981 the newly elected governor of Hidalgo stated that he had been informed that there were more than 100 political prisoners in that state alone.
Amnesty International has been following land conflicts in the State of Hidalgo, particularly in the Huasteca area, for some time. Here and throughout Mexico, control of the land has been an explosive issue since the revolution of 1910 to 1917, one aim of which was to divide up the large estates. However despite the fact that the constitution stipulates that all families are entitled to own land, it has been estimated that some four million rural families remained landless, and many of the human rights abuses reported to Amnesty International during the year have involved land tenure disputes. Some disputes date back to the agrarian reform which followed the struggle of 1910 to 1917, when officials working in the capital did not clearly delineate the lands in the provinces classified as "ejidos" (common land). More recent confrontations have been attributed to the fact that officials work from Mexico City to try and settle disputes between claimants who have tides of different dates showing possession of the same lands. Land whose value has been increased by development projects has been wrested from peasant farmers who have been working the land for years, but do not have official titles. A number of peasants who have occupied land in dispute for many years have been killed by paramilitary units in the service of large landowners. In some instances these units were reportedly helped by official military personnel, both in uniform and in plain clothes. Ithas also been suggested that reports of violent land occupation by peasants have been fabricated in order to justify attacks on peasant leaders and organizations who were trying to develop independent peasant movements outside the control of the ruling government party, the Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI), the Institutional
168
