Uganda
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, "disappearances" and extrajudicial killings, torture, harsh conditions of imprisonment, and the death penalty.
On 13 May 1980 President Godfrey Binaisa was deposed and detained by the Military Commission of the ruling coalition Uganda National Liberation Front The Military Commission headed by former Interior Minister Paulo Muwanga held power until the parliamentary elections of December 1980.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Military Commission on 19 May to try or release Godfrey Binaisa and expressed fears for his safety. Paulo Muwanga informed Amnesty Intemational that Godfrey Binaisa was " still living in State House" and had not been mistreated. He was later detained in a private house under the guard ofTanzanian security officers, but no charges were preferred. Amnesty International later adopted him as a prisoner of conscience. He was freed in December 1980.
Amnesty Intemational had also urged the Military Commission to investigate the illegal detention by the army of several people arrested in early May, including journalist Roland Kakooza, editor of The Economy, whose release President Binaisa had failed to obtain. Roland Kakooza and others were severely tortured at Makindye military police barracks and Malire army barracks. Others detained by the army on political grounds in the succeeding weeks included Sam Njuba, Chairman of the Uganda Law Society. Roland Kakooza and Sam Njuba were released in July 1980.
Uganda continued to suffer from the chronic insecurity and violent crime prevailing since the overthrow of Idi Amin in April 1979. Allegations that many murders during 1980 were politically motivated were mostly impossible to verify. Two major crises underlined the problemiof such insecurity: the famine in Karamoja, caused as much by banditry as by drought, and the upheavals in the West Nile district In early October 1980 anti-government forces invaded West Nile and killed about 300 soldiers in Koboko. Army reinforcements not only
91
attacked the remaining invaders but also arbitrarily killed, raped and looted the civilian population, apparently in revenge for the killings between 1971 and 1979 of thousands of members of the Acholi and Lango ethnic groups by Idi Amin's security forces, of whom many came from West Nile. Within a short period about a quarter of a million people — virtually the whole population of the district — fled across tiie border to Zaïre and Sudan. Amnesty International called on the government to initiate an independent inquiry into the West Nile incidents. By late 1980 as the situation became more stable many of these refugees were beginning to return home.
A total of 5,800 prisoners were captured in 1979 by Tanzanian and Ugandan forces during the fighting to overthrow the Amin government, or arrested immediately afterwards. They have been detained since then under the control of Tanzanian security officers in Uganda, and their fate remained unclear. Under Godfrey Binaisa's government a few hundred were released, including civilians seized by the Tanzanian forces during the overthrow of Idi Amin, transported to prison in Tanzania, and later repatriated to custody in Uganda. The government announced that steps would be taken to establish special courts for these detainees, who were mostly members of the army and repressive branches of the Amin government: the State Research Bureau, Public Safety Unit, Military Police, and Anti-Corruption Unit. (The head of the Public Safety Unit, Kassim Obura, was sentenced to death for murder by the High Court, but the case proceeded to appeal.) In mid-1980 conditions for these detainees so deteriorated that a number died of starvation, and others were being routinely ill-treated. Amnesty International urged that they should be tried or released. It called for them to be treated humanely and in accordance with the law.
The December 1980 elections were held in an atmosphere described in the Commonwealth Observer Group's report as "turbulent and troubled... the signs of economic and social collapse were everywhere, as were the psychological traumas caused by exposure to brutality on a massive scale". Four political parties contested the elections. Dr Milton Obote — President of Uganda from 1962 to 1971 — was returned to power as leader of the Uganda People's Congress, which had obtained the majority of parliamentary seats. The Democratic Party and Uganda Patriotic Movement formed the parliamentary opposition, although they disputed the validity of many poll results.
President Obote stated at his inauguration: "We shall work for human compassion, rights and dignity. We shall work for reconciliatioa We shall insist on no revenge." He pledged that he would lead "a government of law". One of his first acts was to release former
92
President Binaisa from detention. He later ordered the release of 300 of the detainees arrested in 1979 and stated that the cases of the rest would be reviewed.
In early February two opposition guerrilla forces — the Uganda Freedom Movement and the People's Revolutionary Army — attacked army, police and prison establishments in different parts of the country. In subsequent anti-guerrilla army operations, large numbers of political opponents as well as suspected guerrillas were arrested. Some prisoners were later revealed to be detained under the Public Order and Security Act (1967), which permits indefinite detention without charge or trial. Some were arrested by or in the presence of Tanzanian security officers, to ensure they were not ill-treated by the Ugandan army. Others were arrested by the Ugandan army, without legal authority, and in many cases ill-treated, tortured, made to "disappear" or murdered
The detainees arrested in February included four Democratic Party (DP) members of parliament, one of whom. Professor Yoweri Kyesimira, was still held at the end of April 1981. Prominent officials of the Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM), including defeated parliamentary candidates, were also detained, such as Rhoda Kalema (released after two months), Jaberi Bidandi-Sali, Bakulu-Mpagi Wamala, and the Reverend Christopher Okoth.
Amnesty International urged President Obote to guarantee all those arrested the full protection of their basic human rights, and asked for information on the grounds for their detention, their legal status and whereabouts. When no reply was received, fears for the safety of those arrested prompted an urgent appeal. A second urgent appeal expressed extreme concern over reports that Bakulu-Mpagi Wamala had been bayoneted or shot during his arrest by soldiers and tortured in the army interrogation centre at the Nile Mansions Hotel. The detainees' cases were then investigated by Amnesty International as possible prisoners of conscience. Further arrests of DP and UPM supporters, including two more members of parliament and a lawyer, took place in April 1981. Some were reportedly ill-treated. The DP leader alleged that several hundred people had been arrested. By the end of the month Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 25 known detainees. Amnesty International submitted the cases of the detained members of parliament to the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Amnesty International issued another urgent appeal on behalf of four Makerere University students arrested on campus on 22 February 1981. Demonstrations had been held against the government ban on the student union for protesting against the arrest of a woman student who was later released. In the ensuing violence by the
93
army and pro-government civilian groups against suspected student opponents, several student leaders fled the country. There were fears for the safety of the four arrested students — Paschal Bahikayo, Joseph Essanyu, Silvio Ewaku, and Charles Mukembo — who were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. By the end of April 1981 there was no news of their fate.
Amnesty International called on President Obote on 2 April to establish an independent inquiry into the deaths of about 60 people found murdered in Kampala and believed to have been killed by the security forces.
By April 1981 the security situation in Uganda had deteriorated with armed opposition groups based in several parts' of the country claiming responsibility for sabotage and assassinations of government leaders, while anti-guerrilla operations by the Ugandan army made life increasingly dangerous for civihans in areas of alleged guerrilla activity. During April at least 150 people were killed in Kampala, most of them reportedly civilian victims of arbitrary killings by the security forces.
It was announced on 28 April that 10,000 Tanzanian security forces, who had remained in Uganda at the government's request after the defeat of Idi Amin's forces, would be withdrawn by the end of June 1981.
