Algeria
During the year Amnesty Intemational welcomed the lifting of all restrictions on its adopted prisoner of conscience, Ahmed Ben Bella; it also took up for further investigation the cases of four prisoners sentenced on charges of plotting against state security. It continued to follow the cases of those arrested in the aftermath of clashes that had taken place in March and April 1980 between security forces and demonstrators in the Berber Kabyle region. To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge there were no executions in Algeria during the year.
On 30 October 1980 the govemment announced that all remaining restrictions on former President Ahmed Ben Bella would be hfted to mark the anniversary of the 1954 uprising against French occupation on 1 November. Ahmed Ben Bella, the first President of independent Algeria, had been arrested in June 1965, following a coup led by then Minister of Defence Houari Boumedienne. He was held in detention until July 1979, when he was transferred to house arrest in M'sila, southeast of Algiers, where he remained until all restrictions were lifted. In a recorded message which he sent to his Amnesty International adoption group in Madrid Ahmed Ben Bella said he wanted:"... the Amnesty Intemational group in Madrid to know that my wife and I have and will keep a very, very great regard for what
they did for us during those 15 years of silence____We know that this
action... was not on behalf of one man or one idea, but on behalf of a concept of man, a concept of democracy, of human dignity... I think that such acts are the best contribution to drawing together the peoples of the West and the Third World, to get them to know each other better and to put them all on the same level."
351 	
Following the conviction of five defendants (one of whom had escaped arrest and was tried in his absence) by the Military Tribunal at Blida on 27 December 1980, Amnesty Intemational took up for further investigation the cases of the four who were serving sentences, two of three years and two of six years. The four — two trainee-officers from the Cherchell MiHtary Academy and two civilians — were originally arrested on 2 November 1978, accused of having formed a local cell of the "International Communist Party" with links in Western Europe, and were charged with plotting against state security. Reports received by Amnesty Intemational suggested that the political activities of these individuals were limited to the discussion of leftist literature and the dissemination of their own political views; they were said not to have used nor advocated violence. Amnesty Intemational has not yet been able to confirm these reports.
Amnesty Intemational continued to follow the cases of those arrested in Tizi-Ouzou (the administrative centre of the Berber Kabyle region) in March and April 1980, 24 of whom were charged and scheduled to appear before the State Security Court at Medea. On 21 May 1980 Amnesty International sent a telegram to President Chadh Benjedid urging that' 'the rights of the defence and the right to a public hearing be respected, in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which Algeria has signed but has not yet ratified". In June 1980 the 24 accused were provisionally released. At the end of April 1981 they were still provisionally at liberty and Amnesty Intemational continued to follow the cases as the charges had not yet been officially dropped. In March and April 1981 there were renewed demonstrations in the Berber Kabyle region calling for further official measures to promote Berber culture and for the demands of the previous year's actions to be fulfilled, including a chair of Berber studies at the University of Tizi-Ouzou. These demonstrations included the occupation of the University of Tizi-Ouzou for several weeks in March and April 1981 by students supporting increased freedom for Berber cultural expression, a general strike by merchants, students and civil servants, and the holding of public assemblies to secure more attention for Berber culture.
Amnesty Intemational received serious allegations from a number of different sources of very bad prison conditions, and reports that those detained in the Kabyle region in March and April 1980 and the fourprisoners sentenced in Blida had been ill-treated. So far Amnesty Intemational has not been able to verify these reports.
352 	
