Hungary
The concems of Amnesty International were the existence and ap-phcation of legislation restricting freedom of expression and movement, and the death penalty.
In July 1980 the Human Rights Committee set up under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights examined a report from the Hungarian Government (supplementing its 1977 report) on its implementation of the covenant. Information received by Amnesty Internationa! in recent years has indicated that people who publicly criticize official policies or the political system are liable to imprisonment of up to eight years under Article 148 of the criminal code, dealing with "subversive activity", including "incitement against the constitutional order".
Statements by officials in the past year have confirmed that among political prisoners serving sentences were people convicted of incitement against the constitutional order. Amnesty Intemational feared that some of them were prisoners of conscience.
According to press reports Dr Imre Markoja, Minister of Justice, said in a phone-in program on Hungarian television on 16 October 1980 that prisoners convicted of political crimes in Hungary formed only 0.2 per cent of all prisoners and that there were under 50 of them. He stated that this figure included war criminals, convicted spies and people convicted of incitement against Hungary's constitutional order. The Chief Public Prosecutor, Karoly Szijarto, in a statement on 25 February 1981 said that in 1980 there had been 65 criminal offences against the state, peace and mankind, and that a "large majority" of these had taken the form of verbal incitement, very often under the influence of alcohol. However for lack of specific information on individual cases. Amnesty Intemational did not adopt any prisoners of conscience.
Emigration is restricted by the govemment. Because of these restrictions some would-be emigrants, after having tried all legal avenues in vain, have attempted to leave the country without authorization. Those who attempt to do so may be punished with up to three years' imprisonment. Preparations for an unauthorized crossing of the border are also punishable.
302 	
Amnesty International has received reports that a former prisoner of conscience, Sandor Rudovics, was sentenced in May 1980 to a year's imprisonment by a court in Szombathely after having spoken in a restaurant of his plans to leave Hungary without official authorization. He had already served at least two previous sentences for attempting to leave the country. Amnesty International was investigating the cases of Peter Oszvath (aged 20) and Mihaly Rudi (aged 19), who were sentenced by Gyor County Court on 24 February 1981 to three years' and 20 months' imprisonment respectively. Together with a friend, Gabor Baksa, they had attempted to cross the border near Sopron into Austria in a stolen lorry but were stopped by border guards. Gabor Baksa, who succeeded in reaching Austria, was sentenced in his absence to four years' imprisonment
The criminal code retains the death penalty for a number of political and military offences as well as for aggravated cases of murder. During the year Amnesty International learned of three executions. Amnesty International learned of the imposition of one death sentence before it was carried out that on Lajos Nagy, and appealed to the Chairman of the Presidential Council to commute it
