Ireland
Amnesty International had no adopted prisoners of conscience during the year, nor was there a pattern of allegations of ill-treatment in police custody (see Amnesty International Report 1977 and 1978). However Amnesty International sent an observer to assess the fairness of a trial which raised important issues linked to these earlier allegations.
In May 1980 an Amnesty International observer attended the appeal hearing of Osgur Breatnach and Bernard McNally. The two members of the Irish Republican Socialist Party had been convicted orf 13 December 1978 of armed robbery in the Special Criminal Court in Dublin, a non-jury court set up to try politically motivated offences affecting the security of the state. Both defendants, who denied involvement in the robbery, had been convicted solely on the basis of confessions which they alleged were the result of ill-treatment during prolonged incommunicado detention in police custody in April 1976.
Amnesty International collected information on their cases during its 1977 mission to Ireland to investigate allegations of ill-treatment
303 	
by police of detainees held on suspicion of politically motivated crimes. Information included medical reports noting injuries found on the accused on their last day of police custody and on their subsequent admission to prison.
The Special Criminal Court ruled at the trial that the injuries had been self-inflicted and that it was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that their confessions were voluntary (in law only purely voluntary confessions may be used as evidence). Amnesty International's observer, who attended only the part of the appeal hearing related to Osgur Breatnach, said in his report:
"In the hght of the numerous injuries which the accused had sustained, some of which, according to expert witnesses, were incapable of self-infliction and/or were consistent with assault, it was unreasonable of the court to hold that no such doubt existed. Moreover, on the evidence the court could not have found beyond all reasonable doubt that Breatnach was not subjected to brutalities and/or oppressive circumstances of both a physical and psychological nature which rendered him incapable of the exercise of his free will for legal purposes."
On 22 May 1980 the Court of Criminal Appeal quashed the convictions in both cases and ordered the release of the prisoners. In its judgment, pubhshed only on 16 February 1981, the appeal court held that the Special Criminal Court should not have admitted the confessions in evidence; since this was the only evidence against the accused, their convictions and sentences were set aside.
A third defendant in the same trial, Edward Noel ("Nick") Kelly, who had been convicted in his absence, retumed to Ireland in July 1980 and surrendered himself to the police. His conviction too was based solely on a statement he made to the police during a prolonged period of incommunicado detention. However on 18 December 1980 the Court of Criminal Appeal refused his application for appeal on grounds including the fact that he had not presented any evidence to support his allegation of ill-treatment in pohce custody, and that he had not substantiated the allegation that his statement had not been made voluntarily. Kelly apphed for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court. The Court of Criminal Appeal has reserved its judgment on this apphcation. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal in the case of Breatnach and McNally had still not been made public at the time of Kelly's appeal seven months later, especially since it contained important considerations of law regarding the circumstances under which statements made in police custody should be excluded in evidence. The death penalty in Ireland is retained under the Criminal Justice
304 	
Act 1964 for several categories of crime, including a mandatory death sentence for the murder of a police officer in the course of duty.
Four prisoners were sentenced to death during the year. On 27 November 1980 Peter Pringle, Colm O'Shea and Patrick McCann were sentenced to death by the Special Criminal Court for the murder of a policeman after a bank robbery in July 1980. Their convictions were upheld by the Court of Criminal Appeal on 22 May 1981, but their sentences were later commuted to life imprisonment by the President of the Republic. Peter Rogers was sentenced to death by the Special Criminal Court on 11 March 1981 for the murder of a policeman in October 1980. At the end of April 1981 his appeal was still pending. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
6	
^JMf	
■r^O /«J	^ <
	
y' ^ V^ y sfcsi'	
