El Salvador
Amnesty Intemational has been concemed about reports that people from all sectors of Salvadorian society have been detained without warrant, have "disappeared" or have been murdered. Although conflict between guerrilla groups and the authorities has escalated and human rights violations by non-govemment forces have been reported, Amnesty Intemational believes that the majority of the reported violations were inflicted by all branches of the security forces on people not involved in guerrilla activities.
The year has also been characterized by continuing instability in govemment. Following the overthrow of President General Carlos Humberto Romero in October 1979 by a civilian-military junta, the new government announced an amnesty for political prisoners, the restoration of human rights and the implementation of agrarian reform. However in the ensuing months the civilian members of thé firstywnia withdrew from the govemment in protest as the agrarian reform stalled and the repression continued; most went into exile. They had particularly objected to the failure of the authorities either to disband the mral paramilitary group ORDEN (now operating under another name) as recommended in the 1978 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Report on the Situation of Human Rights in El Salvador, or to initiate proceedings against officers implicated in human rights violations. Christian Democrat José Napoléon Duarte joined the govemment in December 1980 as its civilian President. Colonel Adolfo Majano led the coup which overthrew General Romero in 1979 and had continued to press for land and social reforms. An attempt on his life in November 1980 failed and in December 1980 he was made to leave the junta. When he then accused the govemment of condoning right-wing "death squads" a warrant was issued for his arrest and he was detained in February 1981. Released on 20 March 1981 he reportedly left the country.
139
Those now in control have implemented what appears to be a systematic and brutal policy of intimidation and repression. When challenged about arbitrary detention, "disappearances" and extrajudicial kiUings, President Duarte repeatedly responded that his government was under attack from extremist groups of the right and the left who were responsible for many of the abuses. Asked about killings of peasants in strategically important areas where guerrillas were believed to be operating, the government held that many were killed in confrontations with the security forces. In those areas the government appeared to be implementing a counter-insurgency policy that presumed that all civilians were supporters or potential supporters of the armed opposition.
Additional emergency legislation, which contravenes regional and international standards for the protection of human rights, has been passed to legitimize such practices. Decree Law 507, which came into force on 1 January 1981, defines unlawful groups broadly, and under Article 11 statements in the news media that a person belongs to such a group will be sufficient proof. Article 7 permits a secret six-month period of investigation at the pre-trial stage, starting when the detainee is transferred to the custody of the examining judge, and appears to allow at least six months' incommunicado detention. It could be construed as an attempt to legitimize "disappearances".
Many of the "disappeared" and killed were young people; apparently assumed to be sympathetic to the opposition simply on grounds of age. Amnesty International has a photographic record of two arrests on 3 October 1980. Two young men were pictured being arrested by the National Guard who were then shown binding and tying the young suspects before turning them over to men in plain clothes. Five days later their corpses were found showing clear marks of torture.
On 1 November 1980 Gloria del Rosario Rivera, aged 15; Alfonso Román Hernández, aged 22; and 60 others, aged between 14 and 22, were detained in the Colonia Amatepec and Ciudad Credisa in Soyapango, to the east of the capital, by members of the army and security services on a house-to-house search. All were taken away in an armoured lorry. Two days later 15 of their bodies were found in Ilopango. On the same day the bodies of the others were found on the road to Mil Cumbres. All showed signs of torture.
In January 1981, as the guerrillas began their unsuccessful "final offensive", indiscriminate repression against the young intensified. On 10 January troops took 22 teenagers from Mejicanos; all were found tortured and dead. The faces of five of the young women had been obliterated.
On 9 April 1981 Amnesty International publicly urged the
140
authorities to investigate the massacre which allegedly occurred during the week of 7 April. More than 20 people, including many youths, were killed in the Soyapango suburb of the capital, San Salvador. Unusually, Salvadorian officials, the United States Embassy in El Salvador and the State Department had reportedly acknowledged that an official security unit, the Treasury Police, was involved.
Amnesty International also recorded many abuses directed against children too young to have had any involvement with opposition groups. On 9 July 1980,31 members of a peasant family by the name of Mojica Santos were reportedly killed by ORDEN members with the complicity of the National Army and the National Police. Those murdered included 15 children under the age of 10. One was only two weeks old.
The children of "displaced persons" fleeing areas of fighting to seek shelter in church-run reception centres in San Salvador and elsewhere have suffered abuses, as have the children of refugees who have sought asylum abroad. Persistent rumours have been received of Salvadorian troops entering Honduras unmolested to pursue refugees, and a number of incidents have been reported in which Salvadorian refugees have been detained with the aid of Honduran troops, taken back across the border into El Salvador, and "disappeared".
A combined military action was reported in May 1980, when hundreds of people, mainly women and children, were killed by Salvadorian troops as they tried to cross the Sumpul River into Honduras, while Honduran troops blocked their way. Both governments initially denied the incident, but a denunciation of the killings by local priests was supported by the Honduran Bishops Council and confirmed by Salvadorian and Honduran human rights groups and eye-witnesses. Later the Salvadorian authorities did state that there had been a confrontation between government forces and guerrillas in the area.
Peasants who survived the massacre later described to visiting foreign delegations of inquiry how Salvadorian soldiers and ORDEN members gathered children and babies together, threw them into the air and slashed them to death with machetes. Some infants were reportedly decapitated and their bodies slit into pieces and thrown to the dogs; other children were reported to have drowned after Salvadorian soldiers threw them into the water.
Similar incidents, involving Salvadorian and Honduran armed forces as well as members of ORDEN, reportedly occurred in March and April of 1981. Amnesty International presented information it had received regarding human rights abuses directed at Salvadorian refugees to international and regional organizations.
Internal refugees or displaced persons fleeing areas where the
141
government's agrarian reform program had been violently imposed and confiscated lands handed over to ORDEN supporters have been removed from church-run relief centres and summarily executed. A government "pacification" program of massive bombings intended to force civilians out of areas controlled by opposition forces had also driven many peasants from their homes.
Clergy, both Salvadorian and foreign, who have denounced such atrocities have themselves been repressed and Amnesty International has repeatedly called for inquiries into the murder and "disappearance" of priests and lay workers including Father Marcial Serrano, parish priest of Olocuilta, kidnapped by the National Guard on 28 November 1980 and still missing.
The assassination of Archbishop Romero, an outspoken defender of human rights, provoked an international outcry. In March 1980 shortly after he had written to President Carter asking the United States of America not to provide military assistance to El Salvador which could be used to perpetrate human rights violations, he was killed while saying mass. Since then there have been reports that the authorities have refused to act upon information about the identities of those behind the Archbishop's assassination.
Slow progress has been made in investigating the murders of four American women whose partially-clothed bullet-ridden bodies were found near Santiago Nonualco, a small town southeast of the capital, on 4 December 1980. All bore marks of strangulation and other physical abuse. A mission of inquiry led by former US Undersecretary of State William Rogers found that diere was circumstantial evidence to implicate local security forces. It also found indications that highly placed Salvadorian officials had obstructed efforts to investigate the disappearance and deaths of the four women. The magistrate of the department where the bodies were initially held asked for official protection so that he could give information to the US Ambassador and was reportedly murdered two days later.
After the mission the US suspended assistance to El Salvador until the government clarified the circumstances of the deaths. When the USA resumed its military aid program in January 1981, no charges had been brought nor any criminal proceedings initiated in connection with this incident.
Amnesty International wrote to the US administration of President Jimmy Carter to express its concern at the alleged involvement in human rights violations of official security agencies which could be presumed to be likely beneficiaries of US military aid. In May 1980 the US State Department replied that its assistance was intended to enhance the professionalism of the armed forces.
Following further correspondence with the Carter administration
142
on the subject, Amnesty International welcomed public statements by the new administration of President Reagan when it assumed power in January 1981 that it would continue to be US policy to endeavour to protect human rights in El Salvador, but noted that Amnesty International shared the concern expressed in December 1980 by the United Nations which called upon governments "to refrain from the supply of arms and other military assistance in the current circumstances". After indications that the new administration intended to increase military assistance to El Salvador significantly, Amnesty International announced its intention to urge the new Secretary of State, General Alexander Haig, to review the effects of US assistance programs upon the human rights situation in El Salvador, and to make public the findings of that review.
Academics have been subjected to many abuses. On 10 February 1981 troops burst into a regular meeting of the Consejo Superior Universitario, the Supreme University Council, of the National University of El Salvador. Twenty people were detained including the Deans of six faculties and the interim Rector of the National University, Lie. Miguel Parada. Parada's predecessor, Felix Ulloa Martinez, President of the Geneva-based World University Service, died in October 1980 after a machine-gun attack in San Salvador. Ulloa's name had previously appeared on several anonymous death lists. Fourteen of the University Council members detained on 10 February were released shortly afterwards, but there were fears for the safety of the others. However, a journalist eventually located and interviewed them in Santa Tecla prison in the capital.
They described their arrests as the final step in a government campaign to destroy the university, and stated that hundreds of students and professors had been assassinated and the university assaulted by troops on several occassions. The last assault occurred on 26 June 1980 when the institution was completely occupied by troops supported by tanks and helicopters. Students, professors, university administrators and staff, as well as members of left-wing organizations and 15 foreign journalists were taken into custody. At least 22 were reported killed.
Following the publication of their names in the international press, the University Council members were released on 1 April 1981, but approximately 117 other political prisoners remained in Santa Tecla. Many testified that they had been physically and psychologically tortured while in custody. Electric shocks, beatings and the use of hallucinogenic drugs were alleged in attempts to extort confessions of guerrilla involvement. A young teacher, Rafael Carias Flores, displayed large areas of burnt flesh on his arms, legs, body and face, where he said interrogators had thrown sulphuric acid. He also
143
claimed to have been indecently assaulted, and to have had acid poured on his testicles. His two-year-old son was arrested at the same time and has not been located. Four prisoners were reportedly removed from Santa Tecla in September 1980 in reprisal for a hunger-strike calling for a general amnesty and an end to human rights violations and remained missing.
Others held in Santa Tecla included members of the Sindicato de Trabajadores Empresa Comisión Ejecutiva Hidroeléctrica, the Hydroelectric Workers Union, which represents workers in the privately-owned electricity-supply industry. They had been jailed after a strike in August 1980. The strike was in protest at a government ruling that the union was unconstitutional under Decree 296 prohibiting trade unions from discussing politics. The discussions in question had dealt with the killings in front of their families of 10 trade unionists who had held meetings to protest against dangerous working conditions.
Also found in Santa Tecla prison was journalist Francisco Ramirez Avelar, who when arrested on 15 January 1981 had been writing for the newspaper El Independiente, The Independent, later forced to close. The whereabouts of eight other staff members detained at the same time remained unknown. Ramirez stated that he had not yet appeared before a court, though he had been brought blindfolded and handcuffed before a military judge for questioning, and guns had been jabbed into his chest. He was charged with having served as a link between the news media and the opposition, but he said he had been imprisoned because he had written about the authorities' involvement in political killings. The persecution oíEl Independiente had included several violent attacks on the newspaper's offices, three unsuccessful attempts on the life of its editor, Jorge Pinto, and two failed attempts to arrest him. The only other newspaper that had refused to practice self-censorship. La Crónica del Pueblo, the People's Chronicle, closed down in the summer of 1980 after its managing editor and a photographer were abducted. Their bodies were found the next day hacked to death.
Foreign journalists have also suffered. In December 1980 American journalist John Sullivan disappeared from his hotel and has not been heard from since. Nina Bundgaard, writing for the Danish monthly magazine Politisk Revy survived detention by the Treasury PoHce. Arrested on 25 November 1980, blindfolded and interrogated at both Air Force and National Guard Headquarters, the 22-year-old reporter was threatened with death on several occasions and was eventually expelled on 30 November 1980 after intervention by the Danish authorities. Her Salvadorian husband had been killed two days earlier; another friend was kidnapped at his funeral and her dead
144
body later found with torture marks. Mauricio Gamero, a young Salvadorian arrested at the same time as Nina Bundgaard, remained missing. One month later Venezuelan film director Nelson Arrieti was abducted from his hotel by 18 heavily armed members of the security forces in plain clothes. After his release on 18 January 1981 Nelson Arrieti stated that he had been beaten and drugged at the military barracks where he was interrogated.
Salvadorian human rights groups which have tried to inform the international public about human rights abuses have also been decimated by murder and enforced exile. In early October 1980 Maria Magdalena Enríquez, press secretary of the Human Rights Commission of El Salvador, was abducted and found dead in a shallow grave about 35 kilometres from the capital. Another of its representatives, Ramón Valladares Pérez, was killed on 26 October 1980. The offices of the commission have been bombed frequently since then, and its information and administration secretary, Victor Medrano, was abducted in January 1981 and held by the National Police until 11 F ebruary. Attacks have also been mounted against the Socorro Jurídico, another body which monitors human rights abuses and which also offers legal assistance to the poor. In mid-December the offices were forced to close temporarily, having been raided 17 times in one week by the National Police, and many of its personnel have been forced into hiding or exile. In early April, a number of Socorro Juridico workers were named on a list issued by the press office of the army as "traitors to their country". Amnesty International issued a press release which expressed regret that the army had published such a list which suggested that official sanction was being given to people wishing to eliminate those who denounced violations of human rights by the security forces. Amnesty International called upon the authorities to protect those named on the list
Teachers were another profession to suffer repression. From January to October 1980 at least 90 were murdered by uniformed and plainclothes members of the security forces, and at least 19 primary and secondary schools were raided by the security forces. A further 22 teachers were killed in the period 1 January to 1 May 1981, while others have been detained and "disappeared". Many have gone into exile; 85 per cent of the schools in the west of the country have reportedly been closed.
The attacks on teachers appeared to be an attempt to destroy the teachers' ymion. Asociación Nacional de Educadores de El Salvador (ANDE S), the National A ssociation of Salvadorian Educators. This union was a member of one of the largest opposition bodies, the Bloque Popular Revolucionario (BPR), the Popular Revolutionary Block, which united unions of peasants, teachers, students and shanty
145
town dwellers and was in turn a member of the coalition of opposition parties, the Frente Democrático Revolucionario (FDR), the Democratic Revolutionary Front, formed in April 1980.
In November 1980 six FDR leaders, including Secretary General and former Minister of Agriculture under the first post-Romero government, Enrique Alvarez, were kidnapped as they were about to hold a news conference. An estimated 200 men in army andNational Police uniform surrounded the area while men in plain clothes arrested the six along with approximately 25 others. The bullet-ridden bodies of the six were later found at a lake near the international airport, showing signs of torture, dismemberment and strangulation.
In December 1980 Amnesty International sent messages to the United Nations, pointing to the overwhelming evidence that Sal-vadorian troops had been responsible for the killings, and urging member states to condemn these actions which "outraged the minimum standards of government conduct".
A previous submission by Amnesty International to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, included the case of teacher Leonel Meléndez, an ANDES leader. Shot and wounded in May 1980, Meléndez was abducted from the operating theatre of the Rosales Hospital in San Salvador when the hospital was surrounded by vehicles belonging to the National Guard and agents of the National PoHce.
Throughout the year Amnesty International received similar reports of individuals, in some instances incontestably non-combatants, being removed from hospital and killed, apparently merely because they had sought medical attention after being wounded in the civil conflict Medical personnel have also been abducted and murdered, apparently for giving treatment to the wounded, including non-combatants. First aid workers have also reportedly been abducted as they tried to transport medical supplies.
In June 1980 and March 1981 Amnesty International launched a campaign to mobilize doctors throughout the world to urge the Sal-vadorian authorities to protect the health services and bring those who violated its neutrality to justice.
In April 1981 the British charitable agency Oxfam reported that 17 Salvadorians who worked on Oxfam-supported projects in El Salvador had been killed by the army or government-controlled paramilitary forces in the last year. More than 300 people less directly involved in the projects had been killed.
Such atrocities prompted Amnesty International to submit information about the detained and "disappeared" in El Salvador to regional and international organizations. Amnesty International made an oral statement to the UN Commission on Human Rights in
146
March 1981 in which it estimated that 12,000 people had been killed during 1980 and noted that evidence it had collated from hundreds of individual cases of human rights abuses clearly indicated the responsibility of the regular security forces for the majority. The commission later decided to appoint a special representative to investigate the reported violations. Submissions were also presented to UNESCO and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States. A statement on El Salvador was presented to the Tenth Regular Session of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States, held in November 1980, in which Amnesty International expressed hope that given the continuing gravity of the human rights situation there, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights would carry out an in situ investigation and seek effective means of checking abuses. In March 1981 Amnesty International advised the US section of Amnesty International who testified before the Sub-Committee on Inter-American Affairs to the United States House of Representatives on human rights violations in El Salvador, and urged the sub-committee to uphold human rights considerations as fundamental guidelines in the development of US policy towards El Salvador. In other testimony to the United States House of Representatives a former military doctor in the Salvadorian Army stated that it was the high command of the armed forces, and the directors of the security forces who wielded the power in El S alvador; that the Escuadrones de la Muerte, "death squads", were made up of members of the security forces; and that acts of terrorism ascribed to those squads such as political assassinations, kidnappings and indiscriminate murder were in fact planned by high-ranking military officers and carried out by members of the security forces.
During the year. Amnesty International launched 58 appeals on behalf of472 people believed to have been detained or "disappeared".
147
