Angola
Amnesty International's main concerns were detention without trial, unfair trial procedures and the death penalty.
Throughout the year there was sporadic fighting in the central and southern parts of the country between government security forces and guerrillas belonging to the Uniao Nacionalpara a Independ^ncia Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, led by Dr Jonas Savimbi. The UNITA was responsible for regular sabotage along the Benguela railway and for bomb explosions in the capital, Luanda, and in other cities in central Angola. In addition Kunene and Kuando-Kubango provinces were repeatedly attacked by South African forces.
The conflict between the UNITA and the government of the Movimento Popular de Libertaqao de Angola — Partido de Trabalho (MPLA-PT), People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola — Labour Party, resulted in prisoners being taken by both sides. At the end of 1980 the UNITA was reported to be holding Angolan and Portuguese civilians as well as captured government soldiers. For its part the government had detained several hundred people suspected of UNITA connections. Some had been captured while fighting for
26
the UNITA; for example more than 50 people were held in Luanda's Casa de Reclusào (detention centre) without charge or trial. Others were merely suspected of supporting the UNITA and were detained without trial. Both sides executed opponents. In August 1980 the UNITA summarily tried and executed 15 people described as MPLA-PT soldiers after 25 UNITA members had been executed in Luanda.
In addition to those imprisoned for supporting the UNITA a small number of people accused of supporting the Trente Nacional de Libertaqào de Angola (FNLA), Angola National Liberation Front, which had fought the government in 1975 and 1976, were still being held in mid-1980 at Tari detention camp, nearKibala in Kuanza-Sul province.
Despite the armed conflict many long-term detainees were released during the year. They included suspected members of dissident left-wing groups held since late 1977 and early 1978 and detainees of several nationalities who had been detained without charge or trial in Luanda, some for as long as four and a half years.
Members of the Organizaçào Comunista de Angola (OCA), Angola Communist Organization, and the Nucleo José Staline, Joseph Stalin Group, had been detained without trial since 1977 and early 1978. Members of both these organizations were released in January 1980, and by May 1980 about 15 remained in detention who had all been adopted as prisoners of conscience. In February and March 1980 at least four of the detainees appeared before a special judicial commission composed of members of the People's Revolutionary Tribunal which summarily examined their cases and sentenced them to periods of two and three years' administrative detention. The detainees had no right to defend themselves. At the beginning of May 1980 three of them were transferred from Sao Paulo prison in Luanda to Tari detention camp. Later in May three women teachers held at Sao Paulo prison on account of suspected links with the OCA went on hunger-strike for 12 days to protest against their continuing detention. The three were released in June along with a fourth teacher, Dulce Fonseca, who had been detained in 1978 and sentenced to two and a half years' administrative detention in February 1980.
In July 1980 the seven men still in detention at Sào Paulo prison because of links with the two dissident groups went on hunger-strike. At the same time the three who had been transferred to Tari camp refused to work. During the hunger-strike Amnesty International appealed for the release of all the detainees. The hunger-strike lasted 28 days and by the time it ended all seven hunger-strikers had been transferred to hospital and the authorities had indicated that their
27
cases would be reviewed. The seven detained at Sao Paulo and the three at Tari camp were all released unconditionally in August 1980. In October 1980 Amnesty International received a reply to its appeals from a senior member of the MPLA-PT Centra! Committee, but it did not refer to detainees still being held on whose behalf Amnesty International was appealing.
Amnesty International investigated the detention without trial of Sabino dos Santos da Cunha Matos and eight other prisoners from Sao Tome and Principe who had been living in Angola and who were arrested in Luanda in April 1979, apparently suspected of criticizing the Government of Sao Tome and Principe. They were reportedly released in August 1980.
More than 20 detainees held in the Casa de Reclusao in Luanda went on hunger-strike in September 1980, protesting against their detention. Four of them were Zairians who had been detained since July 1976, a few months after seeking political asylum in Angola. Prisoners from Zaire, Portugal, Chile and other countries had been detained in 1977 and 1978, apparently because the authorities saw them as a threat to national security. Several Cape Verdeans were released in October 1980. In March 1981 the Zairians and a number of other non-Angolan detainees held in Luanda were released to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for resettlement outside Angola. In December 1980 Amnesty International learned that four Portuguese nationals captured before independence in 1975 while fighting for the FNLA, who had since been detained without trial, had been released and deported to Portugal.
Although a number of political detainees were released during the year Amnesty International remained concerned by the prolonged detention without charge or trial of civihans arrested on suspicion of being "counter-revolutionaries". Amnesty International received reports of a number of civilians detained for between six and 12 months after being denounced to the authorities, although no evidence had been presented that they had actually committed offences.
During 1980 and early 1981 some 50 people accused of being members of the UNIT A and of causing bomb explosions and civilian deaths were sentenced to death by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal, sitting in Bie, Huambo, Kuito and Luanda. The condemned prisoners were allowed to appeal to a special Appeals Tribunal formed in April 1980 to hear appeals against death sentences and prison terms exceeding 20 years. Only one appeal against the death sentence, in January 1981, was successful; the sentence was commuted to imprisonment. At the same hearing a prisoner who had been given a long prison sentence had it changed on appeal to a death sentence. Sixteen prisoners condemned to death in July 1980 and
28
nine condemned in August 1980 are reported to have been executed; it is not clear how many other condemned prisoners have been executed.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the Angolan authorities not to impose the death penalty and to commute death sentences, both during and after trials in 1980 and early 1981. In April 1980 and again in September 1980 the organization wrote to senior officials explaining its opposition to the death penalty and why it sought to prevent executions from taking place. No reply was received.
