Suriname
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial; the establishment of special courts; retroactive legislation; and the alleged ill-treatment of prisoners.
After the overthrow of the govemment in February 1980 by noncommissioned army officers, some former govemment ministers and officials were detained without charge and without access to their families and lawyers. Amnesty Intemational received reports that some of the detainees had been ill-treated These allegations were raised by Amnesty International on 27 June 1980 in a letter to the Prime Minister Chin A Sen (who was subsequently appointed President), together with an inquiry as to whether the detainees would be tried. On 31 July 1980 Amnesty Intemational asked Prime Minister Chin A Sen about the reported ill-treatment of Johannes Cornelius Krol,
; ^	
\ V	
	
182	
detained in May 1980 in connection with an alleged plot to overthrow the government.
In January 1981 an Amnesty International mission visited Suriname to discuss Amnesty International's concerns with the authorities, including the introduction of retroactive legislation and the establishment of a special court for cases of alleged corruption, both apparently intended to secure the conviction of former government ministers and officials. The first judge appointed to head the special court resigned because his efforts to ensure a fair trial were defeated by the behaviour of the prosecutors. Defendants and their lawyers were informed of the charges only a few days before the trial and were, therefore, unable to prepare an adequate defence.
After the return of the mission Amnesty International wrote to President Chin A Sen criticizing Decree B-9 in detail, in particular its retroactive effect; its wording, which lends itself to "the most arbitrary interpretation and application"; the creation of special courts, which "frequently results in proceedings and judgments which reflect the dilution of those safeguards afforded by the ordinary courts"; and the new provision for long periods of imprisonment partly or wholly in isolation. Allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners were also raised and specific mention was made of the death of Frits Ormskerk, said by the government to have been killed during an attempted coup in May 1980, but allegedly beaten to death.
In February 1980 an Amnesty International observer attended the trial of John Thijm, former Director of the Planning Bureau who was tried by the special court on charges of corruption, under Decree B-9. In his report to Amnesty International the observer pointed out that the acts with which the defendant was charged were not crimes at the time when they were said to have been committed and that "Given the nature of the substantive criminal law to be applied, one may say, from the outset that the trial was unfair, whatever the outcome .. The report stressed that the retroactive application of the criminal law did not accord with Article 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, of which Suriname is a State Party.
At the end of April 1981 all detainees known to Amnesty International had been brought to trial or released pending trial.
183	
