Sudan
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, unfair trials, and poor prison conditions. Sudan retains the use of the death penalty.
One hundred and forty people detained indefinitely without charge or trial under the State Security Law were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. Of these, 66 were released during the year, mostly in August 1980. A further 70 known detainees were being adopted in April 1981, when the total number of political detainees was believed to be at least 300.
Since 1979 the government of President Jaafar Numeiri has detained without trial a substantial number of members or alleged supporters of opposition political parties banned since the Sudanese Socialist Union was decreed the sole political party in 1971. Detained members of the Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party include Omer Mohager Mohamedeen, a lawyer, and Mohamed Ali Jadeen, Deputy Secretary in the Ministry of Finance. An urgent appeal was launched in October IP 80 for another detainee, Youssif Himat Hassan, a bank manager who was suffering from a perforated ulcer.
About 60 members of the Democratic Unionist Party were detained in May 1980 for allegedly planning a coup. The majority had
84
been released uncharged by the end of 1980, although Seif Abdel-Magid, a doctor, was still detained in April 1981 and held in solitary confinement at the National Security headquarters.
The largest single group of detainees consisted of members or alleged supporters of the Sudan Communist Party. They included party central committee member Youssif Hussein, lawyer Kemal al-Gizooli, trade unionist Mokhtar Abdullah, and Edward Lino Wor, senior official in the Southern Region Development Corporation. Most were arrested after demonstrations and strikes in mid-1979, but some, like the party central committee member el-Tigani el-Tayeeb, were arrested in late 1980.
In May 1980 Mohamed Murad, a Khartoum University lecturer, and four others were tried before a security court on charges of membership of an illegal organization — the Sudan Communist Party. They were found guilty and given the minimum sentence of six months' imprisonment. They were due for release since the sentence began at the time of arrest, but were immediately rearrested. Seven Ba'athists were tried on similar charges, five of whom were convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for six to 18 months. They too were detained again on expiry of their sentences.
Prisoners released during the year included: Samuel Aru, former Vice-President of the southern region's High Executive Council; poet Mahgoub Sharif; two members of the Sudan Communist Party central committee — Saudi Daraj and Suleman Hamid; Osman Abdel-Nabi a doctor, and Maker Benjamin, a civil servant
The majority of the detainees were held in Kober prison, Khartoum. They were permitted short supervised family visits, reading material and recreational activities. The main complaint was about inadequate medical treatment and serious delays in obtaining hospital admission.
Kober prison detainees went on hunger-strike on 28 February 1981 against worsening conditions under a new prison commandant. Writing material had been forbidden, their diet had deteriorated, access to independent medical specialists was denied, and other previously recognized rights were arbitrarily withdrawn. After three days the strike ended when the authorities agreed to remedy their complaints.
85