Brunei
Amnesty International was concerned by the continued use of emergency legislation to detain people without trial for extraordinarily long periods.
All the detainees held under emergency orders about whom Amnesty International has received information were former members of the bannedPar/az	(PRB), Brunei People's Party. In
August 1962 the PRB had won all the elected seats in the Legislative Council. Sultan Sir Omar Ali Saifuddin called in British troops to suppress a rebellion launched by the PRB after the Legislative Council had failed to meet.
After the defeat of the rebellion, approximately 2,500 members of the PRB and its military wing, the Tentera Nasion'al Kalimantan Utara (TNKU), North Kalimantan National Army, were arrested. Almost all have been released. Section 83 of the 1959 constitution permits the Sultan to proclaim a state of emergency whenever it appears to him that a public danger exists. Under Section 83(3), the Sultan is empowered to issue any orders he considers desirable
205	
^ subject only to the provision that "no such order shall confer any right to punish without trial, by death, imprisonment or fine". The Sultan issued the Emergency Orders of December 1962 under Section 83(3) authorizing the Chief Minister to issue two-year detention orders renewable indefinitely. The Sultan and his successor, SirHassanal Bolkiah, have maintained the state of emergency ever since 1962, and have used the Emergency Orders to detain political prisoners for many years without trial.
Since November 1974, 40 detainees who had been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience have been released. The remaining nine adopted prisoners of conscience have spent between 15 and 18i^ years in detention. Amnesty International understands that there have been further arrests of alleged associates of the PRE under the Emergency Orders since the initial wave after the rebellion. Amnesty International believes that approximately 30 detainees were held under the Emergency Orders but could not be sure of the precise number. The government would not disclose the figure even to members of the Legislative Council.
Amnesty International was concerned by the conditions in which : the detainees were held. After eight prisoners escaped in July 1973, the remaining detainees were transferred from the relatively liberal conditions of Berakas detention camp to the much stricter regime of Jerudong prison, where they were believed to be held in isolation and denied regular visits and correspondence. Amnesty International received reports that a number were in declining physical and mental health. Several were of advanced years, two being in their sixties.
Amnesty International believes that those still detained were not being held because they individually constituted a threat to the security of Brunei. This conclusion was suggested both by the fact that most detainees have been released and by consideration of the background of those still detained. Of those still in detention, four were farmers, two foremen, one was a fitter, one a teacher and one a fisherman. All except one were ordinary members of the PRB, the exception being Othman bin Haji Karim who was a branch committee member; he was a 66-year-old farmer and featured as a prisoner of the month in the Amnesty International Newsletter in September 1980.
