"	Bulgaria
The concerns of Amnesty International were the existence and application of legislation limiting the exercise of human rights, political imprisonment, violations of international standards with regard to pre-trial investigation and trial procedure, ill-treatment of detainees, poor prison conditions and the death penalty.
In April 1981 Amnesty International wrote to Todor Zhivkov, head of state and Secretary General of the Bulgarian Communist Party, appealing for an amnesty for ali prisoners of conscience to mark the celebration of the 1300th anniversary of the founding of the Bulgarian State.
Despite guarantees of freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly and of association in the constitution, people who exercised these freedoms in a manner not approved of by the authorities, although non-violently, were liable to imprisonment under the criminal code. Ljuben Sobadschiev from Ruse, for whose release Amnesty International has worked since his conviction in 1978, was imprisoned under Articles 108, 109 and 113 of the criminal code for having distributed leaflets in a local supermarket in which he criticized official economic policy and complained of food shortages. He was sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment. Article 108 makes " anti-state agitation or propaganda" an offence punishable by up to five years' imprisonment; Article 109 prescribes three to 12 years' imprisonment for "forming or being a member of an organization whose activities are aimed at committing offences against the state"; Article 113 makes people who commit these offences against another workers' state liable to the same penalty.
Emigration is severely limited by the govemment and, as in past years, Amnesty International has worked on behalf of those imprisoned for attempting to leave the country without official authorizatioa Under Article 279 of the criminal code people convicted of this offence may be punished by up to five years' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000 levas. In November 1980 Amnesty Intemational began investigating the case of Sotir Iliev, a 33-year-old builder-architect from Plovdiv, who in March 1980 applied for political asylum in Vienna after having left Bulgaria without official authorization. On 11 April he disappeared from Vienna; he was subsequently tried in Bulgaria and sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. The Austrian authorities instituted legal proceedings against persons unknown
283	
held responsible for his disappearance; it has been alleged that he was kidnapped in Vienna by Bulgarian state security agents. Sotir Iliev was reportedly serving his sentence in Sofia central prison.
Amnesty Intemational has leamed thatDimiter Kolev, an adopted prisoner of conscience convicted of having sought to leave Bulgaria without official permission, was released in May 1980 in very poor health.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on a number of cases of people sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for espionage, including both adopted prisoners of conscience and cases under investigation. Typically these were people with friends or relatives living abroad, with whom they maintained contact, or with foreign acquaintances living in Bulgaria.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on the cases of three Pomaks (ethnic Bulgarians of the Moslem faith) — Bajram Gaitov, Jumer Ilanski and Mr Bunzev — who were sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment in 1973 after protesting against an official policy of forced assimilation by which Pomaks were required to change their Moslem names for Bulgarian ones.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about continued reports of ill-treatment of detainees during preliminary investigation in the investigation department of the Razvigor Street State Security Centre in Sofia. Under Bulgarian law, a person may be held in custody for up to 10 days before being formally charged. During preliminary investigation, which may last up to six months, the accused has the right of access to defence counsel only if the Procurator permits. Several former prisoners have reported that attempts were made to extort confessions from them. They alleged that they had been threatened, subjected to violence, such as punching and beating with rubber tmncheons, interrogated for long periods and deprived of sleep; in two cases they were reportedly taken to the "Fourth Kilometre" psychiatric hospital in Sofia and forcibly given drugs.
Many political prisoners have had only minimal access to defence counsel, who were generally state-appointed, and there have also been complaints that political prisoners or their defence counsel were given their dossiers only days before the trial and were thus unable to prepare an adequate defence. Political trials were usually heard in camera, although the verdict was pronounced in open court.
Conditions in Sofia central prison, where some prisoners of conscience have been held, were reported to be crowded, unhygienic and well below internationally recognized standards.
The majority of adopted prisoners of conscience have served their sentences in the high security prison of Stara Zagora. Former prisoners have stated that the prison population of Stara Zagora
284	
varied in the past decade between 900 and 1,400, and estimated the number of political prisoners at about 250. It has also been claimed that about 15 per cent of all prisoners in Stara Zagora were serving sentences for having attempted to cross the border without authorization, but Amnesty Intemational could not verify this. Reports have frequently referred to overcrowding in Stara Zagora prison; political prisoners were reportedly detained in units 1 and 6, in cells measuring approximately 4m by 2m, and housing four people. Prisoners have complained of the noise of loudspeakers in the cells broadcasting radio and alleged that these loudspeakers concealed listening equipment. Although conditions at Stara Zagora appeared to be generally better than at Sofia central prison, prisoners have complained of difficult working conditions. Food has been described as poor and prisoners had to supplement it with food from a prison shop and from their families. Medical care consisted of twice-weekly visits of two hours by a qualified doctor and dentist This was quite inadequate and at otíier times prisoners could obtain only the most basic medical care. Prisoners have reported being punished for minor breaches of prison mies by solitary confinement with greatly reduced food rations in an unheated cell, without toilet or washing facilities. By allowing prisoners to spend a night in their own cells before retuming them to solitary confinement, prison authorities have at times prolonged this punishment well beyond the maximum of two weeks.
The criminal code retains the death penalty for 29 crimes. Amnesty Intemational leamed of two executions during the year. A press report on 27 August 1980 stated that Anton Dimitrov Andreev, sentenced to death by the District Court of Kardzhali for the "particularly cruel" murder of his pregnant, 18-year-old wife, had been executed. On 20 November 1980 the execution of Tsano Nikolov Petrov was reported. He had been sentenced to death by the District Court of Vidin for the "premeditated and particularly cmel" murder of a young woman.
285	
