Grenada
The main concern of Amnesty Intemational during the year was the continued detention of over 100 people without charge or trial. Other issues which were raised with the authorities were the alleged ill-treatment of detainees and new legislation providing for the death penalty.
Throughout the year Amnesty Intemational appealed to Prime Minister Maurice Bishop for the release of all detainees not charged with specific offences. Among those held since the coup which brought Maurice Bishop and the New Jewel Movement to power in March 1979 were members of the former govemment ana its supporters. Many people who supported the coup were later accused of plotting to overthrow the present govemment and detained. Approximately 110 people were held without charge or trial at the beginning of 1981.
An Amnesty Intemational mission visited Grenada in January 1981 to discuss all Amnesty Intemational's concems with the Prime Minister and in particular to urge that the detainees should be brought to trial, or released. Allegations that some detainees had been ill-treated were also raised.
After this, visit Amnesty Intemational wrote to Prime Minister Bishop pointing out that Article 7, paragraph 4 of the American Convention on Human Rights, to which Grenada is a State Party, states: "Anyone who is detained shall be informed of the reasons for his detention and shall be promptly notified of the charge or charges against him". Paragraph 5 of the same article states: "Any person detained shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable time . . .".
Grenada has a mandatory death penalty for murder. The Terrorism (Prevention) Law, 1980, also provides a discretionary death sentence for causing death by explosives or by acts of terrorism. Amnesty Intemational asked the Prime Minister whether the new legislation constituted an extension of the death penalty, and appealed to him for the total abolition of the death penalty in Grenada.
In April 1981 Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of 81 detainees.
148
