Revolutionary Party.
Amnesty International received reports of conflict in the Huasteca area throughout the year; peasants objected particularly to the presence of military units stationed at strategic points to prevent further land occupations by the peasantry. Reports also suggested that the Policía Judicial (Judicial Police) had arrested a number of local peasants to extort payments or force them to sell their land in return for their release. There has been no further word of two people from the area detained in February 1980.
In the State of Morelos, controversy has flared over plots of land awarded to local residents in 1947 by presidential decree, but subsequently illegally sold to a foreigner, who fell into tax arrears. It was then acquired by the state governor who registered it in the name of his children. To defend their right to the land, the local residents established a colonia (communal settlement) but were forced off by a combined police and army invasion in 1973. In the following years, leaders of this group and other colonias have been repeatedly harassed, arrested and tortured. Amnesty International has been investigating a number of these cases for several years; although the prisoners, held in Cuemavaca prison, have confessed to criminal offences, it has been alleged that their convictions were based solely on confessions extracted under torture, and that the real reason for their prosecution was their activities as peasant leaders. Over the year several of the Cuemavaca prisoners were released. However state and federal amnesties have been unevenly applied, and some prisoners have been released, while others accused of and tried on exactly the same charges were still held. Three of the Cuemavaca group were retried in late 1980, and resentenced to terms of 36 years in prison.
Alfredo Nava Mesa, a prisoner held at Cuemavaca whose case was being investigated by Amnesty International, was killed in prison on 29 January 1981 by another inmate who had already murdered three people. The killer was reportedly released later. It was also reported that shortly before Nava's murder, the judicial department of the federal police had concluded a study of his case, and had called for his release on the grounds that his continued imprisonment was unjustified.
Two deaths in custody were reported to Amnesty Intemational in April 1981; those of Miguel Hemández Pérez who died after an incident in a Oaxaca prison allegedly provoked by the police, and student Ignacio Yañez García, who reportedly died under torture by police in San Miguel de Allende, Guanajuato.
Throughout the year Amnesty Intemational received reports denouncing torture and ill-treatment in prisons. In October 1980 the
169
Attorney General of the State of Mexico was accused before Congress of ordering the detention, torture and assassination of young people, and of running secret jails in that state. Residents of San Pedro Xalostoc alleged that 17 people, mostly minors, were held in secret jails in San Miguel Xalostoc and Tepotzotlán, and that they had been tortured to make them confess to crimes they had not committed. In February 1981 the CNPDPPDEP protested against the systematic ill-treatment of prisoners in the State of Jalisco. In April 1981 the bishop of Cuerna vaca, Sergio Méndez Arceo, ordered the excommunication of torturers in his diocese, and stated that the general public was convinced that "the pohce are not a protection, but a source of terror because of the maltreatment and torture which they use to extort, intimidate and obtain information from detainees".
During the year the bishops of the southern pacific region of Mexico spoke out against the involvement of the security services in the repression of peasants in their area. On 5 June 1980 Amnesty International appealed for an investigation into a clash on 30 May between landowners, allegedly aidedby the army, and peasants on the Bolanchon Estate, Yahalón, in the southern state of Chiapas, during which an unknown number of peasants died. On 15 June soldiers returned to the area and after using teargas fired upon a group of peasants, killing 12 and wounding many more. A total of 723 families, some of whom had been awaiting settlement of land claims for 28 years, were evicted from their lands. Officials announced that leaders of the peasant families would be tried for criminal offences. Similar clashes between peasants and the private armies of large landowners, often led by decommissioned military officers and aided by official security forces, have been reported throughout Mexico during the year.
Clashes have been reported between the security services and trade unionists in a number of sectors including the oil industry. Conflict was particularly acute in the education sector, where the Coordinadora Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educación (CNTE), the National Coordinating Committee of Education Workers, led pressure for a wage rise and government guarantees of trade union freedom. The government also clashed with the Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores Universitarios (SUNTU), National Union of University Workers, which was trying to create a national university workers' union. Violence flared several times as trade unionists organized demonstrations throughout the country. On ll February 1981 Amnesty International appealed for information on the whereabouts of Fernando Medina Ramirez, a student teacher and trade union activist at the University of Baja California, who was forcibly detained by men in plain clothes at midday on 8 February 1981. The
170
authorities initially refused to acknowledge Medina's detention, but he was eventually located in custody and flown to Mexico City where he was released. However, he has not been permitted to return to the University of Baja California.
On 23 March 1981 Mexico deposited instruments of accession to the International C ovenants on Economic, S ocial and C ultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, subject to a number of interpretative statements and reservations.
