France
The concerns of Amnesty International related to the prosecution and imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service, the limitation of the right to freedom of expression, trial procedures in special courts and the death penalty. In the past year Amnesty International worked on 43 cases of conscientious objectors sentenced to short prison terms. Laws on conscientious objection fall short of internationally recommended standards by limiting exemption from military service to those who "are opposed unconditionally to the personal use of arms because of religious or philosophical convictions" (Article 41 of the Code du service national. National Service Code).
293	
Amnesty Intemational considers that both the letter and the application of the law do not meet the standard adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe calling for exemption from armed service "for reasons of conscience or profound conviction arising from religious, ethical, moral, humanitarian, philosophical or similar motives" (Resolution 337 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe 1967).
Amnesty Intemational has adopted as prisoners of conscience people who have been called up who have had their applications for conscientious objector status rejected, and people charged with desertion who have declared their objection to military service after joining their regiments.
During the year under review conscientious objectors have generally received heavier sentences than in previous years. Some received long prison sentences even though declared réformé (unfit for, and exempt from, military service) between arrest and trial; in the past such people usually received suspended sentences of a few months only. Jehovah's Witnesses received the maximum sentence of two years.
On 4 December 1980 Amnesty Intemational wrote to Dr Solange Troisier, an official at the Ministry of Justice with responsibility for medical services in prisons, expressing concerii about an adopted conscientious objector François Rodriguez, who was then on the 34th day of a hunger-strike. Amnesty International had received reports of his worsening condition and allegations that after his transfer to Fresnes prison he had been denied the small amount of sugar usually given to hunger-strikers when taking liquid. François Rodriguez had been sentenced to six months' imprisonment on 31 October 1980 on a charge of insoumission (insubordination) although he had been previously declared réformé définitivement (permanently unfit for and exempt from military service) after a hunger-strike during an earlier period of arrest for insoumission. Like all conscientious objectors who are réformé, he was serving his sentence in a civilian prison, since he was no longer in the army. Dr Troisier replied to Amnesty International saying that the case was receiving very close medical attention and that his health gave no cause for concem. On 23 December 1980 François Rodriguez was released from prison after 57 days of hunger-strike by order of the Minister of Defence on a recommendation from the civilian prison authorities.
A number of conscientious objectors have been sentenced to additional terms of imprisonment on charges of wilful se If-mutilation as a consequence of going on hunger-strike.
Article 50 of the Code du service national prohibits the dissemination of propaganda in any form which is "likely to incite potential
294	
conscripts to benefit from the provisions of the law recognizing conscientious objection". This effectively prohibits people from giving information about the laws on conscientious objection. Amnesty Intemational believes the law limits the non-violent exercise of freedom of expression and deprives people of information about their legal rights.
There have been several prosecutions under Article 50 during the past year. In March 1981 Amnesty Intemational sent a telegram to the President of the Tribunal correctionel (magistrates' court) of Paris, expressing concern at the trial of Damien Thébault for having published a booklet giving information on laws concerning conscientious objection and on the legal consequences of refusing military and alternative service. Amnesty Intemational said it would adopt Damien Thébault as a prisoner of conscience if he was sent to prison. The trial was adjourned until 12 May 1981.
Amnesty Intemational works for a fair trial within a reasonable time for prisoners of conscience and political prisoners. Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights guarantees this right to all defendants. Amnesty International considered that the procedures in the Cour de sûreté de l'Etat (Court of State Security) were not consonant with the spirit of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights because of the discrepancy between the powers given to the prosecution and the defence (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). Amnesty Intemational was also concerned by the political nature of the court. Two of the five judges are military, and only the Minister of Justice, a politician, may initiate proceedings, not the prosecution. The court tries all cases where in the opinion of the Minister there has been an action aimed at substituting an illegal authority for the authority of the state. An extended period of six days for interrogation by the police is allowed and the court has its own investigating judges. Suspects may be held in preventive detention for an unlimited period while the case is under judicial investigation and no appeal is possible.
On 14 January 1981 in the Court of State Security the trial opened of 17 Corsicans, some of whom had been on hunger-strike for up to 60 days. They were charged with participating in an armed group intending to create a disturbance against the state by invading public and private property, and with kidnapping. All the defendants were members of Corsican independence movements.
On 6 January 1980 three heavily armed men who were allegedly members of an anti-independence group called Front d'action nouvelle contre V independence et l'autonomie (F RAN CIA) were stopped at a road block outside Bastelica in Corsica by "autonomists" armed with hunting rifles. The autonomists claimed that the FRANCIA
295	
members were going to murder an autonomist who lived in the village and that they had acted in self defence. No one was hurt but the autonomists took the three men hostage and announced a news conference to publicize the violent activities of the anti-autonomists. After three days some of the autonomists left Bastelica with the hostages and took over a hotel where they took further hostages. The days up to 13 January were spent in negotiations between the autonomists and the police. All the hostages were eventually released unharmed.
The prosecution accepted that there were important mitigating circumstances. The court condemned them to sentences ranging from six months' suspended imprisonment to four years'.
An Amnesty International observer attended this trial in the Court of State Security. He criticized the use of this special court with the attendant risks of political interference and pointed out that he considered it incorrect to try the autonomists under special jurisdiction although the anti-autonomists were allowed to stand trial in a normal court He repeated the criticisms of the procedures of the Court of State Security regarding the discrepancy between the powers of the prosecution and the defence and concluded that it was doubtful whether in this case the use of special courts had allowed for the proper administration of justice or a fair trial (une bonne justice et d'un procès vraiment équitable.)
In February 1981, after full parliamentary discussion, a law "reinforcing the security and protecting the liberty of persons" was introduced. This changed the law in two areas of concern to Amnesty International. First, it replaced the summary courts' procedure known asflagrant délit with a similar procedure which will effectively apply to a wider range of cases. In the past Amnesty Intemational has criticized the prosecution of people arrested during demonstrations in summary courts under the loi anti-casseurs (anti-wreckers law) using ih& flagrant délit procedure. In Amnesty Intemational's opinion the use of summary courts to give rapid judgments could prevent a fair trial where the facts were in dispute. The new procedure may be used to prosecute offenders where the maximum sentence is less than five years' imprisonment.
Second, Amnesty International drew attention to the new power given to the police to verify a person's identity. Where people cannot or will not identify themselves they may be detained in a police station for up to six hours.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to every member of the Senate on 2 October 1980, before they had considered the draft law, expressing its concem about the new law. Amnesty Intemational wrote again on 17 December 1980, before the final voting by the two assemblies, to
.296
President Giscard d'Estaing, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice and the leaders of all the parliamentary groups because, even with minor amendments to the original bill, the elements of concern to Amnesty International remained.
Crimes which carry the death penalty are tried in the Assize Courts (Cours d'assises). Judgments of the Assize Courts may be appealed against to the Cour de cassation, the highest court, whose sole function is to determine whether any judgment referred to it is in accordance with the law. If the Cour de cassation decides to set aside a judgment, a new trial in another Assize Court is ordered. If, however, the verdict of the Assize Court is upheld, the only recourse available to the convicted person is to petition the President to exercise his right of clemency under Article 17 of the French Constitution of October 1958. If clemency is granted, the sentence of death is normally commuted to life imprisonment.
France was again a major target of Amnesty International's program against the death penalty. The European Parliament adopted an emergency resolution on 21 November 1980 calling on all members of the European Community to suspend the use of the death penalty pending a full debate. Additionally, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 22 April 1980 urged that the death penalty be abolished for offences in peacetime.
There have been no executions in France since September 1977. However, in the year under review, death sentences were passed on seven people. A retrial has been ordered in two cases, and five prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of April 1981.
On 10 April 1981 Amnesty International wrote to all the candidates in the forthcoming presidential elections outlining the areas where French law concerned the organization, because it contravened the standards of intemational law. Amnesty International pointed out that France does not allow individual complaints to be brought under Article 25 of the European Convention on Human Rights or the Optional Protocol of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. France did, however, ratify the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on 4 November 1980.
297	
