Switzerland
Amnesty International's concern was the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service.
Under Article 81 of the military penal code every conscientious o\y jector is sentenced to prison, even where the mihtary tribunal recog-_	nizes a severe conflict of conscience
on religious or ethical grounds. If the objection to military service is considered to be primarily political a longer term of imprisonment is given.
According to official sources 354 people were convicted of refusing military service in 1980. Of 202 cases 96 were classified as refusing on religious grounds, 86 on ethical grounds and 20 on political grounds. Many conscientious objectors were sentenced to terms of imprisonment too short to make it practicable for Amnesty International to adopt them, even though it regarded them as prisoners of conscience.
During the year Amnesty International adopted two pacifists: Matthias H über, a member of the board of the Internationale der Kriegsdienstgegner (the Conscientious Objectors' Intemational) and an editor of its journal Virus; and Urs Geiser, a student of theology. They both received five months' imprisonment in the form of arrêts répressifs, which is given in cases where extenuating circumstances have been recognized. Although convicted conscientious objectors may be allowed to do prescribed work outside the prison boundaries, they are held in the prison in solitary confinement for the remainder of the time. Amnesty Intemational considers this system amounts to imprisonment.
Amnesty Intemational recognized as a prisoner of conscience Pierre-Alain Léchot, who was sentenced to four months' imprisonment in the form of arrêts répressifs by the military tribunal of Neuchâtel on 12 June 1980. His religious convictions were acknowledged by the court
Nicolas Pythoud was considered a prisoner of conscience after being sentenced to eight months' imprisonment by the military tribunal of La Tour-de-Peilz on 24 April 1980. He received a relatively high sentence because, although the tribunal found that his pacifist convictions were partially founded on religious and moral principles, it also considered that he was motivated primarily by political beliefs.
The failure in 1977 of an amendment to the constitution to
322 	
establish an alternative civilian service has meant that every year hundreds of citizens are convicted for the exercise of their conscientiously held beliefs, contrary to internationally recognized norms, in particular Resolution 337 (1967) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, of which Switzerland is a member.
