Greece
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors. According to Greek law all men between the age of 18 and 40 years are liable for military service. Since October 1977 Law 731/77, amending conscription Law 720/70, has allowed conscientious objection to armed military service on religious grounds only, and alternative unarmed military service of twice the duration — four years. There is no provision for alternative civihan service outside the military system. All the conscientious objectors adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience were Jehovah's Witnesses, who refused unarmed as well as armed miUtary service. Consequently they were tried for disobedience by a court martial and were usually sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment plus deprivation of civil rights for five years. After the mihtary court proceedings, they served their sentences in the agricultural prison of Kassandra, where each day spent on farm labour counted as two days of the sentence served. Upon release prisoners were given a certificate to present to the military authorities in order to be discharged from the army. They were therl exempt from further mihtary duties. The practice of repeated sentencing appears to have ceased since the introduction of Law 731/77. Only one repeated sentence became known to Amnesty Intemational during the year: the initial three-year sentence of Joel Karavitsis had been reduced to two years on appeal, and a further sentence of two years' imprisonment was imposed to complete four years.
In April 1981 Amnesty International was working for the release of 75 imprisoned conscientious objectors.
In November and December 1980 Amnesty Intemational members took special action urging the abolition of the death penalty. The penal code provides the death sentence for treason and certain crimes connected with high treason as well as for murder under particularly aggravating circumstances. The last execution was carried out on 25 August 1972 for murder. Since then death sentences have been passed on two occasions, against two Palestinian terrorists and three former leaders of the Greek military junta. These were ail commuted to life imprisonment.
Amnesty Intemational received a number of allegations of ill-treatment in prison. One case was raised in a letter to Minister of Justice George Stamatis of April 1981, asking if any investigation
301 	
into these allegations, which were reported in the national press, had taken place.
