Portugal
Amnesty International's main concerns in the past year were the continued delay of the trials and appeals against sentence of alleged members of the Partido Revo-lucionário do Proletariado (PRP), Proletarian Revolutionary Party, and the failure of the courts to justify their decision not to apply the law of amnesty to those prisoners already sentenced A final verdict has not yet been given in all PRP cases, even though the accused have been in detention for nearly three years.
In June 1978 Carlos Antunes and Isabel do Carmo, the leaders of the PRP, were arrested. Many other members of this party were arrested at the same time and detained in prison in connection with bank robberies and explosions allegedly carried out by the PRP. Carlos Antunes and Isabel do Carmo were never accused of being directly implicated in these acts. After a trial lasting three months on 9 April 1980 they were found guilty of responsibility for, moral complicity in, and receiving money in connection with, raids on banks and a bomb explosion. They were sentenced to 15 years' and 11 years' imprisonment respectively. A third defendant, Fernanda Fraguas, was sentenced to 1054 years' imprisonment for taking part in a bank robbery.
Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial. In his report he criticized the proceedings in court because: firstly, the court admitted hearsay evidence; secondly, no written transcript was made, which could inhibit the fairness of appeal proceedings; and thirdly, the defence was not allowed to call witnesses. An appeal was lodged with a higher court, the Tribunal da Relaqao of Lisbon, which upheld the verdict. A further appeal was lodged with the Supreme Court which had given no decision by the end of the year. An appeal for the application of the amnesty law was also before the Supreme Court.
The Public Prosecutor of Oporto began an investigation into allegations of ill-treatment of PRP detainees shortly after their arrest in June 1978. The results have not been revealed.
	Jf! ^	
	/ -1 { >	
1 n		
		
314 _
