Chad
Amnesty International was concerned by reports of executions of prisoners captured during the civil conflict which continued to dominate events throughout the year. The general dislocation and breakdown of administrative control which accompanied the conflict made it difficult either to obtain detailed information or to intercede effectively for the protection of human rights.
The transitional government of national unity formed after negotiations in Lagos, Nigeria, in August 1979 functioned ineffectively for most of 1980. Renewed fighting broke out in March 1980 between the Forces armées du nord (FAN), Armed Forces of the North, led by Defence Minister Hissène Habré, and the Forces armées populaires (FAP), People's Armed Forces, supporting Goukouni Oueddei, President of the transitional government. A third group led by Vice-President Wadai Abdoulkader Kamougue took no part in the conflict but consolidated its control over the southwest of the country. In the capital, N'Djamena, fighting continued until December 1980, when Libyan troops intervened in support of Goukouni Oueddei. The FAN were forced to retreat from N'Djamena but further skirmishes between the FAN and FAP and Libyan forces occurred in March 1981 in Biltine province in eastern Chad.
Shortly after the FAN withdrew from N'Djamena, more than 100 corpses and skeletons were discovered in an area which the FAN had occupied near the Chari river. According to observers they were the
36
remains of prisoners summarily executed by the FAN, still bound at the wrist. FAN forces claimed that the corpses were of their own soldiers killed during the fighting.
Further allegations of summary executions were made in February 1981 after Libyan troops occupied the town of Guereda in Biltine province. Unconfirmed reports alleged that 56 suspected FAN supporters were summarily executed at Guereda between 3 and 9 February 1981. In April 1981 press reports in neighbouring Sudan indicated that more summary executions of suspected FAN supporters had taken place at Abeche in Ouaddai province.
