Guinea-Bissau
Amnesty International's concerns were the detention without trial of suspected political opponents and the death penalty.
On 14 November 1980 a coup led by Prime Minister Major Joao Bernardo Vieira overthrew the government of President Luis Cabral. The only reported fatalities were officials Antonio Bus-cardini and Otto Schatt who were killed by troops loyal to the Prime Minister when allegedly resisting arrest Both the government and the Assembleia Nacional Popular {A^V), National Popular Assembly, were dissolved, and the new Conselho da Revoluqao, Council of the Revolution, assumed executive and legislative powers.
One of the first results of the coup was the revelation of serious and repeated violations of human rights before the coup. The new administration promptly ordered the release of at least ICK) prisoners
49
who had been secretly and arbitrarily detained by the police and National Security officials. Many had apparently been arrested on suspicion of political opposition to the previous administration. Also released was Rafael Barbosa, former President of the Partido Africano da Independencia da Guiñé e Cabo Verde (PAIGC), African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, the country's sole political party. Although detained since 1975 he was among 22 people brought to trial in August 1980 charged with involvement in an abortive coup attempt in November 1978. Following the State Prosecutor's demand in early August 1980 for the death penalty for Rafael Barbosa and two other defendants, Amnesty International appealed to President Cabral to exercise clemency if the death penalty should be imposed. However on 18 August Í980 the trial was indefinitely postponed. One of those for whom the death sentence had been requested, Malam Sanha, was reported to have committed suicide in prison in October 1980.
At a large public meeting on 21 November 1980 in the capital, Bissau, Major Vieira announced the discovery of mass graves in various parts of the country containing some 500 corpses. According to government sources as many as 400 were shot by a small secret commando unit and another 100 were asphyxiated at Farim prison. Records found after the coup revealed that large numbers of comandos africanos, African soldiers who had fought with the Portuguese colonial forces, had been executed in the first six months after independence in July 1974, as had many people allegedly linked to the abortive armed coup'attempt in November 1978. A partial list of those executed was published in late November 1980 and foreign journalists and diplomats visited a mass grave.
Immediately after the coup the former President of the Republic, Luis Cabral, and seven high-ranking officials were arrested. The new authorities announced that some of them would be tried for involvement in the secret executions. One of the detainees, former Army Chief of Security Andre Gomes, is reported to have committed suicide in prison in late December 1980. In a statement to the press in January 1981 President Vieira announced that all political prisoners, including those arrested after the coup, would be freed in due course.
In late February 1981 some 200 students were arrested in Bissau after demonstrations against proposed educational reforms and the arrest of four other students. All had been released by early March 1981. In late March 1981, Rafael Barbosa was arrested once more along with several other people for alleged anti-government activities. In late April 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to try the detainees without delay or to release them.
