Bahrain
Amnesty International's pnncipal concerns continued to be the arrest and imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, detention without trial, and reports of torture and ill-treatment.
At the end of April 1981 there were eight adopted prisoners of conscience, including: Ibrahim Sanad, an army officer arrested in 1972 and accused of organizing a political cell within the army; Abbas Abdullah'Awaji and Ahmed A1 Thawadi, trade unionists who were arrested in 1974 following strikes at the Bahrain smelting works and accused of organizing workers; and Abdulwahid Ahmed Abdulrahman and Abbas Hillal, opposition members arrested in May and November 1976 following the dissolution of the National Assembly in August 1975. Several former adopted prisoners were released in August
1980	and in December on Bahrain's National Day.
Many arrests were reported after street clashes between the police and members of the Shi'i community demonstrating their support for the Iranian regime during several religious ceremonies and festivals. Reliable reports indicated that a considerable number of them, including all the women, were later released. Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of those still in detention to ascertain whether they were prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned about laws, including the State Security Law of 1974 which allows people to be held without charge or trial for up to three years. In practice the detention order is renewable (see Amnesty International Report 1980). In a letter of 7 October 1980 to the ruler of Bahrain, Sheikh Issa Bin Salman A1 Khalifah, Amnesty International reiterated its concern that this and other laws curtail the freedom of expression and participation in public life, and facilitate imprisonment for the non-violent exercise of human rights. It added that these laws contravene the letter and spirit of the constitution of the State of Bahrain and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
A number of allegations reached Amnesty International of torture and ill-treatment. Of particular concem were reports that three people, Jamil Ali Muhsin A1 Ali, Karim A1 Hibshi, and Muhammad Hassan Madan, who died in May 1980, July 1980 and February
1981	respectively, had died as a result of torture. Each had reportedly been arrested on political charges. Amnesty International called upon the authorities to initiate an independent inquiry into the circumstances
353 	
of these deaths, and urged that the findings be made public.
Bahrain retains the death penalty for a significant number of offences. However Amnesty Intemational leamed of no death sentences or executions during the year.
