Afghanistan
Amnesty International was concerned about the arrests of several hundred political detainees during the year and the executions of several former government officials following trial in camera. It was concerned that no steps were taken by the government to investigate human rights abuses such as torture and "disappearance" which many thousands of political prisoners suffered between April 1978 and December 1979 when the present government came to power. In the absence of the detailed information about political prisoners arrested under previous administrations which ¿le government had promised, Amnesty International continued its investigations into the fate of the "disappeared" prisoners. Amnesty International's efforts were directed towards pressing the government to implement the recommendations for the effective protection of human rights which it set out in a March 1980 memorandum, and to adhere to the assurances which the President gave Amnesty International when its mission visited the country in February 1980.
On 10 December 1980 the government stated that it "aimed at ensuring the social, economic, cultural, political and civil rights of the people as set out in the covenants on human rights". However it has taken no steps to ratify the two international covenants, a major recommendation of the March 1980 memorandum.
On 21 April 1980 the Revolutionary Council proclaimed the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic RepubUc of Afghanistan (DRA), pending the adoption of a constitution. The Fundamental Principles proclaim the right "to lead a secure life" (Article 29, section 1 ), the right to express opinions freely and openly (Article 29, section 7), the right not to be arrested without a warrant or outside the provisions of law valid at the time of committing the offence, the right to be presumed innocent unless found guilty and the right to legal defence (Article 30). Article 54 provides for "Special Courts" to assess " specific cases according to law" and Article 56 proclaims that "Judges are entitled to assess cases independently". The same article permits trials in camera: the "circumstances under which cases shall
195	
be discussed in camera will be anticipated by law". Verdicts are final and executions have to be approved by the Revolutionary Council Presidium (Article 58). Amnesty International has no independent information on the application of the Fundamental Principles to political prisoners arrested and tried during the year.
In the week of 26 April 1980 demonstrators, mainly school pupils and students, protested in Kabul against the presence of Soviet troops in the country. Sixty students including six girls were reported to be among those shot in the ensuing violence. On 12 May 1980 Kabul radio reported that 620 people had been arrested in connection with these demonstrations and that 96 would be tried. Amnesty International wrote to President Babrak Karmal on 14 May 1980 to express its concern at the reports of the killings, urging the govemment to investigate the deaths and asking it to confirm the number arrested. It recalled the assurances it had received during its Febmary 1980 mission that political trials "would be open to the public and to Amnesty International", and asked for confirmation that Amnesty International could attend their trials, and for notice of trial dates.
The govemment informed Amnesty Intemational on 31 March 1980 that the majority of those arrested in connection with the February disturbances in Kabul had been released and that "those remaining in custody would stand a fair trial". However Amnesty International was not informed by the government of the trial dates nor did it receive other details requested.
The Kabul New Times of 8 July 1980 reported that the Special Revolutionary Tribunal had "prosecuted a number of people arrested on charges of legal offences ranging from undermining the gains of the Saur Revolution to damaging national independence and sovereignty". The government stated that they were charged with: "espionage, distribution of news and false statements, membership in treacherous groups" and "perfidious activities such as instigating the people to counter-revolutionary actions such as the Febmary 21 and 22 1980 incidents". The report specified the articles in the Criminal Procedures Law and the Criminal Law and added that "the accused were sentenced to various terms of imprisonment". A few others were apparently released "due to lack of incriminating evidence". On 29 July the Presidium of the DRA announced it had commuted the death sentences imposed by the Special Revolutionary Court on two of the accused — Shir Mohammad and Qorban Ali — to 15 years' imprisonment Their trial had taken place " in pubhc session", and the accused had participated in the 21 and 22 Febmary disturbances "armed with weapons". Nine others — Barat Ali Jafari, Ali Jafar, Ain Ali, Haji Ali, Sayd Mohammad Bashir, Mohammad Daud Bakhtyari, Dad Mohammad, Khan Mohammad and Mohammad
196	
Musa — were sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from five to 16 years.
Amnesty International cabled President Karmal on 1 August 1980 to express its concern that the prisoners had not been tried before an ordinary court nor granted the possibility of appeal to an independent tribunal as specified in Article 14(5) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The head of the Afghan mission to the United Nations (UN) told Amnesty International on 23 October 1980 that between 6,000 and 7,000 people had been arrested in connection with the April 1980 disturbances, of whom all but 60 or 70 had been released. The remainder were awaiting trial. Amnesty International has not received any further details.
On 8 June 1980 Kabul radio announced that 11 men had been executed. The government said they had been executed on charges including murder, mass killings, torture and "conspiracy against the government and the revolution". Ten were officials of the former government, including some prisoners Amnesty International had interviewed in February 1980. The government also executed Abdul Majid Khalakhani, a left-wing guerrilla leader known for his opposition to Soviet troops in Afghanistan. On 10 June 1980 Amnesty International wrote to President Karmal that it was deeply concerned about the 11 executions, adding that they appeared to violate the safeguards for open trial proclaimed in Article 5 6 of the Fundamental Principles of the DRA. The head of the Afghan mission to the UN told Amnesty International that among those executed were officials responsible for past human rights violations and confirmed that they had been tried in camera.
The government announced that three more officials of the previous government had been executed on 14 June 1980. Amnesty International cabled President Karmal on 19 June 1980 saying it was deeply concerned to learn of the further executions and urging the government to stop them immediately. The trial of these prisoners in camera by a Special Revolutionary Court contravened the assurances Amnesty International had received in February 1980. Amnesty International deeply regretted that the government had not informed it of the charges or ¿le trial date. It also expressed concern that there had been no possibility of appealing to an independent tribunal. "The government's failure to adhere in these cases to the requirements of international law and to implement assurances given to Amnesty International is particularly disturbing as the trials resulted in the application of the death penalty".
On 2 August 1980 Amnesty International received a detailed reply to its cables of 10 and 19 June. The government said: "we hope
197	
that the time will come when the death penalty will be aboUshed in Afghanistan but at present the laws of the DRA, proceeding from realities of existing conditions provide for the death penalty". The govemment maintained that the trials had been held in accordance with Article 56 of the Fundamental Principles of the DRA and that "the trial in question was in camera for security reasons".
On 8 October 1980 Amnesty Intemational replied in detail to President Karmal, clarified its position on political imprisonment and the death penalty, and reiterated its grave concern at not being allowed to attend the trials. It deplored the reported executions of four former govemment officials in late August 1980. It again called upon the President to halt further executions and attached a list of 35 names of former govemment officials held in Pule Charchi prison. There were no further reports of executions for several months but on 8 Febmary 1981 Kabul radio announced that three members of the Hezbi Islami group which opposes the govemment had been sentenced to death by a Revolutionary Court. On 12 February it reported that four members of the Mujahiddin (Islamic guerrilla fighters) had been sentenced to death and executed. That day Amnesty International cabled President Karmal and appealed to him to halt further executions. It stressed that it was opposed to executions of prisoners whether carried out by the govemment or by groups engaged in armed opposition to the government. Amnesty International has received a number of reports that prisoners taken by such groups have been executed. One report of 2 March 1981 stated that 14 Afghan soldiers and the nephew of a DRA govemment minister were executed by an Islamic resistance group, the Harhat-e-inquilib-e-islami, after "trial by Islamic tribunal".
Statistics published in the Kabul New Times between 16 March 1980 and 8 December 1980 showed that the govemment had announced the release of at least 4,231 prisoners whom it described as "political prisoners" or "persons deceived by the enemies". Reports of political arrests included the arrests of university students at Kabul University for alleged membership of the banned Muslim Brotherhood during the late summer, arrests of several former government officials and university professors in December 1980, and arrests of suspected Islamic guerrillas and dissident members of the government reported in Febmary and March 1981.
On 13 August 1980 the govemment stated that it had freed several hundred prisoners including: 140 untried prisoners during Ramadan; 240 prisoners released from Herat in September; 136 political prisoners from Kandahar in late November 1980; 86 people accused of "political offences" on 27 December 1980; and on 27 April 1981, 706 political detainees "to mark the third anniversary of the Saur
198	
Revolution". Amnesty International welcomed these releases and asked President Karmal for details of the categories of political prisoners it had released and the place where they had been held. It urged the government to publish the names of the released political prisoners as recommended in the March 1980 memorandum. Amnesty International received no reply to these requests and government announcements of releases in t\\Q Kabul New Times remained unsubstantiated by details of individual political prisoners.
In February 1980 the government said that there were 41 political prisoners in Pule Charchi prison, and other official sources told Amnesty International that 91 political prisoners were "under investigation". On 12 April there were 385 political and security detainees in Pule Charchi prison according to a visiting delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Their number has reportedly further increased since then and international organizations have not been allowed to visit prisons holding political prisoners. Amnesty International was investigating several reports that political prisoners have been beaten during interrogation. Amnesty International has also received reports of political prisoners held in prisons in Jalalabad, Herat, Aibah in Samangan province, Kunduz, Kandahar, Nangarhar, Baghlan, Badghis, Mazar-e-Sharif and Jauzjan, but has been unable to obtain details on individual political prisoners.
Pursuing its statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights of May 1979, which had described a pattern of gross violations of human rights under the former government of President Amin, Amnesty International submitted supplementary information about human rights in Afghanistan on 30 May 1980. Amnesty International noted that the government had not fully investigated the whereabouts or fate of "disappeared" people. Amnesty International had submitted to the government a list of 450 people arrested before 27 December 1979, at least 100 of whom it believed to be among the "disappeared", but had not been given the details it requested. It had also urged the government to establish responsibility for past torture and "disappearances" and to ensure that those responsible were brought to justice. Amnesty International remained concerned that no systematic review of past human rights abuses appeared to have taken place and that former officials, named by authoritative sources as responsible, continued to hold official government positions.
According to a report from the ICRC the government had agreed that the ICRC and the Afghan Red Crescent should establish a tracing agency with a mandate which included the "search for missing persons". However since the summer of 1980 the authorities have opposed the establishment of such a tracing agency.
199	
On 19 December 1980 Amnesty International supplied supplementary information to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights about human rights in Afghanistan, reiterating its deep concem that the government had not implemented its recommendations in respect of the thousands of "disappeared" and that their families continued to hve in uncertainty about their fate, some believing their relatives were still alive and detained in Kabul's Pule Charchi prison and elsewhere.
