Ethiopia
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, torture, "disappearances", political killings, harsh prison conditions, and the use of the death penalty.
Armed conflict continued in Eritrea, Tigrai, the Ogaden, and the Oromo-fKDpulated southern provinces, where opposition movements fought for self-de-termination. The Eritrean conflict entered its 20th year and in late 1980 the conflict in the Ogaden caused relations with Somalia to deteriorate further. Civilians in these areas suffered from the fighting, with many fleeing from the upheavals and related political persecution. The number of refugees from Ethiopia rose to over two million, while a further million or more people were displaced within the country as a result of the fighting and famine. In June 1980 the ruling Provisional Military Administrative Council (PMAC) promulgated an amnesty for refugees in Djibouti, though few are believed to have returned. A small number of refugees returned from Sudan, but were detained on arrival for a lengthy screening process by security officials.
In May 1980 Amnesty International submitted to the United Nations Commission on Hufnan Rights its fourth communication on human rights violations in Ethiopia. The report stated: "the pattern of large-scale and often prolonged political imprisonment under harsh conditions, torture, and summary executions, has persisted through most of the country". It added that a number of "disappearances" took place in July 1979. It noted that the PMAC had taken measures to end the previously widespread pattern of arbitrary arrests and executions by local administrative organizations, both kebelles (urban-dwellers' associations) and peasant associations.
The number of new political arrests appeared to have decreased, except in the areas of armed conflict, and a small number of long-term political prisoners were released. There were some improvements in prison conditions in certain prisons. Nevertheless there were still believed to be several thousand people detained without charge or trial on political pounds; torture was still reported to be widely used; "disappearances" which took place in 1979 had never been explained
41
by the authorities; many prisoners were allegedly executed outside the framework of the law; and prison conditions generally remained harsh.
Six years after the revolution which overthrew the imperial government in 1974, about 200 former government officials were still in indefinite detention without charge or trial. Some of their wives and children were also held. It appears that no review mechanism exists for examining the allegations against these prisoners individually and impartially, or for recommending the release of certain categories such as elderly women and men, women and their children detained together, or chronically ill detainees, or for offering release through a "rehabilitation" process. Amnesty International regards most of the 1974 detainees as prisoners of conscience, detained for their political views or position, and has frequently called for their release.
Among the long-term detainees — many believed to be prisoners of conscience — were people arrested in the first few years of the revolution. Although supporters of the revolution they were arrested for opposing the PMAC. Some were apparently victims of arbitrary arrests of members of nationalities or ethnic groups where guerrilla movements existed. Others were members of certain Protestant and Pentecostal churches — such as the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church — which had become targets of government-instigated campaigns of persecution for allegedly harbouring counter-revolutionaries.
Political prisoners in Addis Ababa were held in the PMAC headquarters in the former Menelik palace; the fourth army division headquarters; Akaki prison (where women detainees have been held since 1975); the Central Revolutionary Investigation Department (known as the "third police station"), and the military police barracks. Some were also said to be held in various unidentified "safe houses" in the capital. Few political prisoners were held in kebelle prisons for more than a short time, since people arrested by kebelle officials were transferred to one of the 25 "higher kebelles" in the city and from there to the Central Revolutionary Investigation Department. Amnesty International learned that during the year, sometimes as many as 100 people a week were transferred to the Central Revolutionary Investigation Department for interrogation after arrest on political grounds. Political prisoners were also held in provincial prisons and military barracks throughout the country, with particularly large numbers of political prisoners in Eritrea and Hararghe.
Torture was widespread. A common method was beating on the back and feet in a variety of contorted positions, and there was also sexual torture, such as a bottle of water or ice being tied to the testicles. Suspected political opponents were beaten to intimidate and
42
"punish" them.
Most political prisoners were held in indefinite detention without charge or trial. The trial of six senior officials in 1980 was exceptional, since no other trials of this nature have taken place before or since. Four were sentenced to death in July 1980 for "anti-socialist and counter-revolutionary activities" and espionage, and two others imprisoned for life and 20 years. Most of the trial, held before the Supreme Military Tribunal, was in camera, and details were not published. There was no right of appeal. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death sentences but the executions are believed to have been carried out without delay.
The cases of the 16 people who "disappeared" in July 1979 remained unexplained by the authorities. Fifteen of them were long-term untried political detainees: 10 former high officials under Emperor Haile Selassie's government, and five leaders of the Marxist-LeninistMeVione, All-Ethiopia Socialist Movement, which was banned in 1977. The Reverend Gudina Tumsa, General Secretary of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, "disappeared" after being abducted by unidentified gunmen presumed to be government security agents.
Amnesty International had submitted their cases to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. The working group reported on 26 Januar ' 1981 that the Ethiopian representative described the facts in the submission as "false rumours", but did not provide any details on any of the cases under investigation. The government has given no official explanation for the "disappearances", and no trace of the "disappeared" has been found. Different government sources have disseminated conflicting information: that the Reverend Gudina Tumsa was in prison and could be visited by a foreign diplomatic representative, although no such visit has been permitted; or that he had been taken away for his own safety by the opposition Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), which is unsubstantiated, and denied by the OLF.
Prison conditions for detainees held in the Menelik palace, fourth army division headquarters, and Akaki prison, improved slightly. Prisoners received food and clothing from their relatives outside prison, and could pass short messages to them, although only one or two short visits were allowed in the year. They had access to a prison medical doctor who could recommend hospital admission for serious complaints or provide treatment in prison. Some exercise and recreational activity were occasionally permitted. More reading and study material was allowed. However no international humanitarian organization has been permitted to inspect the conditions of political prisoners since shortly after the revolution.
43
Conditions were still particularly harsh for the 180 former high-ranking government officials held since 1974 in the Menelik palace cellars. Sanitation was very poor, and most prisoners suffered from the effects of long-term confinement underground in damp unhygienic conditions. Prisoners held in the military police barracks were also treated harshly, being held incommunicado in solitary confinement in small concrete cells without windows or furniture.
Amnesty International was concerned about the threatened repatriation of Ethiopian refugees, particularly from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and the Soviet Union. A number of Ethiopians studying in those countries feared iJolitical persecution if forced to return to Ethiopia, and tried to go to other countries where they could seek asylum. It appears that most were eventually allowed'to go to other countries to seek asylum.
Amnesty International pressed the authorities for clarification of the fate of the "disappeared"; campaigned on behalf of the hundreds of Oromo women and men detained in February 1980 and allegedly tortured; called for the release of all prisoners of conscience, an end to torture and executions, and improvements in prison conditions.
