Ghana
The main concerns of Amnesty International originated before the present civilian administration took office and related to difficulties between the present government and supporters of former head of state, Flight-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings.
Most prisoners sentenced to prison by special courts during the term of office of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC), between June and September 1979, were freed during the year after applying to the courts for reconsideration of their convictions. However at the end of April 1981 at least 27 prisoners were still being held. Their sentences of between five and 95 years' imprisonment were imposed after hurried trials without defence counsel. In July 1980 all had submitted habeas corpus applications to the Accra High Court, which referred the cases to the Supreme Court in late September. In February 1981 the Supreme Court considered the cases but had not, by the end of April 1981, made public its decision as to whether the applications would be received.
In June 1980 Amnesty International publicly appealed to the authorities to review all sentences gassed by the AFRC Special Courts, in view of their unfair proceedings. In a public statement in late September 1980 President Hilla Limann announced an amnesty for all political exiles and refugees, except those sentenced in
46
absentia by the AFRC. He is reported to have said later that "the time is not ripe" for a decision on the fate of prisoners convicted by the AFRC Special Courts.
In mid-October 1980 the government announced that a number of agricultural development schemes established by F light-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings were being turned into camps "for training active subversives . . . with the aim of overthrowing the government of Ghana by unlawful means". During October and November about 10 people were arrested and questioned. Amnesty Intemational was only able to obtain the name of one of them, Wilhelm Harrison Buller, a British national, who was allegedly "chief instmctor" in the camps. After nearly two months in detention without charge or trial, all were released, and Buller was deported. In late November 1980 Amnesty Intemational had asked for the reasons for Buller's detention.
One of those detained in late November 1980, Kojo Tsikata, a former army captain and close associate of F light-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, was alleged to have been severely assaulted during interrogation by military intelligence officers. Kojo Tsikata had previously brought an action against senior members of military intelligence to stop the harassment he claimed he had suffered for several months.
The presidential amnesty of September 1980 commuted to life imprisonment the death sentences of all prisoners who had spent one year or more on death row. Amnesty Intemational does not know how many they were.
