Paraguay
Amnesty Intemational concems have been irregular detention procedures, detention without trial, torture and "disappearances".
Most prisoners of concem to Amnesty Intemational were detained either under state of siege legislation or under the anti-sub-version Law 209, Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons, passed in 1970. A state of siege has been in force in Asunción, the capital, ever since General Alfredo Stroessner took power in 1954, having been lifted only six times to coincide with elections.
Amnesty Intemational knows of at least 25 political prisonere. Twelve have been adopted as prisoners of conscience or allocated to groups for further investigation. The trials of Amnesty Intemational adopted prisoners of conscience Alfonso Silva Quintana and his wife Maria Saturnina Almada de Silva, which began in 1979, continued slowly. The couple were accused under Law 209 of subversive activities which carry a maximum penalty of six years' imprisonment They had already spent 10 years in detention without trial from 1968 to 1978. Amnesty Intemational adopted prisoner of conscience Constantino Coronel was released on 5 September 1980 and forced into exile. He had been charged with a criminal offence but independent observers believed that it was his position as a peasant leader that led to his imprisonment.
Short-term detentions have been used to control political oppositioa Nicaragua's ex-President Anastasio Somoza, who had been living in
176
Paraguay since August 1979 after his government's defeat, was killed on 17 September 1980 in Asunción in a machine-gun and bazooka attack. The Paraguayan authorities announced that the attackers were Argentine guerrillas from the Marxist group the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP) collaborating with Nicaraguan Sandinistas. After the killing security forces searched homes, confiscated private papers and personal effects and arrested hundreds of citizens. Many of those arrested were Argentines and other foreigners. About 150 foreign nationals were expelled, mostly Argentine, including people married to Paraguayans and parents of Paraguayan children. Many reported ill-treatment while in detention. Pedro and Zulema Igón, both Argentines, were arrested on 11 October 1980 in Asunción. Pedro Igón's name later appeared ona Ust in an Argentine newspaper of people arrested in Argentina. Also detained at this time was leading opposition politician and economist Domingo Laino. Personal documents were taken from his home on the morning of 30 September 1980. Later in the day some 12 men in civilian clothes arrested him. He was held until 15 October 1980. This was Domingo Lamo's third spell of short-term detention in just over two years.
In March 1980 a large number of peasants had been arrested after a small group of peasants had held up a bus to draw attention to problems over land (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). The group represented the hundred or so families who in the early 1970s had set up a new colony in Acaray, Department of Alto Paraná. Since then the peasants have been in constant conflict over ownership of the land, even though they had authorization from the Rural Welfare Institute (IBR) to settle there. After the hold-up 10 peasants were reportedly shot dead. Most of the arrested peasants were released after varying periods of detention. Several minors were imprisoned. Apolonia Flores Rotela was 13 at the time of her arrest in March 1980. She was accused of several common crimes, including assault and robbery, and held until September 1980 when she was released after appearing before a judge. Her 15-year-old brother Amaldo was held until January 1981. Apolinaria González, 16 and mentally retarded, was pregnant at the time of her arrest and gave birth in detention. She was released in January 1981 on the advice of a psychiatrist. Her husband and nine other peasants were still in prison in April 1981 and were being tried for several common crimes including assault, robbery and resisting the authorities. Sources have indicated that four of the peasants did not take part in the hold-up of the bus and Amnesty Intemational has adopted these four as prisoners of conscience. The organization was also concemed about the trials of the others, especially since it appeared that these arrests were part of a general repression of peasants and the Ligas Agrarias,
Ill
Agrarian Leagues, a church-supported peasant organization.
A number of urgent appeals were issued, mostly concernmg irregular detention procedures and incommunicado detention. On 27 August 1980 Antonio Maidana, Secretary General of the banned Paraguayan Communist Party, and Emilio Roa Espinosa, also a Communist Party and trade union leader, were abducted in Buenos Aires, Argentina. It is thought they were transferred from Argentina to Paraguay. Emilio Roa was 64 and suffered from a heart condition which required constant medical supervision. He had lived in Argentina for 22 years after being forced to leave Paraguay because of his trade union activities. Antonio Maidana, 69, had previously been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience until his release in March 1977 after over 18 years' imprisonment. The whereabouts of the two men were not known.
Amnesty Intemational submitted information on Paraguay to the Secretary-General of the United Nations under the procedure set up to consider "a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights". A statement was made to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States which met in Washington between 19 and 28 November 1980, in which Amnesty Intemational outlined its concems on human rights in Paraguay. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in its annual report to this Assembly recommended the lifting of the state of siege in Paraguay, restoration of independence to the judiciary, guarantees of trade union rights and freedom of expression and fair trial or release for all existing prisoners. It also urged the govemment to set a date for a visit by the commission which had been agreed in principle back in 1977.
