Albania
The concerns of Amnesty International were the existence and application of legislation punishing the non-violent exercise of human rights, the imprisonment and subjection to forced labour of prisoners of conscience, unfair trial procedures, harsh prison conditions and the death penalty.
Albania is a member of the United Nations; it has not, however, signed or ratified the international human rights covenants. Key provisions of the constitution, criminal and criminal procedure codes explicitly limit the exercise of certain human rights and stress the role of law in defending the sociahst state and the Albanian Workers' Party from "socially dangerous acts", in particular, "manifestations of bureaucracy and liberalism". Amnesty International believes that the very broad formulation of Article 55 of the criminal code breaches international standards guaranteeing the freedom of conscience, belief, religion and expression. Article 55 defines as an offence:
"Fascist, anti-democratic, religious, warmongering or anti-socialist agitation or propaganda, as well as the preparation, dissemination or the keeping for dissemination of Uterature with such a content as to weaken or undermine the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat."
The punishment is deprivation of liberty of from three to 10 years (in time of war or when "especially serious consequences have resulted" deprivation of liberty for not less than 10 years; or death).
The Albanian constitution does not guarantee the right to freedom of movement, and in practice travel abroad has been almost exclusively restricted to official delegations and officially authorized students. People who tried to leave the country without official authorization were liable under Article 127 of the criminal code to up to five years' deprivation of liberty for "illegal passage across the borders of the state". Amnesty International has been informed of several people sentenced in the 1960s to between 12 and 25 years' imprisonment for trying to leave Albania without official permission, under Article 64 of the former criminal code (1958). Under Article 47 the current criminal code retains the penalty of deprivation of liberty for from 10 to 25 years, or death, for:
280	
"flight from the state and refusal to return to the fatherland on the part of a person sent on service or allowed temporarily to leave the state".
Information received by Amnesty International indicated that in the late 1970s up to 2,000 political prisoners were detained in the prison camps of Ballsh and Spaci alone, and that many had been convicted for expressing dissatisfaction with economic or political conditions in Albania. No information has since been received to indicate any substantial change. Since 1967 when Albania was officially proclaimed an atheist state all places of worship have been closed and religious leaders of the Moslem, Orthodox and Roman Catholic faiths prohibited from performing rehgious functions. Those who continued to do so have reportedly been severely repressed. Of three Roman Catholic titular bishops detained in the mid-1970s after privately conducting reUgious ceremonies, two — Bishops Fishta and Coba — were reported to have died in detention. The third, 65-year-old Nikoll Troshani, has variously been reported to be detained at Ballsh camp or at the camp of Tepelena. Reports received by Amnesty International alleged that Bishop Coba died in 1979 after being beaten by guards for trying to hold Easter mass for fellow detainees at a prison camp, Paperr, near Elbasan. Five other Roman Catholic priests have been reported to be detained in camps in southern Albania.
Amnesty International learned of two foreign nationals detained in a section of Ballsh camp reserved for foreigners; both had voluntarily left their own countries to live in Albania. One was reportedly arrested and convicted after he had applied to leave Albania, tiie other after he had criticized the authorities and listened to foreign radio broadcasts.
In past years Amnesty International has received reports alleging serious deficiencies in procedures during investigations and trials. There have been reports that psychological and sometimes physical pressure has been used to obtain confessions from the accused or testimony from witnesses. Some prisoners were held in solitary confinement without access to family or lawyer during pre-trial investigation for up to six months. Where defendants were permitted defence lawyers, counsel appeared to have always been state-appointed, and to have provided only nominal services. Some defendants did not see their defence counsel before the trial itself.
In April 1980 a new criminal procedure code came into force. The information available to Amnesty International was not sufficient to allow an assessment of its practical application, but certain of its provisions gave grounds for concern and were incompatible with internationally recognized standards for fair trial. The right of the
281	
accused to defence counsel of their choice is not guaranteed in all circumstances, and indeed the wording of the criminal procedure code appears to imply that defence counsel is "designated" by the court and not by the accused. Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about decree No. 5912 of 1979, which allows administrative internment or banishment without trial (in contravention of Article 56 of the constitution) for unspecified periods, a measure which may also be used "against members of the family of fugitives living inside or outside the state" — that is as a reprisal against people who have not themselves necessarily broken Albanian law.
Reports have described conditions in labour camps in Albania during the 1960s and 1970s where political prisoners were employed on projects including the constmction of factories and housing, marsh-drainage and mining. Conditions at Spaci camp, with a population estimated at over 500 political prisoners, appeared to be particularly harsh. Prisoners reportedly mined copper in eight-hour shifts, six days a week, with little industrial protection apart from helmets and cotton masks. Work targets were described as excessive and prisoners who failed to meet these targets risked extra work hours or solitary confinement. Conditions for the approximately 1,400 political prisoners at Ballsh camp, (there are also camps at Ballsh for ordinary criminals and for foreigners), if less harsh than at Spaci, also appeared to be very poor. Prisoners reportedly slept in unhealed barracks, on straw mattresses laid out on wooden platforms. At both camps food was reported to be deficient in quality and quantity, needing to be supplemented by parcels from prisoners' families and by food bought from the prisoners' wages. Medical care, provided by staff mainly recmited from among the prisoners, was described as seriously inadequate. Prisoners punished by solitary confinement were reportedly kept in an unheated, concrete cell measuring approximately 2m by Im, with neither bed nor mattress. It was also reported that guards have punished prisonere by stripping them to the waist and beating them with rubber hosing filled with sand or gravel.
The criminal code lists 34 crimes (of which 23 are poHtical and military crimes) punishable by the death sentence.
282	
