Mali
Amnesty Interaationars main concerns were political imprisonment, detention and banishment without charge or trial, torture, poor prison conditions and the death penalty.
The conflict between the government and students, which culminated in March 1980 in numerous detentions, the death in custody of a student leader, and clashes between troops and demonstrators, and led to large numbers of students being suspended indefinitely from their studies and the closure of numerous schools and colleges, was followed in the second half of 1980 by an open confrontation between the government and the teaching profession. In mid-July 1980 about 20 teachers were arrested in Bamako, the capital, after the breakdown of negotiations over teachers' demands for better pay. Some of those arrested are believed to have been beaten and tortured with electric shocks. Most were alleged to have been active members of the Commission des comités syndicaux des enseignants, Commission of Teachers' Trade Union Committees, an autonomous trade union body formed in late 1979 to represent teachers working in and around Bamako. This body replaced local sections of the official Syndicat national de l'éducation et de la culture, National Union of Education and Culture, which had been disbanded some months earlier after internal disputes. During early 1980 the commission had been negotiating with the government for better pay, but negotiations broke down and teachers refused to supervise examinations held in July 1980.
In early September 1980, 13 of the detainees were tried in Bamako, the remainder having been freed after several days' detention. They were convicted of "opposition to the legitimate authority", defined as "offending public order or impeding the execution of administrative or judicial functions". Eleven of the teachers were sentenced to three months' imprisonment, and a 12th was given a suspended sentence. Modibo Diakite, the commission's Secretary General, was sentènced to four months' imprisonment. The teachers were transported to the remote desert town of Menaka where they remained until the end of their sentences. They were all adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
All the teachers were stopped by the authorities at Segou on their return to Bamako and forcibly returned to Gao, where an appeal against their conviction lodged the previous September was heard in camera. The appeal court confirmed the sentences imposed in
62
September and already completed but the teachers were dismissed from the Ministry of Education, put " at the disposal of the Ministry of the Interior", and banished in early December to remote administrative outposts. Amnesty International continued to intervene on their behalf, appealing for the lifting of all restrictions. Three of the teachers were reportedly allowed to return to Bamako at the end of 1980.
Between 13 and 26 November 1980,21 teachers were arrested in Bamako at meetings of the commission. All were held for several weeks without charge in one of Bamako's poHce stations, and some were reportedly beaten and tortured with electric shocks. In early December 20 were transported to remote outposts in the Gao region, where some were reportedly held in military camps. Despite government claims that the teachers were "working freely", it was clear that they were sent against their will. In April 1981 they were charged with the "establishment of a secret association", an offence which carries a penalty of up to three years' imprisonment All the teachers detained and subsequently banished have been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Ibrahima Samba Traore, a teacher recently returned from France, who has been held in Bamako without trial since September 1980 has also been adopted as a prisoner of conscience. He is believed to have been tortured at the Brigade d'investigation criminelle, Criminal Investigation Bureau, having been found in possession of documents published by foreign-based movements critical of the government
Between January and March 1981a student found in possession of documents published by a banned student organization and 12 more teachers belonging to the commission were arrested and held without trial in police stations in Bamako. The teachers were charged in April 1981 under the penal provision relating to secret association and were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
During the year Amnesty International received confirmation of the release of all the students arrested in March 1980. On 2 July 1980, 37 students and teachers were reportedly injured when police violently attacked a peaceful gathering to commemorate the death in detention of student leader Abdul Karim Camara in March 1980. Several days later at least one school pupil died and several were seriously injured in Sevare near Mopti when police charged at marchers protesting against the arrest of another pupil.
Amnesty International continued to work on beh^f of Dr Mamadou Gologo and Idrissa Diakite, who were convicted on charges of "insulting the Head of State" and sentenced to four years' imprisonment in October 1979 after the distribution of leaflets criticizing the government. After appeals from several organizations including
63
Amnesty International, Dr Gologo was allowed to leave Nioro du Sahel prison and return to Bamako for treatment for an eye ailment.
Conditions of detention in the police stations of the first, third and fifth arrondissements {6\s\xicis) of Bamako were reported to be harsh. Many political detainees were held with criminal suspects in dark, overcrowded and poorly-ventilated cells. Standards of sanitation and hygiene are very low. Torture has been reported at several of these police stations, as well as at the Gendarmerie camp and the Djikoroni military base. Prisoners at the Prison centrale (Central Prison), Bamako, suffer overcrowding and poor food, and prison officers reportedly beat them. Conditions at the Taoudenit "Special Reeducation Centre" were still harsh. Its extreme Saharan temperatures and the severity of the regime made imprisonment here a brutal form of punishment Many prisoners were reported to be forced to march barefoot some 20 to 40 kilometres a day. The one meal provided daily was of low nutritional value, and some prisoners were reported to suffer severe and prolonged stomach complaints.
In early February 1981 Amnesty International made a public appeal to the delegates attending an extraordinary congress of the country's sole political party, the Union démocratique du peuple malien (UDPM), the Democratic Union of the Malian People, calling for the release of all prisoners of conscience in the country, an end to torture, and an improvement in prison conditions. No reply was received. In mid-March 1981 Amnesty International representatives met the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Blondin Alioune Beye, and repeated these concerns.
In late June 1979 the Special State Security Court sitting in Timbuctoo (Tombouctou) imposed death sentences on Kissima Doukara, formerly Lieutenant-Colonel and Minister of Interior, Defence and Security, and Nouhoun Diawara, former army captain. Both were convicted of" embezzlement, corruption and extortion". In mid-March 1981 the same court, sitting in Bamako, imposed three more death sentences, one in absentia, against three gendarmes allegedly involved in a plot to assassinate President Traore on New Year's Eve 1980. None of these death sentences had been carried out by 30 April 1981. On 21 August 1980 Mamadou Keita and Karuba Coulibaly, both sentenced to death in 1980 for murder, armed robbery and other offences, were executed by firing-squad.
64
