Rwanda
Amnesty International's main concern was the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the government, more than 30 of whom were still held at the end of April 1981.
About 40 people were arrested in April and May 1980 after the distribution of a number of leaflets in the capital, Kigali, during March 1980. Although the leaflets criticized the head of state, President Juvenal Habyari-mana, they did not advocate his overthrow but accused him of misusing his office to accumulate a large personal fortune and of favouritism towards his own Bashiro clan in preference to the rival Bagoyi clan. The Bashiro and Bagoyi clans originate in the northwest and belong to the majority Hutu ethnic group.
The leaflets, which first appeared in Kigali in early March 1980, were initially concerned about the dispute between Emile Birara, Governor General of the National Bank of Rwanda, and three military officers. The officers had apparently accused Emile Birara of corruption, leading him to publicize a letter he had written to President Habyarimana refuting the criticisms and in turn accusing the officers of corruption and nepotism. This led to more leaflets, some of them anonymous and apparently written by members of the Bagoyi clan, complaining about the extent to which their clan had been deprived of power in recent years as a result of President Habyarimana's policies.
74
On 17 April 1980 Major Théoneste Lizinde, a prominent member of the Bagoyi clan, was arrested in Kigali. At the time he was Director General of Foreign Policy at the presidency, and had formerly been head of the Security Police until December 1979. Within a few weeks of his arrest about 40 other people were detained, many of them members of the Bagoyi clan. They included a number of soldiers and former senior officials such as Alphonse-Marie Kagenza, a former Ambassador to Uganda, and Donat Murego, a former Director General of the presidency. Spiridion Shyirambere, Secretary General the national university, was also detained as were the wives of Alphonse-Marie Kagenza and others. Several of the detainees are believed to have been released later, but some 30 were still being held at the end of April 1981.
In mid-May 1980 the government claimed that the detainees were suspected of conspiring against the government At the same time President Habyarimana stated that they would be charged and tried before a civilian court without delay. The President repeated this assurance in December 1980 but no trial had taken place by the end of April 1981.
It is believed that all the detainees were held incommunicado at Ruhengeri prison in a special unit for political detainees, which Major Lizinde himself had designed when he was head of the Security PoUce. According to reports a number have been physically ill-treated but the circumstances of their detention make it impossible to verify this.
Amnesty International is investigating several of the detainees' cases. In August 1980 an appeal was made to President Habyarimana for information on the charges against those detained and the likelihood of their being brought to trial. No response has been received.
Sao Tome and Principe
Amnesty International's main concern was the continued detention without trial of former Prime Minister Miguel Tro-voada, who has been adopted as a prisoner of conscience. He was arrested in October 1979 after taking refuge in the local office of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and was accused of plotting against the government of President Pinto da Costa. However no formal charges
75
have yet been brought against him and the authorities have not replied to inquiries or appeals for his release.
Amnesty International is investigating the cases of Alcino de Lima and Albertino Neto, who are serving prison sentences of 22 and 21 years respectively. They were convicted of conspiring against the government with three others in March 1979. Orlando da Grapa, who had been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, and Maria Braganga Neto, whose case was being investigated by Amnesty International, were released in July 1980 under an amnesty granted by President da Costa on the fifth anniversary of independence. The third defendant, Fernando Alvim, was released during 1980 after completing his two-year prison sentence.
Two Portuguese nationals, Antonio Ferreira and Antonio Martins, were arrested in November 1980 and accused of plotting to overthrow of the government Two Portuguese diplomats were expelled at the same time.
