Zambia
The main concern of Amnesty International was the detention without trial of real or suspected opponents of the government. Most were held under administrative detention orders signed by the President in accordance with the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, which allow unlimited detention outside the jurisdiction of the courts.
As economic conditions failed to improve following the independence of neighbouring Zimbabwe there was a series of confrontations between the government and the trade unions and growing criticism from the business community. At one point 17 leading trade unionists were expelled from the United National Independence Party (UNIP), the ruling political party, membership of which is a requirement for public office.
On 15 October 1980 security forces clashed with a group of about 50 armed men, said mostly to be of Zaïrian origin, at Chilanga, a few miles south of the capital, Lusaka. Several of the gang were killed and within a few days at least 45 were captured. A series of arrests then took place. François Cros, a French journalist known for his contacts among refugees from Zaire's Shaba province, was detained on 17 October.
On 23 October, the day before independence day, a dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed in most urban areas and a number of prominent Zambians detained. They included Elias Chipimo and Valentine Musakanya, and a well-respected lawyer and commissioner of the High Court, Edward Shamwana. Elias Chipimo, a leading banker and former diplomat had earlier obliquely criticized the government and had been publicly denounced by President Kaunda. Valentine Musakanya, former governor of the Bank of Zambia, has also been denounced as one of "a gang of dissidents". Brigadier Christopher Kabwe, who had been promoted to commander of the air force on 9 October only to be suspended for alleged corruption two days later, was also detained in connection with the activities of the group at Chilanga. On 27 October President Kaunda publicly alleged that the armed gang had been acting on behalf of dissident Zambians, who had received South African backing and whose intention was to overthrow the government. He gave details of the alleged plot and said that the ring-leaders had been arrested, adding that they would soon be charged and brought to trial and that Chief Justice Annel Silungwe had been recalled from abroad to preside. The armed group were said
100
to have been based on a farm owned by Pierce Annfield, a white South African lawyer resident in Zambia who had left the country a few days before. The South African Government denied any involvement in the alleged conspiracy.
Several of those detained in October 1980 were released within a matter of weeks. Elias Chipimo was freed unconditionally on 5 November, and Patrick Chisanga, director of the state-owned Industrial Mining Corporation, on 13 November. François Cros, made the subject of a presidential detention order on 31 October, was also released on 13 November. Three days earlier, his application for a writ of habeas corpus had been rejected by the Lusaka High Court. He was later allowed to leave the country.
With one exception, none of those detained in connection with the alleged conspiracy had been charged and brought to trial by the end of April 1981, although on several occasions government officials publicly reaffirmed that the case would go to trial. For example after an appeal by Amnesty International in January that the detainees should be brought to trial or released, a spokesperson for the Minister of Home Affairs was reported on 9 February to have said that investigations were almost complete and that some 50 people would soon be tried Earlier, in November 1980, a UNIP Central Committee recommendation that a special military tribunal be established to try the alleged conspirators had been rejected at a full meeting of the National Council of UNIP.
The only detainee to have been charged was Valentine Musakanya. On 26 November the Ndola High Court granted his application for a writ of habeas corpus and ordered his release finding that the grounds for his detention were "vague, roving and exploratory". However he was immediately rearrested under a new detention order. On 1 December he was charged with treason and taken before the Lusaka Magistrates Court, only for the charge to be withdrawn without explanation before he was asked to enter a plea. He was then returned to detention. His subsequent attempts to obtain release on a writ of habeas corpus were unsuccessful.
Edward Shamwana, another detainee, also applied for a writ of habeas corpus in November 1980, arguing that his detention was " unlawful and unconstitutional", that he had not been informed of the grounds for detention within the prescribed 14 days, and that he had been subjected to periods of continuous interrogation by security police trying to find reasons to keep him in detention. His application was rejected at the end of November, and a subsequent appeal against the judge's decision was also dismissed. He made a new but similarly unsuccessful attempt in January 1981, claiming that the authorities' failure to prefer charges and bring him to trial should result in
101
immediate release.
After the failure of attempts to obtain their release through the courts in March 1981 Edward Shamwana and Valentine Musakanya jointly drew up a formal petition addressed to the Speaker and members of the National Assembly. They argued that the President's use of the Preservation of Public Security Regulations to authorize detentions was unconstitutional. Because of a technicality the Speaker could not accept the petition when it was first submitted by Mohamed Mansoor, the lawyer acting for Edward Shamwana. Before it could be resubmitted President Kaunda declared it a prohibited publication by notice in the government gazette of 23 March. Mohamed Mansoor was arrested and charged with possession of a banned document, but he was acquitted on 21 April. The state appealed against the verdict, and almost immediately issued a deportation order against Mansoor who is a Sri Lankan.
Action was also taken against Edward Shamwana and,Valentine Musakanya after their preparation of the petition. They were moved from Lusaka central prison to remote places of imprisonment at Chipata and Lundazi, in the eastern part of the country, where they were effectively placed in solitary confinement.
In April 1981 Amnesty Intemational reiterated its concem over the continuing detention of Valentine Musakanya, Edward Shamwana and the other detainees held since October 1980, and appealed to the government to bring them to trial or release them without further delay. An eariier appeal, made in January 1981, had resulted in criticism of Amnesty Intemational in the Zambian press, and a claim by the Minister of Legal Affairs, Gibson Chigaga, that appeals sent in Amnesty International's name were "fake".
A number of long-term political detainees were released during the course of the year. They included John Chisata, a former Minister of State for Labour and Social Services, who had been detained without trial under the Preservation of Pubhc Security regulations since late 1978. In March 1981 an appeal brought by John Chisata and another detainee, Faustino Lombe, against an earher decision of the Ndola High Court to reject their applications for habeas corpus was upheld by the Supreme Court, which also awarded costs to the detainees. Both men were then released. Jackson Mutale, arrested at the same time as John Chisata, had his detention order revoked by President Kaunda in April 1981. However at the end of April 1981 several people were still in detention suspected of supporting the banned United Progressive Party (UPP), which had been declared illegal in 1972.
102
