Peru
178	
X . ■ \	On28 JulyPeru'sfirstcivilianpresi-
dent was inaugurated after 12 years ^ ofmilitary government, and the con-^If stitution of 1979 came into force. / : These major developments affected the human rights situation directly. The major concerns of Amnesty International had previously included the periodic short-term detention of thousands of civilians each year for political or trade union activity, their trial by military courts, and the death penalty. After the political and constitutional changes. Amnesty International was concerned about reports of arbitrary arrests linked to anti-terrorism operations, allegations of ill-treatment or torture, and the failure of prison conditions to improve.
The new constitution abolished the death penalty except for treason in time of external war (Article 235). It also ended the jurisdiction of the military courts over civilians, declaring that the Código de Justicia Militar, Code of Military Justice, would no longer apply in civilian cases (Article 285). This change in the law was accompanied by an end to the periodic mass arrests of trade union activists and political opponents.
S hortly before the change of government four Argentine citizens in exile in Peru were abducted in what was later shown to have been a combined operation by agents of the Argentine army and members of Servicio de Inteligencia del Ejército (SIE), Peruvian army intelligence. On 12 June 1980 Julia Ines Santos de Acabal was detained by men in civilian clothes in the Lima suburb Miraflores; the detention was witnessed and reported by Naomi Esther Gianetti de Molfino, the mother of two children who had "disappeared" after detention in Argentina. The next day Naomi Gianetti and two other Argentines living in Lima were abducted. Although Peruvian authorities initially denied any knowledge of the detentions, the four were reportedly held in the Centra Recreacional del Ejército, an army recreation centre, at Playa Hondable north of Lima, and Amnesty International made an urgent appeal on 17 June 1980 for the Peruvian authorities to guarantee their safety.
In October 1980 the weekly magazine Equis-X published an interview with Peruvian Army Captain Wilfredo Jacinto Cesare Zárate, who, it said, was the SIE doctor present during the interrogation of
179	
the Argentines at Playa Hondable. Equis-X quoted Dr Cesare as insisting that he "did not participate in the torture", but admitting his responsibility "to determine the limits of resistance of the victims" in order to prevent deaths during interrogation. Dr Cesare and other sources identified the torturers as members of Argentine military intelligence, assisted by officials ofPeruvianSIE.On 17 June 1980 the Peruvian Ministry of the Interior said in a press release that three Argentines described as "subversive criminals" had been detained on 12 and 13 June, but had been expelled and handed over to immigration officials of Bolivia; this was immediately denied by the Bolivian Government.
An open letter to Amnesty International was published by president-elect Fernando Belaúnde Terry on 29 June 1980 in response to requests for him to use his good offices on behalf of the four "disappeared", in which he stated that he had asked for a full explanation, and had "clearly and definitely expressed fear for the safety of these people . . .".
In his inaugural address on 28 July 1980 President Belaunde declared his government's intention to implement fully the new constitution and to promote the full observance of human rights. A general political amnesty bill was approved by Congress on 28 July that called for the release of all political detainees and the reinstatement of public employees dismissed by the previous government on political grounds. However several prisoners were excluded.
Shortly after the change of government a series of dynamite explosions were reported in the capital city area and in several departments. A wide variety of targets were attacked: public buildings, electricity pylons, the homes of provincial opposition leaders and the editor of a left-wing magazine, factories, and commercial premises. In most cases only property was damaged. Security authorities have attributed the bombings to a little-known group called Sendero Luminoso, Luminous Path, purportedly on the extreme political left. Leaders of the Izquierda Unida (lU), United Left, the coalition which groups most of Peru's left-wing political parties, have condemned the bombings and questioned whether such widespread attacks could be the work of one extremist group.
Vice-President Javier Alva Orlandini, a leader of President Belaiinde's pziiiy Acción Popular, said that despite the efforts of the security forces it was still unclear who was responsible for the terrorism and suggested that Peru's powerful narcotics smugglers might be trying to divert police attention from their criminal activities. Whoever was behind the attacks, they brought about special anti-terrorist laws that extended the penal code by defining and punishing crimes of terrorism. Decree 46 of 10 March 1981, issued by the
180	
executive while congress was in recess, defines "terrorism" as acts that have the "intent to provoke or maintain a state of anxiety, alarm or terror", and are "capable of causing great destruction", or "affecting state security". Actions causing "considerable" damage to private or public property are punished with no less than 15 years' imprisonment, and should deaüi or serious injury be caused, no less than 20. Membership of an organization deemed to support terrorist methods may be punished by two to four years' imprisonment. The law also provides for four to eight years' imprisonment for inciting any of these crimes through "the press, radio, television or other means of social communications" and three to five years' for justifying or defending any act of terrorism publicly, or defending the actions of anyone imprisoned for terrorism.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of several local govemment officials from lU opposition parties held on "terrorism" charges, including Isidro Quiroz, a city councillor in the Lima district of Carabayllo and a leader of the lU affiliate, Union de Izquierda Revolucionaria (UNIR), Union of the Revolutionary Left, who was detained in March 1981. In Puno province, where both the congressional deputy and local govemment leaders were members of lU, seven leaders of the UNIR were detained in April 1981 including its provincial vice-president Ronald Bustamente.
Eight leaders of the Cuzco department union of construction workers detained on 10 April 1981 on terrorism charges told a court that they had been severely tortured by the investigative police Policia de Investigaciones del Peru (PIP). Their allegations included near drowning, beatings while wrapped in wet cloths, bums with cigarettes, and a threat by a senior PIP officer that their houses would be blown up. The arrests came one day after a general strike in Cuzco department protesting against central govemment policies. The legal situation of the eight was unknown. Amnesty Intemational has called for a full inquiry into the case.
Three hundred people were believed to have been detained in antiterrorism operations in the highland departments of Ayacucho, Lambayeque, Puno and Cuzco, after special counter-insurgency forces of the Guardia Civil (Civil Guard), notably iht Batallón Sinchi, and of the PIP were called in. In April 1981 trade union and political organizations in the departments of Cuzco, Puno and Lambayeque organized general strikes to protest against the detention of regional political leaders and against abuses by counter-insurgency forces including the arbitrary detention of peasant farmers and torture.
Prison conditions were a major concem of Amnesty Intemational in the past year. In August 1980 Minister of Justice Felipe Osterling Parodi visited the largest prison, the Centro de Rehabilitación y
181	
Adaptación Social (CRAS) of Lurigancho, in the outskirts of Lima, and was quoted as describing conditions as "truly Dantesque" and requiring radical reform. Lurigancho prison opened in 1968 with facilities for 1,800 prisoners and by 1981 housed over 6,000. In November 1980 the Lurigancho prisoners went on hunger-strike in protest at arbitrary beatings, and unprovoked shootings of prisoners by prison guards of the Guardia Republicana, and at the lack of adequate food, water, and medical attention. There has been no noticeable improvement since an Amnesty International mission visited Lurigancho prison in 1978.
Similar overcrowding and poor conditions marked the Lima prison Centro de Sentenciados El Sexto, which housed over 1,000 prisoners although it was built for 190. There have been prison mutinies and unexplained killings in both prisons. A fight among prisoners in the badly overcrowded El Sexto prison on the night of 4 March 1981 led to 31 deaths, with many prisoners burned to death while locked in ceils.
On 3 October 1980 Peru ratified the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which provides for individual complaints to be heard by the Human Rights Committee.
