Costa Rica
Amnesty International has been concerned about reports that in the latter half of the year local human rights organizations have been raided and their staff briefly detained, and and that a number of Salvadorian and other refugees have been arrested, apparently without warrant, and expelled from the country. Following a group of such arrests in March 1981 Amnesty International urged Minister of the Interior Amulfo Carmonoa Benavides not to return a mmiber of Central American refugees to their countries of origin, where in Amnesty International's judgment, their lives would be in danger. Appeals for habeas corpus for six exiled Guatemalans who were among the detained were denied, and they were eventually expelled to a third country, on 4 April 1981.
Cuba
The major concerns of Amnesty International were the detention of prisoners of conscience, the death penalty, prison conditions, summary trials, re-sentencing, and allegations of ill-treatment of political prisoners.
About 250 long-term political prisoners were held, most of them in the Combinado del Este maximum security prison in Havana, Boniato prison in Santiago de Cuba and "Kilo 7" prison in Camaguey. The prisoners have reftised to obey prison regulations in protest
136
against their treatment as ordinary criminals, and were known as the plantados. Many of the 250 political prisoners have spent 15 or more years in prison. Although Amnesty International has not received any evidence that they are prisoners of conscience, it has regularly appealed for their cases to be reviewed and was concerned at reports that many were old and sick, such as Dr José Enrique Velazco Santa Cruz who has spent over 20 years in prison and was said to be suffering from diabetes and cancer of the prostate gland. The plantados have gone on several hunger-strikes against alleged ill-treatment and harassment by prison guards. In November 1980 about 100 political prisoners in Boniato prison went on hunger-strike because monthly family visits were suspended. It is alleged that as a result prison guards attacked some of the prisoners; Jorge Vals, Oscar Rodriguez, Onofre Pérez and Ernesto Palomeque were reportedly injured. Amnesty International asked the government for a full investigation and requested that medical treatment be provided to the injured. The protest ended in mid-December, but according to the families of the political prisoners in January 1981 five prisoners were still on hunger-strike. They were: Eloy Gutiérrez Menoyo, Julio Ruiz Pitaluga, Ernesto Diaz Rodriguez, Sergio Montes de Oca and Onofre Pérez. On 23 January Amnesty International asked the government to intervene to protect the health of the five whose lives were thought to be in danger.
Although Amnesty International does not demand special status for political prisoners, it was deeply concerned by allegations that the prison authorities have several times withdrawn food and medical treatment from the political prisoners because they refused to accept new prison regulations. The suspension of family visits was reported to be frequent and arbitrary. Relatives of prisoners in Boniato prison (especially those who were transferred from Havana in July 1979) have sometimes travelled almost 1,000 kilometres from Havana to Santiago de Cuba only to find that the monthly visit had been cancelled without explanation or warning.
Amnesty International believed that only an independent observer with a mandate to visit prisoners and to investigate the allegations of ill-treatment and harassment of the plantados could assess their conditions within the context of the general prison regime in Cuba. On 4 December 1980 Amnesty International renewed its appeal to the Cuban authorities to allow such a visit. No answer was received.
The re-sentencing of political prisoners due for release continued to be a major concern. There were at least four prisoners in this category: Fermín Álvarez Santos, Manuel Espinoza Álvarez,Servando Infante Jiménez and José Oscar Rodn'guez Terrero, known as "Napoleoncito". The sentences are reported to have been passed
137
without the prisoners having the opportunity to defend themselves.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of adopted prisoners of conscience Armando Valladares Pérez and Angel Cuadra Landrove. Both were featured in the Amnesty International Newsletter "prisoners of the month" during the year. An appeal by Angel Cuadra against the remainder of his sentence was rejected by the Supreme Court; the new penal code had reduced the sentence for crimes of the type he allegedly committed Article 60 of the constitution, on which Angel Cuadra based his appeal, states that penal laws have retroactive effect if favourable to the accused. Amnesty International lawyers' groups continue to campaign for his release. Armando Valladares Pérez has been in the hospital of the Combinado del Este prison since April 1980, after being transferred from an orthopaedic hospital. He has allegedly been kept for several months without medical treatment or exercise in the open air, and without visitors. In a letter smuggled out of the prison, he reported that on 7 February 1981 he was knocked unconscious by a prison guard. It was also alleged that his skin was burnt by a lamp which was held against the back of his neck. Amnesty International has written to the medical authorities at the prison about allegations that Angel Valladares had been denied medical treatment since April 1980.
More than 100,000 Cubans left Cuba during 1980 after some 10,000 had occupied the Peruvian Embassy asking for political asylum (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Later in the year the Ecuadorian Embassy and Vatican Legation were occupied by Cubans trying to leave the country, some of whom were àrmea. In both cases, the Cuban police stormed the premises. It was not clear whether they were authorized by the states involved, and Amnesty International has received reports that after the storming of the Vatican Legation the arrested Cubans, including minors, were summarily tried and some were given 30 year sentences.
Amnesty International received no news of executions during the year, but was concerned about information that death sentences have been passed by the courts and that an unknown nimiber of prisoners in Boniato and Combinado del Este prisons have been sentenced to death for criminal offences. Names received by Amnesty International included: Rodolfo Manuel Alonso Roche, 28 years old; Abilio González Llanes, 26 years old; and Orlando Zuárez (or Suàrez) Torres, 20 years old; all reportedly in Combinado del Este; and Reinaldo Masso Garrido (alias "El Caimán") and José Antonio Durruty Faure (alias "Polito"), reportedly in Boniato prison.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of Adolfo Rivero Caro; Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz; Edmigio López Castillo; Ricardo Bofill Pagés, a sociologist and joumahst; and Luis Fernández.
138
They were held on criminal charges such as illegal possession of foreign currency or crimes against the national heritage but their relatives alleged that the real reason was their past political activities and the fact that they have applied for visas to leave the country. It is also alleged that Dr Bofill Pagés and Edmigio López Castillo have been given psychiatric treatment against their will.
