Nepal
Amnesty International continued tobe concemed at the imprisonment, in some cases without trial, of political opponents including people detained for the non-violent expression of their views.
Shortly after a referendum on 2 May 1980 the government adopted the highly restrictive Freedom of Speech and Publication Ordinance, which among other things prohibited the formation of associations, organizations or unions motivated by party politics. Some provisions of the ordinance, including the requirement that district administrators approve all public meetings, posters or wall writing, were removed after widespread protests but ,were later incorporated into the Local Administration (Amendment) Act of September 1980. Under this act. Zonal Commissioners and Chief District Officers are empowered to declare areas under their administration "disturbed areas", shoot "lawless elements" on sight, ban meetings and demonstrations and arrest people under the preventive detention provisions of the Public Security Act (PSA). Alternatively prison terms of up to three months may be imposed after summary proceedings. As in previous years, several hundred people engaged in political activities were arrested under the PSA, which allows preventive detention under renewable nine-month detention orders up to a maximum of three years. Some of these were subsequently reported to have been released. Others were arrested underthe Treason(Crime and Punishment) Act, (the Raj Kaj Act), which covers rebellion and treason, for which the maximum penalty is death, and sedition, for which the maximum penalty is three years' imprisonment. Amnesty International received reports of a
244	
number of arrests during the referendum campaign under the Arms and Ammunition Act. Seventeen of these people were later reported to have been acquitted and released.
A series of student-organized demonstrations, beginning in September 1980, focused on a number of issues, including the continued detention of political prisoners despite the amnesty of 13 April 1980 {sQe Amnesty International Report 1980). The demonstrations led to the arrest of several hundred students, workers and peasants. In April 1981 the President of the newly-formed Political Prisoners Release Committee said that his organization had recorded the names of 128 political prisoners throughout the kingdom. Amnesty International was informed of the names of 146 teachers, political activists and students arrested in the two months preceding the national assembly elections. Other sources reported between 400 and 600 arrests in this period, including election candidates whose manifestos were deemed to contain objectionable material and political activists who had called for a boycott of the elections.
