Federal Republic of Germany
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about aspects of high-security detention, and it became increasingly concemed about the way in which anti-terrorist legislation was appliéd against the exercise of freedom of expression. Amnesty Intemational also worked on behalf of people imprisoned for being conscientious objectors to military service.
In May 1980 Amnesty Intemational published a dossier: Amnesty International's Work on Prison Conditions of Persons Suspected or Convicted of Politically Motivated Crimes in the Federal Republic of Germany: Isolation and Solitary Confinement. The dossier contained Amnesty International's findings that strict isolation of prisoners in high-security detention could seriously affect their physical and mental health, and had done so in a number of cases (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). The prisoners concemed had all been charged with or convicted of politically motivated acts of violence. None was adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience; its sole concern was that prisoners should not be subjected to conditions that threaten their health.
In the dossier Amnesty Intemational called for the abolition of strict forms of isolation and, pending this, for the health of the prisoners to be properly monitored by doctors tmsted by both prisoners and authorities. Amnesty Intemational recommended remedial action if medical examinations conducted with the full cooperation of the prisoners showed damage to health.
Amnesty International's conclusion that the conditions imposed
290	
on these prisoners had serious effects on their healtli has never been disputed by the authorities, and has been explicitly confirmed by the courts. However the authorities rejected Amnesty International's recommendations and continued to impose strict isolation on many prisoners. The authorities and the courts argued that the prisoners, because they were so dangerous, forced the authorities to impose security measures which damaged their health, and were therefore themselves responsible for the regime. Although the authorities expressed in general terms a willingness to reduce the isolation imposed on prisoners this led to no improvements in practice.
Such conditions have been imposed not only on prisoners who were members of groups such as the Red Army Fraction (RAF) or the 2 June Movement, but also on others regarded as high security risks, especially if there were political aspects to the case. They have also been imposed on people in investigative detention suspected of "making propaganda for a terrorist association", without it having been alleged that they had been involved in any acts of violence.
In early January 1981 lawyers and doctors from all over the world wrote to federal and lander (state) authorities urging them to reconsider Amnesty International's recommendations. They pointed out the obligation of the authorities under intemational law to exercise their custodial authority to safeguard the health and well-being of all prisoners. They rejected the argument that the prisoners were so dangerous that the authorities were relieved of this obligation.
From early Febmary 1981 a number of politically motivated prisoners went on hunger-strike. A large proportion of them were detained in the kind of conditions about which Amnesty Intemational had expressed concem. Their demand that politically motivated prisoners should be held in groups extended to issues outside Amnesty International's mandate, which it therefore could not address or support However in a letter of 13 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational again urged the authorities to abolish solitary confinement and small-group isolation as regular forms of imprisonment, and to implement, until then, the recommendations it had made as far back as October 1979. In view of the poor health of a number of hunger-strikers Amnesty International on 8 April 1981 called for the implementation of its recommendations as a matter of urgency. On 16 April 1981 Sigurd Debus, one of the hunger-strikers, died in a hospital in Hamburg. The prisoners ended their fast shortly afterwards.
The authorities replied that the hunger-strike was seen by the prisoners as part of their violent actions against the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), as was their demand to be held in groups made up only of politically motivated prisoners. The prisoners' isolation was largely because they had rejected association with ordinary prisoners;
291	
the so-called "small-group isolation" was to avoid stricter forms of detention. The prison authorities saw to it that the prisoners received medical attention, including visits by doctors from outside the prison system.
Although some prisoners have rejected contact with non-politically motivated prisoners, Amnesty International knows of others who have been willing to accept such social contact, but have been denied it. Amnesty International also believes that the general lack of trust between the prison doctors and the prisoners has led to the health of politically motivated prisoners not being adequately monitored.
In its letter of 13 March 1981 Amnesty International had expressed concern about the arrest and indictment on criminal charges of people supporting the hunger-striking prisoners' demands. The letter referred to allegations "that the mere support of the prisoners' demands and of the hunger-strike as a means of obtaining them, is treated by the prosecuting authorities as 'support of a criminal association' in the sense of paragraph 129a of the FRG Criminal Code". Amnesty International's letter continued:
"It is said that individuals are prosecuted in cases in which no advocacy is involved of the violent aims of groups to which some of the prisoners claim allegiance. These cases are said to include a number of defence lawyers. Amnesty International is concerned that people may be prosecuted and imprisoned for the nonviolent expression of their political beliefs, without advocacy of violence".
In his reply the Federal Minister of Justice said that he "shared Amnesty International's opinion that a criminal prosecution solely because of support of the hunger-strike and the demands connected with it should be out of the question". Solidarity with the demands became criminal only when they were connected to propaganda for a specific terrorist association and its violent aims.
However in Amnesty International's opinion the arguments in indictments and judicial decisions against supporters of the hunger-strike constitute a threat to the non-violent exercise of the freedom of expression. Judge Kuhn, a judge at the Bundesgerichtshof (federal court), who is responsible for the pre-trial proceedings in virtually all these cases, has argued in many cases that the "ultimate aim" of the hunger-strike was the continued existence of the Red Army Fraction. Supporters of the hunger-strike who he felt "knew and wanted" this "ultimate aim" therefore supported the terrorist organization, even though the opinions they expressed related only to the direct demands of the hunger-strikers. Many supporters of the hunger-strike were consequently held in investigative detention charged with "making
292	
propaganda for a terrorist association" (Article 129a of the criminal code) because of "ultimate aims" which Judge Kuhn held to be apparent from, for example, the use of a red five-pointed star. Amnesty Intemational was collecting information on these cases.
Arrests and investigative detentions of this kind became widespread during the hunger-strike; yet in October 1980, before the hunger-strike, a number of people had already been charged under Article 129a for putting up a banner in a square in Munich with the words "For the grouping together and self-determination of prisoners from the RAF" and a red five-pointed star. They were found guilty of "making propaganda for a terrorist association" in January 1981 and were given suspended sentences.
On 19 May 1980 Albert Mayr, a stonemason, was sentenced by them/i^er/cAi (district court) Bruchsal to six months' imprisonment for refusing to obey orders and desertion. The prisoner, who served his sentence in Rottenburg, had applied twice on religious and moral grounds for recognition as a conscientious objector. On both occasions, in 1977 and 1979, the Prujiingsausschusse (examination boards) of Kempten and Augsburg respectively turned down his application. After his application had been refused a second time Albert Mayr wrote to the military authorities to say that he would not submit to further tests of conscience because he believed them unjust. At the time of his trial Amnesty Intemational told the President of the court, Herr Zimmermann, that it believed Albert Mayr to be a genuine conscientious objector, and requested his immediate release. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
