GHANA
REPUBLIC OF GHANA
Head of state and government: John Agyekum Kufuor Death penalty: retentionist International Criminal Court: ratified UN Women's Convention: ratified Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: signed
No death sentences were passed and there were no executions, although the death penalty remained on thestatutebooks. A National Reconciliation Commission reported on human rights violations during Ghana's periods of unconstitutional government since 1957. A woman was imprisoned for practising female genital mutilation. A draft Domestic Violence Bill was still not tabled in parliament
Background
After elections in December, President Kufuor was re-elected.
The National Reconciliation Commission
The National Reconciliation Commission (NRC) ended its hearings in July. Established by the government in 2002, initially for one year, its task was to compile a
114
Amnesty International Report 2005
GRE
record of human rights violations committed during Ghana's periods of unconstitutional rule since independence in 1957. and to recommend reparations and reforms. Most of the witnesses were victims of human rights violations under the military governments headed by former President J.J. Rawlings. Many of the 2,000-plus testimonies that were heard spoke of summary executions, "disappearances", torture and ill-treatment.
The NRC's report and recommendations were submitted to President Kufuor on 12 October but had not been made public by the end of 2004. The recommendations reportedly included reparations for about 3,000 victims and reforms of institutions including the security agencies.
Women's rights
Despite being made a criminal offence in 1994, female genital mutilation continued to be practised, particularly in the north. In January, a 70-year-old woman from Koloko, Upper East Region, who had performed female genital mutilation on seven girls, was convicted and sentenced to five years' imprisonment.
A draft Domestic Violence Bill had not yet been tabled in Parliament by the end of 2004, despite wide support from women's organizations and other civil society groups. The bill aimed to strengthen official responses to complaints of violence against women and to broaden remedies available to the courts.
