PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by
Governor-General Paulias Matane (replaced Acting
Governor-General Bill Skate in June)
Head of government: Michael Soma re
Death penalty: abolitionist in practice
International Criminal Court: not signed
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not
signed
Human rights violations by police, including against women, continued as law and order deteriorated. Ethnic violence left at least 30 people dead. Many police enjoyed impunity for brutality and shootings. The government prepared procedures for executions. Refugees from Papua, Indonesia, were given improved legal status and living conditions.
Background
Gun-related violent crime and inter-communal violence dominated public debate. At least 30 people were known to have been killed in armed clashes between villages or ethnic groups. Provincial power struggles, reprisal killings, corruption and government mismanagement continued to fuel violence. The violence adversely affected living standards and the economy, and hindered government measures against deteriorating infrastructure, education and health services. Some businesses and banks closed because of such violence.
Government mediation and security measures helped to prevent the escalation of ethnic or politically motivated violence in some provinces. At least 70 of the planned 200-str0ng contingent of Australian Federal Police and 50 civilians were deployed in Bougainville, Port Moresby and Highland provinces, under an agreement signed with Australia in August.
In October the government agreed the draft Constitution for an autonomous provincial administration in Bougainville. The UN extended its observer mission.
Escalating rates of fatal malaria and HIV infection prompted emergency interventions by aid organizations. Port Moresby's General Hospital alone reported 115 new HIV/AIDS cases a month.
Law and order problems
There were serious problems in the criminal justice system, including long delays in bringing suspects to trial, which observers saw as fuelling crime and impunity. In September the former Chief justice argued that judicial processes were inefficient and ineffective, and advocated a radical overhaul. The Chief Justice
complained that the government filled only 19 of 25 positions forjudges, leaving the courts understaffed. The Justice Minister expressed concern about violent attacks on judges and break-ins in court houses.
There were concerns that the payment of court awarded compensation and out-of-court settlements to victims of police brutality significantly reduced the police budget, affecting police capacity to address
Violence against women
Women's organizations recorded hundreds of rape cases in addition to domestic violence. Although some incidents of violence against women led to successful convictions, perpetrators were often seen as enjoying impunity.
Q In March, police raided a guest house and then gang-raped and brutally assaulted women staff and guests. The police marched about 45 men and at least 42 women and girls to Boroko police station, humiliating them publicly. After police filed prostitution and other charges, the men were released but the women and girls were detained. After their release, at least five women were gang-raped by officers in the police car park. All charges against those arrested were dismissed in court, and no action was taken against any of the officers responsible for sexually assaulting the women and girls.
Q Women's groups protested against the sentence— a suspended seven-year prison term - given to a man convicted in March of aggravated rape and assault of a woman. Police then rearrested the man for an earlier offence.
A new Family Support Centre assisting abused women and children opened near Port Moresby General Hospital in May. East New Britain province established a Family Violence Committee in September to assist the Police Sexual Offences Section.
There were reports of the torture and murder of people accused of, or in some cases being victims of, sorcery, particularly women. In Chimbu Province in February, villagers reportedly kidnapped and bound four women with ropes and slashed their bodies with knives.
Police use of excessive force
There were numerous allegations that police used excessive force in carrying out their police duties. Some incidents involved fatal shootings or rape. Port Moresby's Police Commander warned criminals that police would shoot to kill, fuelling the perception that police officers would not be held accountable for use of excessive force that resulted in fatal shootings.
Q in March, Wewak police beat two village elders trying to serve the police with a court summons. The summons alleged serious police brutality at Yangoru Police Station in December 2003 when officers allegedly forced a woman to undress and have sex with her detained husband in his cell, and then tried to cut off his genitals. The elders had also responded to concerns raised by local villagers about widespread police ill-treatment.
198
Amnesty International Report 2005
PAR
Death penalty
Despite public opposition to the death penalty, including by the former Chief Justice and churches, the Justice Minister prepared procedures in anticipation of a resumption in executions-
Refugees and children
The last person detained in an Australian-controlled camp on Manus Island was resettled in Australia. Australia extended its contract on the vacant camp.
The government registered children born to refugees after the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that efforts be increased to ensure all children were registered at birth. In January the Committee, in considering Papua New Guinea's initial report under the UN Children's Convention, expressed concern about violence against children by police and by staff in institutions.
At least 185 Papuan refugees were relocated from Vanimo in August with UN assistance after their refugee status was established. The move increased the refugees' access to economic opportunities.
Al country reports/visits Report
• Papua New Guinea; The state as killer? (Al Index: ASA
34/001/2004) Visit
Al visited Port Moresby in May.
