GUINEA-BISSAU
Several political activists and dozens of students were arbitrarily arrested and detained briefly. Twelve people arrested in 2003 were released after more than 10 months in detention.
Background
In January, President Lansana Conté was sworn in for another seven-year term after the Supreme Court confirmed the results of the December 2003 presidential elections. The Guinean Human Rights Organization accused the election organizers of serious and massive violations of the law. In February former Minister of External Affairs Louceny Fall replaced Lamine Sidimé as Prime Minister. However, in April he resigned. In a letter sent from the French capital, Paris, he denounced the lack of dialogue between the President and the government. In December, Cellou Dalein Diallo was appointed Prime Minister.
Release of military officers
In October the former commander of the airport security service, Cheick Adelkader Doumbouya, and ii other prisoners held on suspicion of plotting to overthrow President Lansana Conté were released. They had been held without charge, trial or access to lawyers for almost 10 months. Other prisoners arrested at the time were reportedly still in detention at the end of 2004. During his detention, Cheick Adelkader Doumbouya, who suffers from diabetes and glaucoma, was denied access to medical treatment.
Arrest of opposition members
Kaba Rogui Barry, Ibrahima Capi Camara and Baidy Aribot, all members of the Union of Republican Forces, UFR, were arrested on 29 March and charged with plotting a coup. They were released on probation more than two weeks later. They were not allowed to leave the country. In April, Sidya Touré, former Prime Minister and leader of the UFR, was detained for one day at police headquarters. He was charged with plotting against the authority of the state, along with a high-ranking officer whose whereabouts were unknown at the end of the year.
Arrest of students
In February at least 15 students were arrested in Conakry. They were released without charge or trial a few days later. In September police broke up a student
REPUBLIC OF GUINEA-BISSAU
Head of state: Henrique Pereira Rosa (interim)
Head of government: Carlos Comes Junior (replaced
Artur Antonio Sanhá in April)
Death penalty: abolitionist forali crimes
International Criminal Court: signed
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: signed
Human rights activists were arrested and beaten on account of their work. Several soldiers and civilians arrested following the September 2003 coup were held uncharged for several months in poor prison conditions. Soldiers arrested in December 2002 and accused of attempting to overthrow the government were released in June pending trial. Police used excessive force or firearms when dispersing demonstrations. Despite legislative elections in March, political Instability continued and increased in October following a military revolt in which the Chief ofStaff of the Armed Forces was killed.
Background
Dire economic and social conditions persisted. There were strikes in protest at unpaid salaries in the first half of the year. Further strikes were averted by an agreement between the government and the trade unions after the World Bank and other donors agreed to provide emergency aid, and workers began to receive part of their salaries.
Steps were taken to restore the independence of the Judiciary with the appointment of the Supreme Court president in January. The appointment marked a return to constitutional rule, which had been severely undermined under former President Kumba lalá.
In February the army clashed near the northern border with an armed group, believed to be a faction of the Movement of the Democratic Forces of Casamance (Mouvement des Forces Démocratiques du Casamance, MFDC). Four Guinea-Bissau soldiers were reportedly killed and at least a dozen injured.
Although political tension diminished slightly early in the year, the political situation remained fragile, undermining the democratization process. The African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape
Amnesty international Report 2005
119
CUY
Verde (Partido Africano da Independencia da Guiñé e Cabo Verde, PAIGC) won legislative elections in March. However, it did not obtain a majority and after more than a month of unsuccessful negotiations with other parties, a government made up exclusively of PAIGC members took office in May.
In June, the UN Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) warned of the danger of escalating tensions. In October, a group of soldiers revolted and killed the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces and another officer. The soldiers were demanding full payment of salaries owed to them for serving in a peacekeeping mission to Liberia. They also called for the restructuring of the armed forces. The revolt ended after they reached an agreement with the government on both issues. The agreement also included an amnesty for offences committed by soldiers since 1980, and the appointment of a new Chief of Staff proposed by the soldiers.
Attacks on human rights defenders
Members of the Guinea (Bissau) Human Rights League (Liga Guineense dos Direitos Humanos, LGDH) were targeted by the authorities for denouncing human rights violations by the security forces. Q In March, Joao Vaz Mané, the LGDH vice-president, was detained for several hours. He had reported on a radio programme that a young man had been shot by a police officer in the Belem neighbourhood of Bissau, the capital, some days earlier and that three others had been arrested and ill-treated (see below). He was arrested without a warrant at the LGDH headquarters by police officers who reportedly beat and threatened to kill him and taken to two police stations in Bissau before being released uncharged. Q In June, Carlos Adulai Djaló, an LGDH activist in Bafatá, in the east of the country, was reportedly beaten by the former Vice-Chief of Staff of the Army, apparently on account of his LGDH activities.
Detention without charge or trial
At least 10 people, including military officers and civilian supporters of former President Kumba lalá who were arrested in the aftermath of a coup in September 2003, were held throughout the year without charge or trial. They were detained in the Mansoa army barracks, in the north of Bissau, and were held incommunicado. Kumba lalá, who had been placed under house arrest, was released in March-
Excessive use of force and firearms by police
In March police used excessive force to disperse a peaceful demonstration by secondary school students in Bissau who were protesting against a strike by their teachers. Dozens of students were reportedly arrested after they went on the rampage after the police charged into them, using tear gas and firing into the air.
Also in March a police officer deliberately shot a young man in the legs, reportedly for refusing to take a taxi he had flagged down. The officer reportedly hit and pushed the young man to the ground, as he tried to explain that the taxi was not going his way, and then
shot him in the legs. Three people who tried to intervene, Leonel PereiraJoaoQuade, Nesto Fonseca Mandica and Malam Sani, were arrested and held in the Second police station for five days, where they were reportedly beaten.
Updates
Eleven soldiers held since December 2002, accused of attempting to overthrow the government, were conditionally released in June pending trial. Their trial was postponed indefinitely in October following a military revolt.
