UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Head of state: Al-Sheikh Khalifa binZayed Al-Nahyan (replaced Al-Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahyan in November)
Head of government: Al-Sheikh Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum
Death penalty: retentionist International Criminal Court: signed UN Women's Convention: acceded Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed	_
Political detainees arrested in the aftermath of the 11 September2001 attacks in the USA remained held without charge or trial. A UAE national arrested in Abu Dhabi "disappeared". Corporal punishment was imposed in the Emirate of Ras al-Khaimah. One death sentence was passed but no executions were known to have been carried out. Women called for greater rights.
Background
An application by a group of human rights activists to form the UAE's first independent human rights organization was submitted to the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs in July, but had not been approved by the end of 2004,
In December a Dubai newspaper reported that three such applications had been submitted by three different groups.
Women's rights
In October the UAE acceded without reservation to the UN Women's Convention.
In November Sheikha Lubna al-Oassimi, a member of the Sharjah ruling family, became the UAE's first woman minister when she was appointed Economics and Planning Minister.
In January, the General Women's Union (GWU) debated a draft amended personal status law, proposed by the Ministry for Justice, Islamic Affairs and Awqaf- The GWU demanded extensive changes to ensure greater rights for women and called for greater protection for a first wife in the event of polygamy; improved financial protection for divorced women; and the amendment of a clause authorizing a husband to prevent his wife from working despite a premarital agreement allowing her to work.
Domestic migrant workers continued to be denied the protection of labour legislation, Unconfirmed allegations of ill-treatment included physical abuse -including sexual abuse - and non-payment of wages.
254
Amnesty International Report 2005
UNI
Continued impact of the 'war on terror'
After II September 2001, more than 250 people were arrested and detained, including military personnel and judges. The number still detained remained unknown, but they were reportedly held without access to lawyers or family, and their legal status was unclear.
Security provisions continued to be strengthened with the introduction of the Anti-terrorism Act in July Penalties for involvement with organizations defined as "terrorist" included the death penalty and life imprisonment.
The "war on terror" was also used to restrict freedom of expression, belief and association. Those perceived to have "Islamist" tendencies, including lawyers, judges, teachers and university professors, reportedly faced restrictions on work opportunities and participation in public life. The Anti-terrorism Act provided for up to five years' imprisonment for "propagating, by word, in writing or by any other means" any "terrorist" act or purpose. Organizations such as teachers', lawyers', and journalists' associations faced harassment because some of their board members were perceived to hold "Islamist" views. Some Islamic charities reportedly had their assets confiscated or frozen, and their activities blocked.
Forcible return
On 23 November, Abdelaziz Khalid Osman, a Sudanese political activist and former political prisoner in Sudan, was forcibly returned to Sudan. He was arrested at Abu Dhabi airport upon arrival from Egypt on 23 September, reportedly at the request of the Sudanese authorities. He was arrested when he arrived in Sudan and detained for "crimes against the state", and was subsequently released on 18 December.
'Disappearance'
A 34-year-old employee of the telecommunications company Etisalat, Hassan al-Za'abi, was arrested and "disappeared" after his car was stopped by members of the State Security (Amn al-Dawla) on i August in Abu Dhabi. Despite several appeals by his family his fate and whereabouts remained unknown. The reasons for his arrest were not clear but were thought to be politically motivated.
Cruel judicial punishments
In December, two women domestic migrant workers -Indonesian national Wasini bint Sarjan and Indian national Rad Zemah Sinyaj Mohammed - were sentenced to flogging, after becoming pregnant outside marriage, by a Shari'a (Islamic) Court in Ras al-Khaimah. Rad Zemah Sinyaj Mohammed was sentenced to 150 lashes, to be received in two sessions, followed by deportation. Wasini bint Sarjan was sentenced to one year's imprisonment and 100 lashes, followed by deportation.
The sentences were to be carried out once the women had given'birth and their children had been weaned.
Al country reports/visits
Report
• The Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula; Human rights fall victim to the "war on terror" (Al Index: MDE 04/002/2004). Visit
Al visited the U AE in January to conduct research on detainees held in the context of the "war on terror", in July and August to conduct research for the Gulf Stop Violence Against Women project (see Middle East/North Africa Regional Overview 2004), and in November to take part in a police training seminar.
