Republic of China (Taiwan)
Work on behalf of prisoners in the Republic of China (Taiwan) has continued to prove difficult as a result of the lack of detailed response from Taiwanese authorities. In consequence, valuable contacts have been made and built up outside Taiwan, and these are now likely to prove useful in the light of the official announcement in April 1975 of a reduction of sentences for all prisoners in Taiwan.
Amnesty International members in Japan have continued to provide information on Taiwan through their links with overseas Taiwanese groups. In view of the difficulty in obtaining information from inside Taiwan, efforts have been made, particularly by the A1 German Section coordination group, to establish supplementary channels for information. One particular feature of the German
group work has been a three-tier campaign, carried out over a period of several months, on behalf of the group of cases connected with the so-called "People's Happiness Party" which is alleged by the government to have planned to establish an "independent Taiwan".
Despite the generally unrewarding nature of official inquiries, certain groups have made important progress in their contacts with the authorities. Particular emphasis here has been laid on Taiwan's American connections. An example is the case of Su Tung-ch'i, where the adoption group has had useful contact with the Taiwanese diplomatic representatives in the United States.
The condition of Su Tung-chi has caused particular concern: he is reportedly suffering from high blood pressure, numbness and dizziness. Reports received by the International Secretariat from the prison island of Lu Tao state that more than half the prisoners on the island suffer from similar symptoms-high blood pressure, numbness, trembling and burning sensations. The reports say there is no qualified doctor to minister to the 200 prisoners on the island—and no evidence that any of them have been removed to hospital for treatment.
AI has also received allegations of torture of prisoners from a reliable source. These state that different types of torture are applied to certain classifications of prisoner, ranging from psychological torture, such as sleep deprivation, to severe beatings, water torture and electrical shocks. In almost all cases, it is reported that prisoners who attempt to lodge an appeal are liable to receive especially harsh sentences.
In November 1974, an urgent action campaign was launched through all AI groups and national sections on behalf of two well-known writers, Lee Ao and Hsieh Ts'ung-min, after reports had been received that their health had seriously deteriorated. AI later heard that Mr. Hsieh had been moved to hospital for medical treatment and that relatives are allowed to visit him.
Following the death of President Chiang Kai-shek on 5 April 1975, his son. Premier Chiang Ching-kuo, ordered a nationwide reduction of sentences for all Taiwanese prisoners. For the first time since 1949, this measure is to include political prisoners. On 22 April, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals cabled Chiang Ching-kuo welcoming the reduction in sentences, and requesting full details of individual commutations as they affect political prisoners. On 11 May, Professor James Seymour, Professor of PoHtical Science at New York University, was sent on a mission to Taiwan for discussions with the Taiwanese authorities and to make formal inquiries as to how the reduction of sentences will affect particular cases and groups of cases in which AI has taken an interest.
Sources close to the government estimate the number of political prisoners in Taiwan at 300, while exile Taiwanese sources say there are some 8,000 held. Other outside observers generally believe several thousands are being held for non-violent political dissent.
AI groups are working on 14 adopted and 71 investigation cases.
