Lesotho
In July 1974 an Amnesty International delegate visited Lesotho to investigate the situation of more than 170 supporters of the opposition Basutoland Congress Party (BCP), all of whom had been detained at the time of January 1974 disturbances. During the mission, the delegate was allowed to visit the detainees at Maseru Central Prison and to arrange for them to receive study materials purchased with funds provided by AI. AI then began to take up the detainees as investigation cases.
A total of 66 detainees were released unconditionally in October, but 32 others were charged with treason—a capital offence in Lesotho—and told that they would be put on summary trial the following month. At AI's request, Barend van Niekerk, Professor of Law at Natal University, went to Lesotho in November to observe the trial.
His report contained substantial information concerning atrocities alleged to have been committed by the police and other officials against BCP supporters in January 1974 and about the brutal treatment of those BCP detainees who were taken into custody at that time. The International Secretariat brought these allegations to the attention of the Lesotho High Commissioner in Ix)ndon, and AI wrote to the Prime Minister, Chief Leabua Jonathan, on several occasions requesting the establishment of an independent commission of inquiry.
The first "treason trial", involving 32 BCP members, was concluded in February 1975. Fifteen of the defendants were convicted of treason and received prison sentences ranging from 4 to 9 years. Five others were found guilty of sedition and sentenced to terms of 3 or 4 years' imprisonment. The remaining defendants were either acquitted of all charges or convicted of minor offences and given suspended prison sentences. Chief Justice Justice J.T. Mapetla, whose conduct of the proceedings has been described as exemplary, found that the long history of official harassment to which BCP supporters had been subjected was a factor which had to be weighed in mitigation.
The second "treason trial" of BCP supporters was in progress at this writing. After the release of a further 28 detainees in January 1975, the remaining 49 detainees were also charged with treason. However, several days before this second trial was due to begin in April 1975, charges against 18 of the accused were withdrawn and nine other defendants were released during the early stages of the trial. Professor van Niekerk again attended part of the trial as an AI observer..
