Cyprus
On 28 June 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals, wrote to Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus, requesting him to initiate an independent investigation into allegations of torture made by members of the EOKA B organization against the Cypriot security forces. The Secretary General recognized that the government was faced with problems of maintaining peace and order, but expressed the hope that "...what appears to be a lawless vendetta between official security forces and the EOKA B can be brought within the jurisdiction of the law courts of Cyprus, in which Amnesty International has the utmost confidence".
On 15 July 1974 there was a coup d'etat in Cyprus, the eventual outcome of which was the landing on the island of Turkish troops and the fall of the military regime in Greece. AI received many appeals for help from Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, but in the early stages of the conflict, there was no possibility of effective AI action. By the end of August 1974, AI received more detailed information about prisoners, other than prisoners-of-war, and on 29 August 1974, Martin Ennals wrote to Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit asking for information about the treatment of Greek Cypriots who had been taken to the Turkish mainland.
In October 1974 the Secretary General wrote to the Acting President of Cyprus, Glafkos Clerides, appealing to the Cyprus government to reconsider its reported plans to introduce the death penalty in cases of illegal arms carrying. At the same time, AI Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale, visited the Cypriot High Commissioner in London, Costas Ashiotis, to discuss Al's position on capital punishment.
In February 1975 appeals were still being received for help in tracing missing persons and the Deputy Secretary General wrote to the new Turkish Prime Minister, Sadi Irmak, to ask whether any Greek Cypriots were still held on the Turkish mainland. Inquiries about missing individuals were addressed to
110
Rauf Denktash, the Turkish Cypriot leader, and in a further letter to Mr Denktash on 4 March 1975, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals raised the matter of the continued detention of many people in the Dome Hotel, Kyrenia.
Also in March 1975, the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture published well-documented information about the torture by electrical shock of a Greek Cypriot sailor in September 1974 while he was being held, together with 400-500 other Greek Cypriot prisoners-of-war, in Turkey.
AI has no adopted prisoners in Cyprus. Although there are still large numbers of missing persons, it is not known how many of these may still be held in detention. The International Secretariat is, however, in contact with the Cypriot government through its High Commission in London.
