Guatemala
Disappearances and political murder continue to be Amnesty International's principal concern in Guatemala. In January 1975 alone, the daily newspapers of Guatemala City reported the apparently politically motivated killing of 41 persons and the disappearance of seven.
AI adoption groups took up eight new investigation cases in the past year, most of them persons reported in the press as having "disappeared"—a description that, in Guatemala, generally refers to kidnapping as a prelude to murder. Disappearances have been written up as investigation cases when there has been evidence that government officials played some part in the affair. Eleven AI groups are investgiating the cases of Guatemalans who disappeared prior to 1974. AI groups have also been supplied with material on the overall incidence of pohtical violence in Guatemala for publicity purposes.
In February 1975, AI sent a list of 121 persons who have disappeared in the past three years to all the radio stations in Guatemala. Relevant data on each disappearance was included, as were copies of documents of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States concerning political murder and disappearances in Guatemala.
In May 1975, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Kjell Laugerud concerning reports that an official investigation had been instituted into police participation in political murder in Guatemala. Mr Ennals welcomed this initiative and enclosed an annotated list of 135 persons reported killed or found dead through apparent acts of political violence, many of them bearing signs of torture and mutilation. Each individual case was taken from Guatemala City newspaper reports and cited the source and date of the news item. All cases were reported between 1 July 1974, the date on which President Laugerud took office, and 31 January 1975.
73
In addition to drawing President Laugerud's attention to the 135 murder cases, the Secretary General also referred to a report published in November in the Guatemala City newspaper Prensa Libre on an unsuccessful kidnap attempt in the Department of Escuintla. The style of this attempt was identical to the manner in which many Guatemalans have "disappeared" and been found dead shortly afterwards with gunshot wounds. But in this case the victim escaped when the car used by the kidnappers—apparently members of a death squad-crashed, killing an agent of the national police who was identified as one of the kidnappers.
Noting that seven leaders of the Christian Democratic Party in the Department of Escuintla have been murdered by death squads in the past year, the Secretary General asked whether the kidnap attempt had been fully investigated and what the results of the inquiry were.
A number of submissions were made by AI to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights after the March presidential elections. In August 1974, AI submitted newspaper cuttings from the Guatemalan press on death squad actions and disappearances during the March election period.
In March 1975, AI made a further submission of information on an appeal by parliamentarians of the Guatemalan Christian Democratic Party to the Ministry of thé Interior concerning the violence endemic in the country. The submission concerned both the parliamentary appeal and death threats and an assassination attempt that followed. The same information was also sent via national sections to Christian Democratic and related political parties throughout the world.
