Greece
The most important event of the past year in Greece was the fall in July 1974 of the military regime which, in various guises, had ruled the country since April 1967. One of the first acts of Constantine Karamanlis, the new Prime Minister, was to release all the political prisoners (approximately 350). In a cable of congratulations to Mr Karamanlis, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals urged him to establish an official inquiry into the torture of prisoners over the past seven years. Subsequently, in letters to members of the new government who were former political prisoners, the Secretary General renewed his appeal for an inquiry into torture and also for the rehabilitation and compensarion of victims of torture. In November 1974 three of AI's former adopted prisoners, Constantinos Alavanos, Stelios Nestor and Gerasimos Notoras, came from Greece to attend a working party in London organized by the Campaign for the Aboliton of Torture (see chapter on Campaign).
Jehovah's Witnesses who are still imprisoned in Greece because of their refusal to perform military service continue to be a matter of concern to AI.
113
There is no provision in Greek law for conscientious objection to military service but AI knows of no imprisoned conscientious objectors other than Jehovah's Witnesses, who refuse to be conscripted and who are, therefore, sentenced to successive terms of imprisonment until they are beyond military age. Although AI has worked in the past for these prisoners, the Research Department discontinued work on their behalf at the request of the Jehovah's Witnesses themselves, for the period of the military regime.
The most recent sentences were passed after the men concerned refused to bear arms during the general mobilization at the time of the crisis over Cyprus. They received extremely heavy sentences of between 8 and 20 years, but recent information is that these sentences are being substantially reduced on appeal. In a letter to the Greek Prime Minister on 17 September 1974, the Secretary General asked him to "...give your earliest attention to ensuring that provision is made in Greek law for conscientious objection..."
AI groups are working for the release of 96 Jehovah's Witnesses in Greece.
