People's Republic of China
A newly-appointed researcher has been examining in detail material gathered by the Research Department on political imprisonment and reform-through-labour in the People's Republic of China.
Although fragmentary, some information is now available on the law and judicial system in China. In particular, an interview between Gerd Ruge, Peking correspondent of the West German newspaper Die Welt, and members of the Kwangtung Institute of Law and Political Science, provided detailed information on the structure of the courts in the country and the application of penalties. (Mr Ruge was a founder member of Amnesty International's German Section and a former member of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee.)
As reported in the interview, which took place in May 1974, "the principles
87
on which the court's work are based are Party policy and the law of the State". Although the country has no published code, there are regulations covering special penalties, such as "regulations concerning penalties against counterrevolutionaries". High, middle and lower courts are established at different local levels of authority, but important cases, especially when the death sentence is involved, are brought up before the Supreme Court.
The normal legal procedure allows the accused to make one appeal, although if he is "not convinced after the second trial, he must observe the decision and go where he is sent, but he can still appeal to the next court up". The function of public prosecutor does not exist any longer. The role of defence lawyer has also been abolished in the last few years, but the accused "has the full right" to defend himself or to "ask a kinsman...or people from the institution to which he belongs to speak for him". There still remain special courts to deal with particular cases, such as military courts, courts in mining areas and railroad courts.
Regarding the death penalty, it was stated that "extremely few criminals are sentenced to death...Although some criminals have committed monstrous crimes, the anger of the masses can be appeased by sending them to reform farms." In spite of the maintenance of ordinary prisons, especially in large cities, it is now thought that most prisoners spend their term of imprisonment working in farms or factories. Some of these production units have only prisoners as workers-falling therefore within the category of "labour camps"—whereas some others employ free workers as well as prisoners. This has been substantiated by the first autobiographical account of life in Chinese labour camps by Bao Ruo-wang, a French national released in 1964, when France and the People's Republic of China established diplomatic relations, after seven years in detention as a "counter-revolutionary".
According to Mr Bao's account, prisoners in Peking's prisons and in the labour camps of the northeast were generally well-treated by the guards and administration. Intense political re-education was part of daily routine, and the completion of imprisonment depended in various ways on the "political attitude" of the prisoners. The prison diet varied. There were times when the food provided was extremely deficient; Bao comments that this coincided with two years of famine conditions affecting the whole country.
