Tanzania
Amnesty International groups continued to handle more than 60 adoption and investigation cases in Tanzania, both on the mainland and on the offshore islands of Zanzibar and Pemba. These prisoners include individuals sentenced to death or to long prison terms at a trial which culminated on Zanzibar in May 1974, and which stemmed from arrests made after the assassination of Zanzibar! President Sheikh Abeid Karume in April 1972.
In May 1974 AI appealed to President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania to ensure that the death sentences which had been passed at the Zanzibar trial would not be carried out. Meanwhile, the convicted men are carrying their appeals against conviction and sentence to the High Court in Zanzibar, and ultimately to President Aboud Jumbe (President Karume's successor) who has the final decision on the matter.
A number of the accused who were tried in the Zanzibar treason trial between May 1973 and May 1974 are in fact in detention on mainland Tanzania, the government having refused to return them to Zanzibar for trial in view of the lack of guarantees that the proceedings would be fair. In December 1974, 10 long-term detainees were released by the Tanzanian authorities, including five persons who had been held since the killing of Sheikh Abeid Karume but who had been acquitted in absentia by the Zanzibar court. Fourteen others allegedly involved in the Karume assassination plot remain in detention on the mainland. They include Abdul Rahman Babu, the former Tanzanian Minister for Economic Affairs and Development Planning, who was sentenced to death by the Zanzibar court in May 1974.
Prisons in Dar es Salaam, the Tanzanian capital, and in the mainland towns of Tabora, Mwanza, and Tanga, hold an unknown number of untried prisoners detained under the provisions of the Preventive Detention Act (1962). These prisoners include relatives of former Tanzanian cabinet minister Oscar Kambona, now in self-imposed exile; refugees from other African states who have become suspect in the eyes of the Tanzanian authorities; and Tanzanians suspected of subversion or other crimes. Individuals among them are adopted as soon as the Research Department has sufficient data on them.
Al-adopted prisoners on mainland Tanzania were released in presidential amnesties in December 1974 and April 1975.
During the year the authorities on Zanzibar showed a curiously ambivalent
57
attitude towards the imposition of the death sentence for the crime of smuggUng cloves, the island's main cash crop. In August 1974 President Jumbe pardoned 15 clove smugglers who had been caught in 1972 and subsequently sentenced to death. But in March 1975 four people were sentenced to death for clove smuggling after pleading guilty in the Zanzibar High Court. The sentences have yet to be carried out at the time of writing (May 1975).
An AI adoption group in Denmark continued to handle the case of Nasreen Mohammed Hussein, a Zanzibari woman of Persian descent who was abducted and forcibly married in September 1970 on the orders of the ruling Revolutionary Council. In November 1974 a group of women members of the Danish Parliament appealed to Presidents Jumbe and Nyerere to speed her release.
