India
The largest number of poUtical prisoners in India remain detained in West Bengal. Following the hunger strike of 46 political prisoners demanding improvements in prison conditions. Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote on 14 June 1974 to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India and the Chief Minister of West Bengal, Siddharta Sankar Ray, presenting a report on the treatment and detention conditions of political prisoners in the State. When no response was received to this report, nor to any of the earlier letters AI had sent to the Indian government on the subject, the report was published on 16 September 1974.
In this Report on Prison Conditions in West Bengal, AI, following its normal policy of not condoning acts of violence, expressed its concern about the large numbers of political prisoners detained without trial. These are estimated at between 15,000 and 20,000, some of whom have been so detained for up to five years. Most of the prisoners are alleged to be members of the Communist Party of India (Marixst-Leninist), commonly known as "Naxalites", others are members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist). Some are detained under preventive detention laws in force since the state of emergency declared in 1971 (such as the Maintenance of Internal Security Act and the Defence of India Rules), but most are "under trial" prisoners, charged with specific criminal offences.
Prfsoners live in extremely overcrowded conditions, which may well have contributed to the deaths of 88 prisoners (reportedly while trying to escape) during the period December 1970- January 1972. The report further listed the use of bar fetters on prisoners, sometimes for periods of up to two years, and insufficient hygienic and medical facilities, as well as the use of torture during police interrogation.
AI submitted a number of recommendations with the report, suggesting that the government confine itself to prosecuting only those against whom there is evidence that they committed criminal offences, and that all such prisoners be brought to trid without further delay or, alternatively, be released if no
90
trial is possible within three months. In accordance with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, AI also made a number of specific recommendations regarding the improvement of prison conditions. AI asked the Indian government to investigate any allegations of torture which may come to its attention, and that an independent inquiry be made into the many prison incidents which result in the deaths of prisoners.
In its reaction to the report, the Indian government only seriously contested the numbers of political prisoners estimated by AI, maintaining that 1,609 prisoners were held in West Bengal in connection with "extremist activities". However, an investigation made by The Times of India on 30 September 1974 explained the difference in numbers by the fact that political prisoners, when arrested for alleged criminal offences, are not entitled to the special classification for political prisoners-provided for in the 1956 jail code rules.
The state of serious overcrowding in West Bengal prisons and the inadequate medical facilities was subsequently confirmed by the West Bengal Jail Code Revision Committee, set up by the present government in 1972, and which presented its report in February 1974. On page 32 of the report, the committee states: "The immediate problem that challenges the administrators is to devise effective means of reducing the jail population in the bigger interest of the community itself." The committee made its recommendations when the total prison population in West Bengal was 20,000. In September 1974, it had risen to 24,000.
The Times of India, the Hindustan Times and the Indian Express, in reacting to the AI report, were among the leading papers which requested in their editorials that prisoners detained under the Defence of India Rules and the Maintenance of Internal Security Act be brought to trial without further delay, and that an impartial inquiry be instituted to investigate the allegations of torture. Although AI has received reliable reports since then stating that the number of political prisoners in the state has been reduced to to some 8,000, because of the releases of many "under trial" prisoners on bail, the Indian government has not—as far as AI is aware—taken positive steps to investigate any allegations made in the report.
Mr Ennals, while attending the AI Regional Conference in New Delhi (see chapter on Membership) met the Indian Home Secretary N.K. Mukarji, as well as other officials in the Home Ministry. During his discussions, Mr Ennals stressed the need fc«- an independent investigation into prison conditions in West Bengal and also raised the issue of the continuation of preventive detention laws in force since the declaration of a state of emergency in 1971.
The most important of these laws, the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, has over the past year been used to detain political opponents, members of trade union movements, as well as participants in widespread disobedience movements led by Jayaprakash Narayan. Since detention of such prisoners usually is for only a short time, AI has not taken up their cases on an individual basis. The powers of preventive detention under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act were enlarged by a Presidential Order of 16 November 1974 in a move against "economic offenders". The order also removed the right of appeal to the courts against illegal detention, as guaranteed in Part 3 of the Indian Constitution.
As far as AI can assess, these enlarged powers of arrest and detention have not
91
been used to detain political prisoners. But whereas the continuation of the state of emergency and the preventive detention legislation is being increasingly questioned within India, the government introduced on 8 May 1975 a bill in ParHament increasing the period of detention without trial to two years, not subject to review by an advisory board as provided for in article 22 of the constitution.
AI over the past year has taken further steps to ensure the early release of some Pakistani nationals who fled from East Bengal during the Bangladesh war. One of them, Iftikar Mahmood Randhawa, was released shortly after he was featured in AI's May 1974 Prisoners of the Month Campaign.
AI Secretary General Martin Ennals raised the issue of capital punishment for the first time with the Indian government when he made a special appeal on 22 November 1974 on behalf of Kista Gowd and Bhoomaiah, two peasants from Bihar and members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), who had been sentenced to death in January 1972 and are awaiting execution.
