Namibia
A series of much publicized human rights violations focused international attention on the Namibian situation during the latter half of 1974 and increased pressure for the withdrawal of the South African administration in accordance with the 1966 United Nations' decision to terminate South Africa's mandate over the country.
In June 1974, Ezriel Taapopi and Josef Kashea, two young officials of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), who had been detained some months before, were charged with offences under the Terrorism Act and put on summary trial in Windhoek. In a joint mission with the Washington-based Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Amnesty Intemational sent British lawyer Cedric Thomberry to observe the trial and report on the situation of other political detainees in Namibia.
Both the accused were ultimately convicted but received minimum sentences, and other SWAPO leaders who had been detained were then charged with less
50
serious, even trivial, offences. Thomas Komati, who had been held in solitary confinement for almost six months, was eventually prosecuted for having scratched political slogans on the walls of his cell. Like all the SWAPO leaders who had been detained, Mr Komati alleged that he had been tortured at the hands of the South African police.
The situation in Namibia, and particularly in Ovamboland, remained tense throughout the year. The public flogging of SWAPO supporters by the South African appointed Ovambo chiefs, which had aroused a storm of international protest, was gradually suspended and finally forbidden by a ruling of the Appellate Division of the South African Supreme Court in February 1975. AI's Campaign for the Abolition of Torture published a selection of affidavits written by some of the victims of the floggings in mid-1974, and in August 1974, AI submitted a communication to UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim "concerning a consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights perpetrated by the government of South Africa upon inhabitants of Namibia". However, one factor which also influenced the decline of public flogging in Ovamboland was the mass exodus of SWAPO supporters which occurred in the last months of 1974: an estitnated 3,000 people left Namibia and sought refuge in Zambia.
