Mexico
In March 1975, the Chairman of the International Executive Committee, Dirk Börner, visited Mexico and introduced Amnesty International and its work to the Mexican government. In an interview at the Ministry of Government, Mr Börner discussed the international scope and humanitarian aims of AI's work and its concerns in Mexico, including the prevention of torture. The basis for future relations between AI and the Mexican government was established.
Allegations of torture received by AI in the past year relate closely to the de facto absence of procedural guarantees in both common and political cases. All torture allegations received by AI have referred to the periods immediately following detention but prior to formal arraignment before a judge. Allegations describe systematic beatings, near drowning and electric shocks. They have been made by prisoners held for alleged guerrilla activities, students and intellectuals held for brief periods and young North Americans imprisoned on narcotics charges. AI's Campaign for the Abolition of Torture is currently reviewing this information.
On 30 December 1974,65-year old Hilario Moreno, a militant of the legal
75
Mexican Communist Party, was reported by his friends to have disappeared. A week later the police acknowledged his detention, alleging that he had hanged himself while awaiting arraignment. Newspapers openly attributed the death to maltreatment in police custody.
In late March 1975, AI was informed of the "disappearance" of two members of a left wing political research and study group in Mexico City. Mexican authorities denied they were in police custody. Dirk Börner immediately cabled the Mexican authorities asking that all necessary efforts be made to locate the missing persons and to ensure respect for their rights under the law. A letter from Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale to President Luis Ecneverria further expressed AI's concern over the ca^e in the light of similar disappearances, and especially that of Hilario Moreno. A week afterward, the office of the Federal Prosecutor General announced that the two disappeared persons were detained by the Federal Security Police. Shortly afterwards they were conditionally released.
"Disappearances" were the major subject of AI's appeals on Mexico in the past year. As illustrated by the Hilario Moreno case, the period immediately following detention is the most critical. National sections were asked to inquire into reported disappearances in which the victims were believed to be in the custody of government security agencies.
During the past year, AI has received considerable information on political imprisonment in Mexico. In contrast to the situation in the late 1960s, when nonviolent student dissenters received long prison sentences, the current pattern is of short-term detention designed to intimidate, rather than to precede legal proceedings. The subjects are students, members of Mexico's tiny legal leftwing political parties, peasant leaders and leftwing journalists.
These detentions appear to relate to no specific crimes, but rather to be for the purposes of intimidation and general interrogation: release has generally followed shortly after interrogation and before judicial authorities are advised. While there are few long-term prisoners that are visibly prisoners of conscience, AI is deeply concerned over evidence of a generalized disregard in all pohtical cases for basic rights pertaining to detention, interrogation and trial procedures.
In April 1975, AI Legal Adviser Nigel S. Rodley wrote to the Governor of the Mexican state of Sinaloa, requesting information on the continued detention of more than 50 students of the autonomous University of Sinaloa, held without trial since January 1974. According to Mexican law, no prisoner can be held for more than one year without trial.
