Yugoslavia
At present Amnesty International groups are working on more than 50 adoption and investigation cases in Yugoslavia and the Research Department has several dozen more under preliminary investigation. The department has written new background material on the country for AI groups whose work has been helped by the excellent efforts of the Austrian Section's Coordination Group on Yugoslavia. Since there are no published official statistics for the number of political prisoners in Yugoslavia, AI can only refer to one unpublished official source. This gives the total figure of persons charged in Yugoslavia in 1973 with crimes "against the State and Nation" as 1,849, of whom 672 were sentenced.
Since 1974, punishment of dissidents of different beliefs has markedly increased, reflecting the trend for tighter security in Yugoslavia. The effort to re-establish political and ideological discipline has been noticeable in all spheres of life.
In September 1974, a group of 32 "Cominformists" (pro-Soviet communists opposed to President Tito's independent policy) were jailed for a total of 200 years after a secret trial in Montenegro. Individual sentences ranged from 2 to 14 years. This was followed in March 1975 by the arrest of another allegedly pro-Soviet group in the Bosnian town of Tuzla.
In October 1974, Dr Djuro Djurovic, aged 74 and ill, was sentenced in Belgrade to 5 years imprisonment, and his co-defendant, Mrs Zagorka Kojic-Stojanovic, received a sentence of 3 years' rigorous imprisonment, for their alleged connections with emigre organizations. Dr Djurovic, who spent 17 years in prison after 1945 for his wartime association with the Cetniks (a rival resistance movement to Tito's partisans), appealed against the sentence, but the appeal hearing has not yet taken place. AI, which adopted Dr Djurovic,
123
sent a prominent Dutch lawyer, Professor Frits Ruter from the University of Amsterdam, to observe his trial in Belgrade.
In January 1975 about 100 youi^ Albanians were arrested in Pristina, capital of the autonomous privince of Kosovo. Five Albanians received sentences of 3 to 9 years on "anti-Yugoslav" charges.
In mid-February 1975, after a three-month secret trial in the Dalmatian town of Zadar, 15 Croatians were given sentences ranging from 18 months to 13 years for alleged subversive activities. Two more groups of students are said to be held incommunicado in the Croatian capital Zagreb. No specific information about them reached the outside world because the poHce, at the time of writing, had not allowed either their parents or their lawyers to visit them.
In October 1974 the leading dissident writer Mihajlo Mihajlov was arrested. His trial, after being postponed twice, took place at the end of February 1975 in Novi Sad. It was attended on behalf of AI by Professor Riiter and by Dr Broekmeyer. Mr Mihajlov was found guilty of "hostile propaganda" and sentenced under article 118 of the Yugoslav Penal Code to 7 years' imprisonment and to 4 years' ban on publishing anything after his release. Mr Mihajlov refused to appeal against the sentence on political grounds.
Soon after the trial, both defence lawyers were threatened with suspension and possible prosecution; neither threat was carried out. Lawyer Kovacevic had referred in his final plea to President Tito's speech of 25 February, made while the trial was in progress, and which attacked Mr. Mihajlov. The lawyer recalled the first Serbian Codex from the 14th century in which Tzar Dusan had admonished judges that they should not fear the Tzar but judge only in accordance with the law. Lawyer Barovic's son, then in his final year of law studies, was suddenly called up for military service despite the fact that this was against the Yugoslav National Service Law.
Professor Riiter's trial reports significantly contributed to AFs knowledge about the judicial and penal system in Yugoslavia. In his assessment of the I>jurovic trial, Professor Ruter concluded that Dr Djurovic's conviction was a foregone conclusion for poHtical reasons even before the trial started; that the defence lawyers were denied those legal rights guaranteed under Yugoslav law; that the court had shown itself prejudiced against the accused; that important graphological testimony was inadequate; and that insufficient account was taken of Dr Djurovic's state of health. The report was sent to the Yugoslav authorities and also to a number of European political leaders.
There have also been signs of increased pressure on the Roman Catholic Church particulariy in Croatia and Slovenia, resulting in the confiscation of several issues of the Catholic periodicals Glas Koncila and Druzina, which defended religious freedom against discriminatory practices in Yugoslavia.
The prolonged campaign against unorthodox Marxists reached its peak in January when eight dissident teachers from the Philosophy Facuhy in Belgrade were dismissed from their posts and the well-known philosophy journals Praxis and Filozofija were banned from circulation. Further intimidation followed against philosophy teachers at Ljubljana and Split universities. This move against nonconformist thinkers was preceded earlier in 1974 by persecution of students who had taken part in drafting a resolution in support of the Praxis
124
group. The students included Vladimir Palancanin from Belgrade, tried in June 1974, and a group of six students tried in Ljubljana in September 1974. All seven received prison sentences of 10 months and were immediately adopted by AL
