Chile
On 10 September 1974, the eve of the first anniversary of the overthrow of the government of President Salvador Allende Gossens, Amnesty International published an 80-page detailed report on violations of human rights in Chile. A news conference lauhching the report was held at the United Nations in New York. The report was based on the material gathered by an AI mission in November 1973 and was subsequently updated with the help of the enormous volume of material, including individual cases, received by the Research
67
> 'miormr ^rnftmu
Department in the intervening period.
The report was rejected in its entirety by the Chilean government, but the situation it describes has been only too fully corroborated from other sources. Among the many missions which were sent to Chile by international bodies of impeccable repute, one need only mention the International Labour Organization (ILO), the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States.
All these bodies observed and reported continuing violations of human rights in every area of civil liberties. On 6 November 1974, the United Nations General Assembly made an urgent appeal to Chile "to restore basic human rights and fundamental freedoms". In February 1975, the UN Economic and Social Council Commission on Human Rights, meeting in Geneva, set up an ad hoc working group of five members "to inquire into the present situation of human rights in Chile". This is the first case of the commission undertaking an investigation into the internal situation of a UN member country outside southern Africa.
The cumulative effect of so many adverse reports from respected international bodies has been considerable. The Chilean government pubUcly declared that missions would not be welcome unless they had first visited the Soviet Union and the Republic of Cuba.
In addition to submitting evidence to bodies as varied as the UN Human Rights Commission and the International Commission of Inquiry in Mexico City, AI has briefed the many distinguished jurists, academics and others who have undertaken individual missions of inquiry. Their aims have varied from observing the judicial process to investigating the treatment of different sectors of Chilean society; but almost without exception, their findings have corroborated the conclusions of the research staff in the International Secretariat.
AI has continued its program of adoption and investigation of prisoners detained under the state of siege, and groups are now working on over 300 cases. In an attempt to assist the enormous numbers of detainees whose cases could not be included in an adoption program-many of whom had no charges preferred against them even after 18 months' detention-AI decided to launch a special campaign. Lists of detained doctors, journalists, lawyers, actors, trade unionists, etc., were sent to professional or trade associations which were asked to try to secure elementary legal and civil rights for them.
Even when prisoners are brought to trial, the procedures are anything but adequate. In June 1974, a German federal judge, Dr Horst Woesner, attended the trial of 57 air force officers and 10 civilians. In a letter to President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, based on Dr Woesner's report, Secretary General Martin Ennals
68
wrote that "the demands of the military prosecution were based on confessions extracted under torture and on prior interrogations by military personnel and intelligence officers, without the participation of defence lawyers " and that "the decision of the military prosecution that a state of internal war existed in Chile before 11 September 1973 is a violation of the principle of the non-retroactive nature of penal legislation". The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights described the judicial process in Chile as "a massive violation of the guarantees of due process of law". In the particular trial referred to, the death penalty was passed on four defendants, and it was only one of many where intemational concern, including action by AI, preceded the commutation of the sentence.
In September 1974, General Pinochet declared that the state of war was over, but instead of a return to normal legal standards, a state of siege "for internal defence" was declared, with the retention of the military tribunals which have been responsible for the worst legal excesses of the present regime. The state of siege was renewed in March 1975 for a further six-month period.
A new security code was decreed on 8 May 1975. While not protecting the legal rights of detainees, it increased from 48 hours to five days the period during which detainees could be held for interrogation, without official legal obligation to inform their relatives. Although there is overwhelming evidence that the 48-hour rule was rarely obeyed, this represents a distinct and official deterioration in the position of political prisoners. The judicial safeguard oí habeas corpus has been rendered almost totally ineffective by the willingness of the magistrates to accept replies from the minister concerned that the person was detained by virtue of the powers conferred by the state of siege, and the consequent failure of the magistrates to insist on the person being produced in court.
It is during this period between detention and recognition of the prisoner as a detainee that the worst instances of torture take place. This is corroborated both by the report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and by innumerable written affidavits, eyewitness reports and personal testimonials. The problem of torture and disappearances which at the middle of 1974 seemed to be receding slightly, has been sharply re-defined with the establishment in June of a new agency, the Dirección de Investigación Nacional (DINA), to coordinate the intelligence activities of all four services. It is responsible solely to the ruling military junta. Consequently, AI sections and groups have been asked to act swiftly and frequently in attempts to locate individual detainees, inform the authorities of international concern and achieve formal recognition of the prisoner's status in a recognized detention camp.
A paltry number of prisoners have been released during the year under different amnesties. In many cases, despite being detained for considerable periods, the people released have never been charged, tried or sentenced, and the "opportunity of exile" offered to some appears unjust. In cases where the released detainees remain in Chile, no form of legal redress seems available.
