Switzerland
Hans Schuppli, Amnesty International's third and last adopted conscientious objector in Switzeriand, was released in 1974 after 3 months' imprisonment. But Swiss law is unchanged: 545 conscientious objectors were convicted in 1974-75, and AI is investigating new cases.
Turkey
In June 1974, Amnesty International received new reports that political prisoners in Turkey had been ill-treated. The reports related to prisoners held at the Mamak Military Prison in Ankara and allegations were made that some prisoners had suffered serious injuries as a result of being beaten while they were handcuffed. Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to the then Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, naming the people allegedly responsible for the attacks and appealing for an official investigation.
118
In July 1974, the Turkish Constitutional Court ruled that political prisoners should be included in the general amnesty which had been announced in May 1974, and as a result all prisoners adopted by AI in Turkey were released. Thomas Hammarberg, a member of AI's International Executive Committee, and Anne Burley of the Research Department were in Turkey at the time of the releases and were able to meet many of AI's former adopted prisoners. They also had an interview with Turkish Minister of Justice Sevket Kazan, with whom they discussed various matters of concern to AI, including the retention of articles 141 and 142 of the Turkish Penal Code, under which all of AI's adopted prisoners had been charged.
Further imprisonments of people charged under articles 141 and 142 have taken place since the amnesty and in two cases, those of Demir Kugukaydin and Diindar Erenler, publisher and editor of a weekly paper called Kivilcim, sentences of 40 years 6 months were imposed for allegedly propagating communism and forming a communist organization. The sentences were subsequently reduced to 36 years' imprisonment to be followed by 13 years 6 months exile, because this is the maximum term of imprisonment allowed under Turkish law. Both men have been adopted by AI groups as have the accountant and distributor of Kivilcim, who were also imprisoned, but received lighter sentences.
In March 1975, 26 people connected with the publication of a magazine called Aydinlik were brought to trial, accused of "establishing a secret organization aimed at establishing the domination of a social class over other social classes" (Article 141). On 7 March Mr Ennals wrote to the new Prime Minister, Sadi Irmak, to ask that an official investigation be made into the beating of a 15-year old boy, Celal Kagmaz, who was taken into custody by the police at the Aydinlik offices and was reported to have been so badly beaten that he was under treatment at the Bakirkdy Mental Hospital. The policemen allegedly responsible for beating the boy were named in the letter.
The four prisoners mentioned above are the only cases at present adopted by AI in Turkey, but others are being investigated by the Research Department, including those of the Aydinlik group. The exact number of political prisoners in Turkey is not known. Some people remained in prison after the amnesty because they had been involved in offences not covered by the amnesty or because of the length of their sentences. Some others who have been arrested since July 1974 have already been referred to, but many arrests have been reported in connection with student disturbances, and it is not known how many of these people are still held.
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
The number of Amnesty International-adopted Soviet prisoners of conscience remains around 350. These are individuals arrested for religious activity, activities in defence of human rights in general, nationalist activity or expression, or attempts to leave the country. As in the past, most adopted prisoners have been convicted under Soviet laws which specifically restrict the exercise of fundamental human rights: freedom of speech, of assembly, of worship, etc. Most adopted prisoners are confined to corrective labour colonies. Those held in prisons or in psychiatric hospitals represent (together) around 15% of the total.
119
While many categories of prisoners of conscience have remained numerically constant, the numbers of adopted Lithuanian and Armenian prisoners have increased considerably. A major development (and a welcome one) in the opposite direction occurred in the autumn of 1974 when Soviet authorities revealed that 60 dissident Baptist prisoners, most of them AI adoptees, had been released before the expiry of their sentences. AI has since learned the names of a number of these Baptists.
However, a number of other dissident Baptists have been arrested or tried since the autumn of 1974, the best known being Pastor Georgy Vins, who was sentenced in January 1975 to 5 years' imprisonment, followed by 5 years' internal exile. In October 1974 seven Baptists were arrested in Latvia for operating a clandestine printing press which produced Bibles and other religious literature, and a number of other dissident Baptists have been imprisoned in connection with their religious activities.
AI took formal action to help a number of prisoners arrested within the past year. Unsuccessful attempts were made to send observers to the trials of Georgy Vins (January 1975) and Vladimir Maramzin (February 1975). In December 1974 Secretary General Martin Ennals cabled R. A. Rudenko, Procurator General of the USSR, urging a fair trial for Mikhail Shtern, a Jewish doctor accused of certain kinds of malpractice after members of his family had requested permission to emigrate.
National sections took part in urgent action campaigns on behalf of a number of prisoners, including Georgy Vins, Vladimir Maramzin, Valentyn Moroz, Leonid Plyushch, Anatoly Marchenko and two detained members of AI's Moscow group, Sergei Kovalyov and Andrei Tverdokhlebov (see below).
In September 1974, the International Executive Committee decided to recognize the formation of an AI group in Moscow—the first-ever AI adoption group in the USSR. The group was assigned adoption cases from Spain, Yugoslavia and Sri Lanka. However its incoming AI mail was stopped almost from the group's inception.
In November and December 1974 several group members were subject to searches, and at the end of 1974 group member Sergei Kovalyov was arrested, ostensibly in connection with his domestic human rights activity rather than as a result of his AI work. In April 1975 two other members, Andrei Tverdokhlebov and Mykola Rudenko, were arrested. Mr Rudenko was later released provisionally, but Mr Tverdokhlebov has been formally charged with "disseminating fabrications known to be false which defame the Soviet state and social system".
Numerous reports emanating from the USSR indicate that over the past five years, prison and colony conditions have become more severe, particularly for political prisoners. Discipline has become more rigorous and punishments more arbitrary. As before, the life of Soviet prisoners is characterized by chronic malnutrition, medical neglect and overwork. One adopted prisoners, the Buddhist scholar Bidya Dandaron, died on October 1974, apparently as a consequence of mistreatment and medical neglect.
Hunger striking has become a widespread form of protest by Soviet prisoners. Some hunger strikes are carried out by lone individuals, Valentyn Moroz being the most prominent example. Mr Moroz fasted for almost five months in an
120
effort to obtain transfer from Vladimir prison. He eventually ended his action in November 1974 after the prison administration promised to lodge him with a pohtical prisoner rather than with criminals or in solitary confinement. National sections undertook a vigorous campaign in support of Mr Moroz. Other hunger strikes are carried on by large groups of political prisoners.
Because many of the most famous persons confined to psychiatric hospitals on account of their political or religious views had been released by 1974, there was a temporary hope that the Soviet authorities had restricted this practice. However, a number of reports emanating from the USSR in late 1974 and early 1975 (particularly in A Chronicle of Current Events) described recent instances. It appears that Soviet psychiatry is still being abused for political purposes on a regular basis.
The most well-documented current case is that of Leonid Plyushch, who has for almost two years been subjected to "treatment" with drugs in the Dniepropetrovsk special psychiatric hospital. In April 1975, on the initiative of AI's French Section and in cooperation with the International Committee of Mathematicians in Defence of Leonid Plyushch, AI sponsored an International Day for this prisoner.
AI has protested against every death sentence passed in the USSR which has come to its attention. In Soviet law the death penalty can be applied for a wide range of offences, including certain kinds of economic crimes. A number of national sections acted with particular vigour on behalf of Mikhail Leviev, a Moscow Jew sentenced to death after being convicted of large-scale misappropriation of state property.
On 16 May 1975, the Soviet Union announced a partial amnesty for women prisoners to mark International Women's Year. The amnesty appHed to women and minors serving sentences of up to 5 years, and also to mothers of minority-age children, expectant mothers, women over 55 years of age and invalids, regardless of the length of their sentence. It cut by half the remaining terms of women serving sentences of more than 5 years.
The amnesty did not apply to those women prisoners serving sentences for "especially dangerous crimes against the State", nor to "especially dangerous recidivists". Ten of AI's adopted women prisoners have been sentenced for "especially dangerous crimes against the State", and in a letter to President Nikolai Podgorny, Secretary General Martin Ennals welcomed the amnesty but expressed the hope that it be extended to include these 10 women. He also asked for confirmation that eight adopted prisoners, who should have benefited from the amnesty, had in fact been released.
AI's work for Soviet prisoners of conscience over the past year has received greater media publicity than in the past. At the same time, more groups have obtained replies from some of the Soviet authorities to whom they have written.
