Israel
During the past year, Amnesty International raised many individual cases of imprisonment in Israel in letters to the Attorney General. In November 1974, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin expressing AI's concern regarding two aspects of the administration of the West Bank territory by the Israeli authorities: deportation and administrative detention. In his letter the Secretary General urged upon the Israeli government "the termination by the administering authorities of the practice of deporting residents of the administered territories..."and appealed to them to permit "the return of those who have been so deported". Similariy, the Israeli government was requested to give urgent consideration to the possibility of suspending the practice of administrative detention.
Allegations of torture relating to administrative detainees were received following the arrest of several hundred Arabs from the West Bank who were
131

ß
S£ PROHIBE I
PEN5/IR EN VQZ ALTA


-S
'Thinking Aloud Prohibited'
alleged to be members of the Palestine National Front. In October 1974, a three-man mission, consisting of two Scandinavian lawyers and a Dutch doctor, travelled to Israel and Syria to investigate allegations that prisoners of war in both countries had been ill-treated during and following the October 1973 war (see chapter on Campaign for the Abolition of Torture).
The delegates were also asked to investigate all allegations concerning the torture of political prisoners in Israel and Syria which had been received by Al, but in neither country were they allowed the access to poUtical prisoners that would have enabled them to carry out this part of their mission. Consequently, no allegations of torture of civilian prisoners in Israel have been subjected to independent investigation during the past year and it is therefore not possible for AI to comment on their validity.
AI groups are investigating the cases of 50 men originally held under administrative detention orders, but in a few of these cases the men have since been brought to trial and sentenced. Three men whose cases were being investigated were deported to Lebanon. In addition, an AI group is still working on the case of Rami Levneh, an Israeli Jew who was referred to in last year's annual report. His sentence was reduced from 10 years' imprisonment to 4 years by the Supreme Court in July 1974.
There are approximately 2,500 Arabs imprisoned in Israel and the occupied territories for alleged security offences.
132
