Bolivia
Amnesty International has continued its adoption program during the current year. Most of the prisoners under adoption or investigation have been released, although some only on condition that they left the country immediately. In a certain number of cases AI met their travel costs.
Despite administrative changes in Bolivia and the ostensible improvement represented by these releases, serious violations of human rights have continued. Rehable sources supplied evidence of severe torture and physical brutality, prolonged detention without trial, denial of the right of habeas corpus and a lack of legal safeguards for those people arrested for allegedly illegal political activities. In consequence, Secretary General Martin Ennals addressed a memorandum in September 1974 to President Hugo Banzer Suarez. The memorandum was based on information supplied to Judge Lennart Aspegren of the Stockholm Superior Court, Sweden, who had previously carried out a mission to Bolivia. Mr Ennals called for an immediate cessation of such violations, "including illegal arrest, forced exile without due hearing, undue delay in bringing the accused before a competent judge, long periods of incommunicado, torture and other forms of physical and moral violations against detained persons".
AI has worked persistently throughout the year to persuade the Bolivian government either to release prisoners or to put them on trial, since, in some cases, they had been moved from military to civilian jurisdiction and held for periods of up to 3 years. Some of these prisoners have now been released albeit without trial.
64
In November 1974, an alleged attempted coup against the government was defeated. A state of siege was declared and severely repressive measures were decreed: political parties were placed in recession and all political activities within the trade union movement were banned. As a result, numerous trade unionists were detained, and their cases were taken up by AI.
The main target for these measures appeared to be the trade union movement and, following the introduction of a system of compulsory civil service, a number of trade unionists were nominated as labour coordinators throughout the country. Their task was to ensure that management and labour worked together on a non-poHtical basis. Certain trade union leaders refused these posts including Victor Lopez Arias, Secretary General of the Bolivian Miners' Federation, who is still under arrest at the time of writing.
When confirmation of these arrests was received by AI, Martin Ennals wrote to President Banzer expressing grave concern over the nature of the new legislation and the number of arrests that had taken place during the preceding month. At the same time, AI circulated a memorandum to a number of intemational labour federations, documenting the arrests of trade unionists and the persistent violations of human rights, particularly that of labour freedom.
The Bolivian Committee for Justice and Peace (CJP) intervened shortly afterwards and the acting president. Father Eric de Wasseige, a Belgian citizen, was arrested and given 24 hours to leave the country.
However, after the period had expired and as a result of the most vigorous protests from AI and other international organizations, the order was suspended. But in March 1975, Father de Wasseige and another priest were summarily arrested and expelled from Bolivia for allegedly handUng subversive literature. This is believed to be a reference to a publication by the CJP which documented the violent deaths of a large number of peasants in the Cochabamba valley, while they were protesting about the increase in food prices which had taken place in January and February.
To celebrate Easter, the Minister of the Interior announced a partial amnesty for 27 political prisoners. This was welcomed by the Committee for Justice and Peace, which then partially recessed its work for political prisoners.
AI has continued to press the Bolivian government either to release or bring to trial detained people. Money has also been allocated towards the expenses of defence lawyers, if and when the trials should take place, and aid and the supplying of relief monies to help the families and improve the situation of political detainees has continued.
