Indonesia
More than 55,000 political prisoners, all detained without charge or trial since 1965, are now in their 10th year in prison.Their position is increasingly desperate because despite the passage of many years, the government's policy towards them has remained essentially unchanged. In the past year the government has attempted to define away the problem by insisting that there are no political prisoners in Indonesia and by re-naming political prisons as "rehabilitation centers". Official estimates continued to be given for the number of prisoners detained and these have varied between 20,000 and 35,000.
An Amnesty International delegation from Australia led by Richard McGarvie, Chairman of the Victoria Bar Council, and including Senator Peter Baume, Liberal Member of Parliament, Reverend Neil Gilmore, President of the Australian Council of Churches, and Mrs Leonore Ryan of AI's Victoria Section, arrived in Jakarta in January 1975. They were joined by the Head of Asian Research at the International Secretariat, Wen-hsien Huang. Regrettably Indonesian ministers and officials who were directly concerned with political imprisonment refused or were not able to meet the delegation to discuss the problem of imprisonment. The delegation therefore was unable to obtain from any ministry or department a statement of the goverrmient's view of the problem, nor was it possible to reconcile the government's claims regarding the total number of people detained with the figures compiled by independent observers.
Whereas the Indonesian government statistics in the last years have varied around 30,000, several reliable observers put the total number of prisoners held at nearer 100,000. As more is known about the problem it has become evident that there are large numbers of political prisoners held outside recognized prison institutions. Throughout the many islands of the republic, in every town that serves as an administrative center, political prisoners are to be found, often in very small prisons that hold no more than between 10 to 20 detainees, or in military garrisons where the prisoners are used as unpaid labour in conditions that can be described as enforced serfdom.
There are an estimated 1,000 women political prisoners. The husbands of many of the married prisoners are themselves detained, and their children have
92

u.

been practically orphaned for 10 years. In April 1975, the International Secretariat and coordination groups publicized the special plight of women prisoners in a campaign centered around Kartini Day, which is officially celebrated in Indonesia as Women's Day to commemorate a famous national heroine. In the context of International Women's Year, Indonesia is prominent as the country with probably the largest number of women political prisoners.
Approaches were made from the International Secretariat and from national sections to the member states of the Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia, a consortium of 13 governments which has provided extensive development aid to Indonesia since 1967. It was emphasized to the member governments that the Indonesian authorities have not responded to the many discreet appeals in the past to improve the conditions for prisoners, to make better provision for fair trials and to release all those held without trial.
Although the main reason given by the government continues to be that the 1965 prisoners constitute a subversive communist threat if released—despite contrary evidence relating to the majority of those prisoners—it is apparent from official policy regarding detention of others held in connection with the January 1974 events that its overall policy has identical effect for those whom the government cannot, and does not, claim to be communist.
Of the more than 700 people arrested in January 1974, about 40 are still in prison without trial. Although less than 10 were released in early 1975, an official spokesman stated that they could be re-arrested at any time. Moreover, although detention without trial under the Subversion Law of 1963 is limited to one year, the official view is that at the expiry of that year, all that is required by the authorities to continue holding the prisoner is to charge him again under
93
the Subversion Law. This apparently can be done repeatedly.
Despite promises made by leading Indonesian officials to, among others, the Dutch parliamentary mission to Indonesia in September 1974, so far only two of those prisoners detained in January 1974 have been brought to trial. Hariman Siregar, a student leader, was sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment on evidence which indicates no more than that he had expressed disagreement with the government's economic and social development policy. Similarly, in the trial of Sjahrir, the prosecution had asked for a sentence of 16 years, on the basis of evidence which shows that the defendant had merely criticized the government's development policy.
Trids for the 1965 prisoners continue at a slow rate: the nimiber of prisoners who have been brought to trial since 1965 is probably about 700. Despite repeated government promises that the courts would expand to cope with more trials, the annual average is still about 100 cases. In April, four women political prisoners were brought to trial and charged with alleged involvement in the 1965 events. The prosecution has demanded life imprisonment for one of the defendants and 20 years' imprisonment for the others. The prosecution further asked that there should be no reduction in sentences to allow for the nine years the defendants had already stayed in prison. Two of the prisoners are adopted by AI. This is the first time that leading members of the now-banned women's organization Gerwani have been brought to trial.
The permanent "resettlement" of Category B prisoners in labour camps is a stated objective of government policy. In September 1974, Indonesian journalists were again taken to visit the camps on Buru Island, to which some 150 wives and their children have now been transported. Conditions in prison units on the island are known to be very bad, the food allowed to the prisoners is inadequate and medical care is virtually non-existent.
The government in September 1974 stated that, of all the people arrested in connection with the 1965 events, more than 540,000 have been released. By definition, these people belong to the sub-category CI, and this figure of 540,000 is consonant with previous government claims about overall release figures. As early as January 1972 President Suharto had announced that all Category C prisoners had been released. (He said then that there had been 22,000 remaining prisoners belonging to Category C in the preceding year.)
However, Indonesian Prosecutor-General Ali Said told the Dutch parliamentary mission in September 1974 that in fact the government was still, in late 1974, trying to implement the release of Category C prisoners. Apparently the territorial military commanders had been given the power to decide on the implementation of release in phases, and individual commanders varied in doing so. According to the Prosecutor-General, it was possible that one territory had reached its target before another, but he maintained that ultimately in 1975 everyone would certainly have solved this problem.
The claimed overall figures of releases of 540,000 indicates the dimensions of the problem in terms of numbers of people waiting to be released. The government's claims that only 20-35,000 prisoners remain are meant to refer only to prisoners of Categories A and B, since by their own claims, all Category C
94
prisoners have already been released. As it is now officially admitted by the Prosecutor-General that Category C prisoners awaiting release still remain, it is clear that the official total figures very much underestimate the real numbers in prison.
Despite an official announcement last year that "certificates of non-involvement" in the 1965 attempted coup are no longer required, most released prisoners face difficulties in getting official and private employment because they do not possess the certificates, and consequently find it hard to make a living.
AI groups now work for a total of 218 cases. There have been releases, for the first time this year, of AI adopted prisoners from 1965. In January 1975, a longstanding AI adoptee, Sitor Situmorang, the distinguished writer, was released from prison and placed under house arrest. He was one of about 10 former PNI prisoners, all classified as Category B, released in January.
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
In April 1975, President Kim Il-sung said during a visit to Peking that North Korea would not stand by "with arms folded" if revolution came to the Republic of Korea (i.e., South Korea). The cold-war climate which pervades North-South Korean relations has been a particularly serious obstacle to Amnesty International work.
In North Korea, there has been an almost total suppression of information about the "re-education" of political prisoners. Two exceptions to this were the cases of foreigners imprisoned in North Korea—and adopted by AI groups. The Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda was released in September 1974 after 7 years' imprisonment. He had been sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 1967 on political charges. His release is thought to have been the result of high-level, diplomatic initiatives by the Venezuelan government. Another adopted case was that of the French writer and translator Jacques Sedillot, now reported to be released and living in North Korea.
