VENEZUELA
There were further allegations of torture and ill-treatment, in some cases leading to death. Prison conditions remained harsh. At least 29 people were killed by security forces in circumstances suggesting that at least some of them may have been extrajudicially executed. The body of a person who "disappeared" in 1990 was found. Most investigations into reported human rights violations by members of the security forces made little progress.
Economic measures introduced by the government, including a rise in the cost of public transport, prompted widespread protests and demonstrations by students and others. Action by the security forces to suppress the protests, some of which were violent, were increasingly criticized as the number of people killed or injured by the security forces rose.
In July Venezuela ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In August Venezuela ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
As in previous years during widespread social unrest, the security forces arrested student and political leaders by illegal means and held them for short periods. In November the police intelligence agency. Dirección de ¡os Servicios de InteUgencia y Prevención (disip), arrested at least 35 student and political activists, among them former political prisoner Gabriel Puerta Aponte. They were arrested at their homes without a warrant and held for a few hours before being released without charge.
The arbitrary detention, torture and ill-
treatment of alleged criminal suspects continued to be reported. Large numbers of people were arrested in October during police operations in several poor neighbourhoods in Caracas following the killing of two policemen in separate incidents. Police, some reportedly hooded, raided homes without search or arrest warrants and were said to have used unnecessary violence in a number of instances, Some detainees were reportedly tortured, including Yorfán José Escobar Berrios who was arrested by members of the Guardia Nacional. National Guard, and held for five days. They reportedly beat him and walked on his stomach. He was rearrested by the National Guard in December and. according to a complaint presented to the courts, he was subjected to electric shocks, cut with a knife and burned with an iron.
Prison conditions throughout the country continued to be extremely harsh. Serious overcrowding, the arbitrary use of punishment cells, and poor sanitary conditions prompted protests in several prisons. In May a 16-year-old youth died after setting fire to bedding in his cell: he had reportedly been held in a punishment cell for 25 days and had repeatedly asked to be let out. In October at least three prisoners in the Penitenciaría General, General Prison, in San Juan de los Morros died in unclear circiunstances when prison guards moved in to quell protests about overcrowding and ill-treatment.
At least nine people, eight of them students, were reportedly killed during street demonstrations and numerous others needed medical attention after receiving buckshot wounds and beatings. There were allegations that the killings had been deliberate and arbitrary. On 21 March Magdiel Páez García, a student at Mérida University, was shot dead by an army corporal who fired on a group of students outside the Faculty of Medicine. She had gone to help a street vendor shot and injured by the corporal. On 29 October Raúl Contreras, a student at the University College "Cecilio Acosta" in Los Teques, was killed by a member of the state police of Miranda during a demonstration. Reports indicate that he was standing on the 10th floor of the university and had gone to help a fellow student affected by tear-gas when the policeman opened fire in an unprovoked attack. Investigations into his death were
VENEZUELA/VIET NAM
reportedly continuing at the end of the year.
There were reports of at least 20 other killings by members of the security forces, particularly in the barrios (poor urban neighbourhoods), in circumstances suggesting they may have been deliberate, arbitrary killings. Among the victims was Hugo Hernández Guillén, a student. He was shot on 25 January by members of the state police of Bolivar. Police claimed that the victim was a dangerous criminal who had been shot dead in an armed confrontation, but people living nearby said they had heard the victim pleading for mercy. On 3 August José Salas Mendoza was shot by the Metropolitan Police. Witnesses said that a policeman shot him as he lay wounded and defenceless on the ground. There were allegations that police tried to fabricate evidence of a shoot-out by planting a weapon on the victim.
In July a military court formally charged 15 members of a military patrol involved in the massacre of 14 fishermen in 1988 with intentional homicide (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The judicial investigations, which had suffered a series of delays and contradictory rulings, were continuing at the end of the year.
Work continued to exhume from unmarked graves in a Caracas cemetery the bodies of a number of people reportedly killed by the police and army during widespread disturbances in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). By the end of the year forensic scientists had recovered a total of 68 bodies and had identified three of them. However, there was little reported progress in establishing responsibility for the killings.
The remains of Fidel José Jiménez Fuentes, who "disappeared" following his detention in March 1990 by the state police of Anzoátegui (see Amnesty International Report 1991), were found in a lake by his father in September. The seven policemen arrested in connection with this case in 1990 but later released were rearrested. The charges of "abandoning a disabled person in a solitary place" were reportedly reinstated.
In July three officers of the state police of Zulia who had been imprisoned in 1986 for killing Jorge Rogelio López Silva were released. The decision was reportedly appealed by a representative of the Attorney General's Office. Jorge López Silva had
been arrested in November 1985 and subsequently "disappeared". His family had received information that his body was in one of the Pozos de la Muerte, Death Wells, found in Zulia in March 1986 where the remains of other people reportedly arrested by police had been retrieved and later identified.
Judicial investigations into reported human rights violations, including arbitrary killings by members of the security forces and deaths in custody, continued to make little progress in the majority of cases. More than 200 cases of unclarified deaths and serious injury reported during the period of suspended constitutional guarantees in 1989 remained unresolved.
In June Amnesty International published Arbitrary Killings in February/March 1989: Victims Exhumed from Mass Graves. The report described the exhumations of bodies from mass graves in a Caracas cemetery. The organization expressed its serious concern at the courts' failure to properly investigate the complaints of arbitrary killings by the security forces that had occiured during the suspension of constitutional guarantees. It called on the government to bring those responsible to justice. In December Ajnnesty International wrote to President Carlos Andrés Pérez calling for thorough and impartial investigations to clarify the circumstances surrounding the deaths of six people shot by members of the security forces during demonstrations in October and November.
