KOREA
(DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
About 1,000 people were officially said to be held in "correction through labour" camps but it was not clear how many of these were held for political reasons or whether they included prisoners of conscience. The authorities denied holding thousands of political prisoners.
New information about legislation and legal procedures relating to human rights
KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)/KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
was obtained in early May by Amnesty International representatives to the 85th Inter-Parliamentary Conference held in Pyongyang, the capital, when they met government officials, academics and others. Under the 1972 Constitution, the rights to freedom of assembly, association and demonstration, to freedom of speech and religious beliefs, and to freedom of the press are guaranteed. However, these are circumscribed by a requirement that all citizens "observe the socialist standards of life and the socialist code of conduct" and the state's mission to defend "the socialist system against the subversive activities of hostile elements at home and abroad," In practice, there were strict official controls on information exchange and expression, and ft'ee movement within the country, which continued to make it difficult to obtain information about human rights.
The Criminal Code, in force since 1987, provides for people convicted of offences to be sentenced either to "correction through labour" for up to 10 years or to death, as well as other punishments such as confiscation of property or deprivation of the right to vote. The death penalty is mandatory for treason "in collusion with imperialism" and optional for a range of other offences including subversion and homicide "in excessively aggravating circumstances." However, no one aged under 17 at the time of the crime may be sentenced to death and pregnant women may not be executed. Officials told Amnesty International that the death penalty is rarely imposed but would not provide statistics on its use. They said most cases involved espionage or sabotage. It was not known whether any death sentences were imposed or executions carried out in 1991.
The authorities also denied reports that tens of thousands of people were being held for political reasons in 12 corrective labour camps (see Amnesty International Report 1990], saying that about 1,000 people only were being held in three such camps. No details of these prisoners were provided, although it appeared that a number were people officially described as "outsiders" who were being held for "anti-state" crimes connected to the state of war with South Korea. Officials also denied reports that staff and students at colleges in Pyongyang had been arrested in 1988 for putting up political posters (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
