PAKISTAN
Dozens of prisoners of conscience were held, including Ahmadis imprisoned for practising their faith and non-violent opponents of the government. Hundreds of people were detained for short periods on political grounds, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. Torture of criminal and political suspects was widespread: at least 30 prisoners were alleged to have died as a result. Flogging and the
use of fetters persisted. Reports of extrajudicial executions by police in "encounter killings" were frequent. The number of death sentences rose and one execution was reported.
Political and criminal violence continued throughout the year, particularly in Sind and Punjab provinces. The government of Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif held the opposition Pakistan People's Party (ppp) responsible, a charge it denied. In July the government ordered the rearrest of all opposition activists released in a December 1988 amnesty (see Amnesty International Report 1989). However, no one was rearrested under this order and 20 petitions challenging it were pending before the Lahore High Court at the end of 1991.
The trials on charges of corruption of former ppp Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto and others associated with the previous government continued. Special courts, empowered to disqualify from public office but not to imprison, convicted two former ministers and a former member of parliament. The trial of Asif Ali Zardari, Benazir Bhutto's husband, arrested in October 1990 on criminal charges, also continued (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991).
The Enforcement of Shari'ah Act 1991, adopted by parliament in May, proclaimed the supremacy of Shari'ah (Islamic) law and ordered the state to ensure the Islamization of every sphere of life, including the judicial system.
An amendment to the Constitution adopted in July empowered the federal government to establish Special Courts for Speedy Trials for a period of three years. These courts can condemn prisoners to death after trials lasting only a few days. Eleven such courts were set up and began operating in September. The Special Courts do not conform to international standards for fair trial and people convicted by them can only appeal to specially established Supreme Appellate Courts which do not afford the safeguards provided in regular appeal courts.
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan promulgated in July and again in August the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Ordinance 1991. This empowered the federal government to declare any area "terror-ist-affected" and to set up speedy trial courts there. Regulations governing the use of firearms by police in such areas were amended to permit them to shoot to kill
PAKISTAN
without further authorization, even in circumstances where there was no risk to life.
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court proposed the establishment of a Central Council for Awareness and Enforcement of Human Rights and ObUgations and that a Supreme Court judge should hear cases of human rights violations.
At least 14 prisoners of conscience were held on account of their religious beliefs or activities. They included Tahir Iqbal, who had been arrested in December 1990 after converting from Islam to Christianity. He was held throughout 1991 on an apparently false charge of having used blasphemous language. Conversion itself is not an offence under Pakistan law.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community were sentenced to prison terms solely for the peaceful exercise of religious beliefs. In July an Ahmadi place of worship in Sambrial was raided. Six Ahmadis were charged with writing Islamic expressions of faith on the building's walls. They stated that the writings, painted over by police in 1986, had been exposed by recent heavy rains. In October parliament adopted an amendment to the Pakistan Penal Code (ppc), already introduced by ordinance in July, increasing the maximum punishment for "offending anyone's religious feelings" from two to 10 years. Ahmadis have been frequently tried and sentenced for this offence.
Trade unionists and journalists were detained for the peaceful exercise of their civil rights. Following a national strike in mid-February four trade union leaders were detained in Karachi under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (mpo). This allows detention without trial for up to three months, which may be extended to eight or 12 months, depending on the grounds of detention. The four were released in April. Shabbir Bhutto, correspondent of the Frontier Post, was reportedly held in unacknowledged detention for four days in November for having written articles critical of the Sind provincial government. He alleged that he was tortured to disclose his sources by police officers in Abad police station. No official investigation was known to have been ordered.
Large numbers of ppp and other opposition activists were arrested, apparently because of their political affiliations, following a number of violent incidents. Approximately 600 ppp members were
reportedly arrested in June after the murder of Nabi Sher Junejo, the judge trying the case of Asif Ali Zardari. Most were subsequently released, Rajab Ali Brohi, one of three ppp members charged with the murder, was reportedly severely tortured. In August more than 30 ppp members were reportedly arrested in connection with the murder of a Criminal Investigation Agency (cia) officer working on the Asif Ali Zardari case.
During a peaceful national hunger-strike on 4 August, organized by the ppp, several hundred ppp members were arrested. Most were released after a few days. Dr Khatu-mal leevan, a member of parliament belonging to the Hindu minority, remained in unacknowledged detention for a month, during which he was apparently held in different police stations.
After mass arrests in late November, several hundred ppp activists were detained, mostly on charges of breach of the peace, and most were still held at the end of the year.
Successive false charges were apparently frequently used to imprison political opponents of the government. When the charges could not be substantiated in court, detainees were sometimes placed under 30-day detention orders under the mpo. Former member of parliament Afaq Shahid, cleared of a succession of criminal charges in late 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991], was detained in January under the mpo. He was finally released in July after being cleared of further criminal charges.
Torture of criminal and political suspects in police custody continued. Rahila Tiwana, a member of the People's Student Federation arrested in December 1990 by the cia in Karachi, was allegedly tied with ropes and hung upside-down to force her to incriminate Benazir Bhutto and others. A medical examination substantiated her allegations. Nearly two weeks after her arrest she was charged with possession of illegal weapons and with involvement in a 1987 murder case. She was released on bail in June. No known action was taken against the alleged torturers.
Rape and sexual harassment of women in police custody were frequently reported. Khurshid Begum, wife of an arrested ppp activist, was allegedly stripped and sexually abused in a police station in Karachi in November. By the end of the year no
PAKISTAN
action had apparently been taken against those responsible.
Death from torture in police and judicial custody was alleged in at least 30 cases. One victim was Naseer Ahmed Qureshi, who was arrested by the ciA in Karachi in November in connection with the murder of Judge Nabi Sher Junejo. He died in police custody, allegedly as a result of torture. He had apparently been arrested by mistake, instead of someone with a similar name. His body reportedly bore marks of torture, but the post-mortem report was not disclosed. Three police officers were reportedly suspended but no arrests were reported, and by the end of the year a judicial inquiry which was ordered had not made public any results.
Flogging - a cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment - continued to be imposed for rape and drugs offences. In October thousands of people in Okara, Punjab province, reportedly watched the public flogging of three men convicted of rape.
The use of iron crossbars as fetters on prisoners and detainees in police custody persisted. The bars keep the prisoners' legs apart and severely restrict movement. Such restraints constitute a form of ill-treatment and violate international standards for the treatment of prisoners.
Staged killings of criminal suspects after arrest by police, known as "encounter killings", were reported frequently. In January three men were seen being dragged out of Kotri police station and taken away in a vehicle. The following day the local press reported their deaths in an "encounter" with the police. No official investigation was reported. The Sind authorities in August reportedly declared that police officers involved in "encounter killings" would not be charged with murder and that legal aid to defend police personnel against complaints would be provided by a special trust.
The government extended the application of the death penalty and moved to restore its active use. In February parliament approved the introduction of the death penalty for kidnapping for ransom and empowered courts established under the Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Act of 1975 to try this offence (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In July the federal government decided to amend the ppc to make the death penalty mandatory for defiling the
name of the Prophet Mohammad. Orthodox Muslims consider reference to the Prophet's name by Ahmadis to constitute a defilement.
In March the Lahore High Court ruled that the commutation of death sentences by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan in 1988 was applicable only to those whose sentence had been confirmed by a High Court at the time and that to extend the amnesty to people awaiting confirmation had been "wrongful". It confirmed death sentences imposed before December 1988 on four people "erroneously" released from death row. In July the Lahore High Court began to hear some 100 petitions by relatives of murder victims to restore death sentences commuted in 1988. The prisoners concerned were reportedly transferred back to cells on death row before the petition hearings had ended.
About 200 death sentences were reported. They included over 70 imposed by Special Courts for Suppression of Terrorist Activities and 30 by Special Courts for Speedy Trial. The actual number was believed to be considerably higher. Most were imposed for murder or drug offences. In one reported case a person sentenced to death was acquitted when the victim's family forgave the murderer and accepted diyat (compensation). One person sentenced to death for murder was reportedly below the age of 16 at the time of the crime.
One execution was reported during 1991. A man was executed by stoning in February in the Khyber Agency, a tribal area with a separate judicial system. Bahadur Khan had been convicted of rape by a jirga, a council of tribal elders. Another sentence of death by stoning imposed in Punjab was overturned in August by the Federal Shari'ah Court on grounds of insufficient evidence.
In October Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif announced that people sentenced to death by Special Courts for Speedy Trials would be executed in public. On 31 October the imminent public hanging of Zafar Iqbal in Chakwal, Punjab, was announced. He had been sentenced to death for rape and murder in September after a trial lasting only three days and his appeal had been dismissed in October. However, the execution was postponed in November by the Supreme Court, pending a ruling on the issue of public executions.
PAKISTAN/PANAMA
Amnesty International pressed for the release of all prisoners of conscience, including Ahmadis imprisoned for practising their faith, and urged the government not to make the death penalty mandatory for defiling the name of the Prophet. In April it raised its concern about new forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments introduced under Islamic law and called for the abolition of judicial floggings and amputations. In July the organization submitted to the government recommendations for the prevention of torture and deaths in police custody and urged it to investigate cases of torture and bring the perpetrators to justice, In November Amnesty International called on the government to ensure the release of Abdul Rahim Chinzai, a former senior Afghan government official who was reportedly abducted in Peshawar in mid-1991, and to bring to justice those responsible for his abduction (see Afghanistan entry).
Amnesty International expressed concern about extending the use of the death penalty and about the procedures of the Special Courts for the Suppression of Terrorist Activities and Special Courts for Speedy Trial. In November it protested against the proposed resumption of public executions, citing the brutalizing effect on those present.
