ALGERIA
Thousands of suspected government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested and over 50 killed during widespread anti-government protests in June and July. More than 1,200 other suspected government opponents were administratively detained without charge or trial for up to eight weeks. Some of those arrested were beaten or otherwise ill-treated. At least 14 people were sentenced to death, four of them for financial crimes. No executions were reported.
President Chadii Benjedid proclaimed a state of siege on 4 June following widespread demonstrations and violent clashes between demonstrators and the seciurity forces in which at least 55 people were killed and hundreds injured. The violence occurred after the Front islamique du salut (fis). Islamic Salvation Front, called a general strike on 25 May. The state of siege remained in force until 29 September. A new administration under Prime Minister Sid Ahmed Ghozali was formed on 18 June to prepare for general elections, which were held on 26 December, fis candidates gained a clear majority of seats decided on the first ballot; a second ballot was to take place in January 1992.
Thousands of demonstrators and suspected supporters of the fis were arrested in June and July. Most were sentenced to between 15 days' and two years' imprisonment for offences such as disturbing public order or armed assembly. However, more than 1,200 people arrested after 30 June, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held in administrative detention without charge or trial at internment camps at Blida, Oran, Wargla and two other centres. Their families and lawyers were not told where they were or allowed access to them during the first 10 days of their detention. The detainees were held under state of siege regulations which permitted the authorities to hold them without charge or trial for an initial period of 45 days, which
ALGERIA/ANGOLA
could then be extended for a second 45-day period. In the event most were released within the first 45 days. Others whose detention orders were extended and who went on hunger-strike in protest were among 329 detainees released on 23 August. The remaining detainees, numbering about 100, had all been released by early September.
Those detained included two minors and a man suffering from mental illness. Kamel Khemais el-Khechna, who was reportedly arrested together with a political activist who was taking him to hospital at the time.
Under the state of siege civilians accused of serious crimes against state security could be tried by military courts. According to government figures, of 2,601 people prosecuted between 30 June and 12 August, 693 were prosecuted under the military justice system. They included the two main leaders of the Fis, Abbas Medani and Ali Belhadj, who were charged with various state security offences, and five other members of the party's majlis al-shura (council), all of whom were still held at Hilda Prison at the end of the year.
Scores of people alleged that they had been beaten or ill-treated after they were arrested just before or dxuing the state of siege. Some were apparently beaten with gim-butts while at least 30 fis members were said to have been deliberately subjected to degrading treatment by having their beards shaved off.
In Mostaganem 13 victims of alleged ill-treatment in police custody brought charges against those said to be responsible. One of the victims, Rahmani Larbi, alleged that he had been beaten and pushed down a stairway, breaking his leg, by police officers who raided his apartment, and then beaten again until he lost consciousness. Three members of the Corps national de sécurité (cns). National Security Corps, were arrested and charged with assault: they were still in custody at the end of the year.
Two prisoners sentenced to death in March were reportedly kept chained by the hands and feet. However, by the end of the month the chains were removed after protests by local lawyers.
It was feared that some of those killed during the mid-year uruest might have been victims of extrajudicial executions. The government said that at least 55
people, including five members of the security forces, had been killed and hundreds injured. Some of the victims appeared to have been shot while unarmed, or when posing no threat to the lives of members of the security forces, or for breaking the ciufew. One, Amar Kacem, a primary school headmaster, was shot dead after he had left his house to stop his children throwing stones at the security forces. The government's Minister of Human Rights told Amnesty International in September that all incidents involving the use of force by the security forces had been investigated but no details of the findings of any such investigation were made public or, apparently, made available to the relatives of the deceased.
At least 14 people were sentenced to death, nine of them in absentia. In March foiu people, including two in absentia, were sentenced to death by the criminal court of Algiers after being convicted of large-scale embezzlement of public funds, corruption and mismanagement. They were the first people since 1969 to be sentenced to death for financial crimes. At least 10 other people were sentenced to death after being found guilty of miuder, bringing the total niunber of prisoners under sentence of death at the end of the year to at least 85. No executions were known to have been carried out.
Amnesty International expressed concern at the high incidence of deaths as a result of shootings by the security forces and urged the government to establish a full, public and impartial inquiry into all the deaths.
