HONG KONG
The screening process to determine the refugee status of tens of thousands of Vietnamese asylum-seekers detained in Hong Kong remained deficient. A program of forcible repatriation of "screened-out" Vietnamese asylum-seekers was initiated. A motion calling for the abolition of the death penalty was approved by the Legislative Council.
On 8 June the Bill of Rights came into effect, incorporating some provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (icCPR) into Hong Kong law. The iccpr currently applies to Hong Kong because it has been ratified by the United Kingdom, but it is unclear whether it will continue to do so once sovereignty over Hong Kong reverts to the People's Republic of China in 1997. The Bill of Rights lacks safeguards against the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience.
On 26 June the Legislative Council, which advises the executive, adopted a motion urging the government to abolish the death penalty in law. An earlier motion to urge the government to resume judicial executions was rejected. The death penalty is mandatory for murder: since 1966, however, the several death sentences passed each year have all been commuted. The Secretary for Security said in June that the government would consider bringing forward legislation to abolish the death penalty, The government confirmed in December its commitment to present such early legislation by early 1992.
Over 50,000 Vietnamese asylum-seekers continued to be held in detention centres. The majority had not yet undergone the screening process to determine whether or not they would be granted refugee status. The rest had been "screened out" (denied refugee status); they remained in detention and faced a threat of forcible return to Viet Nam. From the end of October the screening process for new arrivals was accelerated.
Significant shortcomings remained in the screening process, despite several improvements introduced in 1990 (see Amnesty /niemaijona/ Report 1991). Legal advice and assistance for asylum-seekers remained inadequate, especially at the crucial first stage of the screening process when asylum-seekers are interviewed by an immigration officer. The written record of that interview, which is used as the basis for the decision on refugee status, is not read back in Vietnamese to the asylum-seeker for correction. Further, asylum-seekers do not have the right to appear in person when appealing against refusal of refugee status.
At the end of October an agreement was reached with the Vietnamese Government on the return to Viet Nam of asylum-seekers who had not been granted refugee status. By the end of the year 87 asylum-seekers had been forcibly returned.
Amnesty International called for a review of Hong Kong's detention policy for Vietnamese asylum-seekers and urged further improvements in the screening process, including legal advice for asylum-seekers at each stage of the process and an oral hearing when appealing against refusal of refugee status. It also called for a review of the cases of asyliun-seekers who were denied refugee status before the 1990
HONG KONG/INDIA
improvements in the screening process. Amnesty International reiterated its concern about the screening process when a representative from the organization met government officials din^ing a visit to Hong Kong in March and in a letter to the Governor, Sir David Wilson, after the announcement in October of the agreement with Viet Nam on forcible return,
After the Legislative Council vote to abolish the death penalty, Amnesty International urged the government to bring forward legislation rapidly to achieve this.
