COLOMBIA
Several hundred people were executed extrajudicially by members of the armed forces or paramilitary groups working with their support or acquiescence. In urban areas scores of people, including suspected delinquents and "street children", were killed by "death squads" linked to the National Police. Over 150 people were reported to have "disappeared". Little progress was made in bringing to justice members of the security forces responsible for human rights violations. Twelve civilian paramilitary
members were convicted in absentia for a series of massacres in 1988.
In July a new constitution containing extensive references to human rights was introduced and the government lifted the state of siege, in force throughout the country since 1984. In Jime the Constituent Assembly dissolved Congress. A new Congress was elected in October and installed in December.
Three more guerrilla organizations demobilized after reaching peace agreements with the government: the Partido Revolucionario de los Trabajadores, Revolutionary Workers' Party, the Ejército Popular de Liberación (epl). Popular Liberation Army, and the indigenous peoples' organization Quintin Lame.
A coordinating body of armed opposition organizations, the Coordinadora Nacional Guerrillera (cng) - representing the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (farc). Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia; the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (eln), National Liberation Army; and a dissident faction of the epl -entered into talks with the government in Jime. No cease-fire agreement was reached by the end of the year. Negotiations were suspended by the government for several weeks in September after a series of attacks by guerrilla forces against senior members of the ruling Liberal Party and other politicians campaigning for congressional election. The eln admitted responsibility for an attack in Cauca department in September against the former president of Congress, Aurelio Iragorri Hormaza, in which seven people accompanying him were killed. The cng was responsible for mmaerous attacks on economic and military targets in which civilians were killed.
COLOMBIA
Dozens of execution-style killings in shanty towns surrounding Medellin, capital of Antioquia department, were attributed by state officials to a relatively new grouping known as MUicias Populares, Popular Militias. These civilian vigilante squads, some of which were reported to have links with guerrilla organizations, were responsible for killing dozens of local drug dealers and people accused of crimes against shanty town residents.
Killings of so-called "social undesirables" such as prostitutes, homosexuals, vagrants, the mentally disturbed and "street children" by shadowy "death squads" were increasingly widespread. Victims were seized from city streets by heavily armed men and driven away in immarked vehicles. Their bodies, often with signs of severe torture, were found dumped by roadsides, in rivers or on municipal rubbish dumps. They frequently bore messages claiming the killing in the name of "death squads" such as "Kan Kil", Mano Negra (Black Hand) or Los Magníficos (The Magnificent Ones). Other victims were shot dead as they slept on the streets. Only rarely were bodies identified and investigations opened. However, in several cases evidence emerged that so-called "death squads" were made up of members of the National Police, ft'equently operating with the support of local tradespeople. In November the Director of National Police and the Procurator General announced the results of a joint police-Public Ministry investigation into the killing of 60 vagrants in Pereira, Risaralda department, during a 20-day period in July. As a result, 13 police agents and two officers were dismissed from service for participating in the murders.
Coinciding with a major guerrilla offensive at the beginning of the year, there was a renewed wave of killings and "disappearances" of members of the legal left-wing Unión Patriótica (up), Patriotic Union party. up leaders reported that in the first two months of the year 50 party activists had either "disappeared" or been killed. The killing of up members continued throughout the year. In August up activist Antonio Palacios Urrea, three of his children and his son-in-law were shot dead by soldiers who broke into their home on the outskirts of Fusagasugá, Cundinamarca department. A statement issued by the Commander of the XIII Army Brigade
alleged that those killed were members of a guerrilla group who had died dming an armed confrontation with soldiers. This was contradicted by forensic evidence and eye-witnesses. The only adult survivor of the attack testified to the military court investigating the killings that her relatives were shot through the back of the head after being made to lie face down on the floor. At the end of September, a military investigating court issued arrest warrants against a second-lieutenant, a sergeant and five privates in connection with the killings.
In September Carlos Vêlez Rodriguez, his wife, brother and eight-year-old son were killed when their vehicle was intercepted near the town of Mesetas, Meta department, by a group of heavily armed men who opened fire on the family as they tried to escape. Carlos Vêlez was a up deputy in the departmental assembly. In March he and two other uP members had been seriously injured when the up headquarters in Mesetas was attacked by machine-gun fire and hand grenades. On both occasions, the assailants escaped.
Unarmed civilians were extrajudicially executed by coimter-insurgency troops in remote rur¿ areas where armed opposition groups were active. In April a counter-insurgency patrol, reportedly commanded by a lieutenant from the José Hilarión López Battalion based on Popayan, stopped a public transport bus near the village of Los Uvos, municipality of Bolivar, Cauca department. Fourteen men and three women were forced to get oft' the bus and lie face down on the road; they were then shot. Regional army and police authorities immediately attributed the attack to eln guerrillas. However, a conscript soldier who had formed part of the patrol later testified that three soldiers had shot the passengers on the orders of the lieutenant who claimed the victims were guerrilla sympathizers.
Paramilitary forces - whose legal basis was withdrawn in 1989 - continued to commit human rights violations throughout the country. Unidentified gunmen killed Julio Chaparro Hurtado and Jorge Torres Navas, journalist and photographer with the daily El Espectador newspaper, shortly after they arrived in the town of Segovia, Antioquia department, in ApriL They were investigating political violence: in 1988 over 40 people had been killed in
COLOMBIA
Segovia during an indiscriminate attack by paramilitary forces supported by army officials (see Amnesty International Report 1989). No one had been convicted of responsibility for the killings despite evidence of military involvement.
Teachers in nual areas were also among the targets for paramilitary groups. José Santos Mendivelso, a teacher and human rights worker, was shot dead by unidentified gimmen outside his house in Turmeque, Boyacá department, in April. Witnesses alleged that the gurunen were later seen in the company of members of the National Police. According to the national teachers' union Federación Colombiana de Educadores, 47 teachers were killed in the first nine months of the year and more than 400 received death threats.
Over 50 members of a paramilitary organization based in Puerto Boyacá, Santander department, surrendered to a judge in November imder a new government program offering leniency in exchange for confessing to a crime. All confessed to possession of illegal weapons - an offence which the government had recently decriminalized - and were immediately released.
Over 150 people were reported to have "disappeared" after being detained by the secmity forces or paramilitary groups. In several cases people reported as "disappeared" were later foimd dead. Alvaro Moreno Moreno, a student, was detained by members of the National Police in Santafé de Bogotá, the capital, in January. Although his detention was initially acknowledged by the police, it was later denied. The following day his body, bearing signs of torture, was found north of Bogotá and taken to a morgue, where it went missing. Over a month later a body was exhumed in the town of Chocontá in the presence of judicial officials and relatives and identified as Alvaro Moreno.
Little progress was made in the investigations of human rights violations. In the vast majority of cases, perpetrators were not identified and investigations were suspended for lack of evidence. When members of the armed forces were implicated, trials in military coiuts generally resulted in acquittal, and in the rare cases when the accused were convicted, sentences were overturned on appeal. However, 12 civilian members of paramilitary forces were convicted in absentia by a civilian courf of a
series of massacres of banana plantation workers in the Urabá region of Antioquia department in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). They were sentenced to 20-year prison terms. Two of those'con-victed were later killed in unclear circumstances. At the end of the year, none of those convicted had been arrested and imprisoned. Four army officers had been charged with participating in the organization of the massacres. Their trial was passed in May to the military courts following a decision by the Tribunal Disciplinario, the coiul that rules on disputes of jurisdiction between military and civilian courts. It ruled that the crimes were "acts of service" and therefore fell within military jurisdiction.
Judges and lawyers attempting to investigate human rights violations and bring those responsible to justice continued to be threatened and sometimes killed. Human rights lawyer and law professor Eduardo Umaña Mendoza received death threats throughout the year. They intensified after Dr Umaña agreed to represent the surviving members of the Palacios family (see above).
In November, eight members of a judicial cormnission - a judge, a pathologist, five judicial police and a regular police officer - died when their vehicles were attacked by a group of heavily armed men near Usme, Cundinamarca department. The wounded occupants of one of the cars were reportedly then shot through the head. Responsibility for the attack was immediately attributed by police and army officials to the farc. Documents allegedly confiscated from farc guerrillas by military intelligence reportedly described the attack as an "accident" and a "tactical error". The farc denied involvement in the attack, and attributed it to a paramilitary group linked to the army's Artillery School.
In September the Procurator General released a report on human rights covering January 1990 to April 1991. The report registered 3,087 complaints affecting 5,285 victims of abuses by the armed forces, including extrajudicial execution, torture and "disappearance". The Procurator General said that, "In areas where there is guerrilla violence and scarce state presence, the state agents most frequently accused are the military. The most common types of violations in which the military are implicated are massacres, torture and enforced disappearances. The majority of victims are
COLOMBIA/COMOROS
peasants." The Procurator General revealed that the majority of cases were still in the investigative stage and that disciplinary sanctions had been imposed against only 61 of the 622 members of the armed forces implicated in abuses. "In urban areas with state presence and little guerrilla violence, the National Police is the force most implicated and punished in disciplinary investigations. The most common types of violations in which the National Police are implicated in these areas are 'disappearances', bodily injiuy, threats and arbitrary detentions." Disciplinary sanctions had been imposed against 261 police officers. A further 84 had been acquitted. On presenting the report the Procurator General described the human rights situation as "alarming" and said it deserved immediate corrective measures on the part of the state.
In February Amnesty International submitted a series of recommendations to the Constituent Assembly urging it to incorporate into the new Constitution comprehensive human rights safeguards. In May an Amnesty International delegation met the President, government officials and others to discuss its human rights concerns. Also in May Amnesty International was invited to address the Assembly. In his speech Amnesty International's Secretary General said the organization was aware that human rights violations have taken place in Colombia in a context of grave political and social violence in which serious abuses have been perpetrated by armed opposition groups and criminal organizations. The Secretary General stated that such abuses cannot be used to justify or excuse human rights violations by government forces. He stressed the need to include provisions in the Constitution to establish and regulate the armed forces' accountability to the constitutionally elected authorities, in view of mounting evidence of their responsibility for widespread and systematic human rights violations. The Minister of the Interior rejected the speech which he called "one-sided" and "exaggerated" and defended the government's commitment to human rights.
In December Amnesty International wrote to President César Gaviria Trujillo welcoming measures taken to improve the investigation of human rights violations but expressing concern that so far the measm-es had produced few concrete results. The letter called on the government
to take steps to bring those responsible for human rights violations to justice and to dismantle paramilitary forces.
In oral statements to the United Nations Commission on Himian Rights in February and its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Colombia about "disappearances" and the impunity of paramilitary organizations operating with the support of members of the armed forces.
