ZAIRE
Hundreds of suspected opponents of the government were detained without charge or trial, including prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, but most were released after short periods. Hundreds of others were killed or injured when the security forces attacked demonstrations. Torture of detainees was reported to be common and some deaths under torture were alleged. At least 24 people were under sentence of death but no executions were reported.
Following a series of strikes and other protests, President Mobutu Sese Seko gave way to opposition demands and agreed in June to summon a Sovereign National Conference to review and reform Zaire's political system. The conference opened in August but was halted in September when an army mutiny led to widespread disorder in Kinshasa and other parts of the country. After procedural disagreements among the participants in November it resumed in December with Roman Catholic Bishop Laiurent Monsengwo Pasinya as its President.
There were numerous changes of government as President Mobutu sought to reach agreement with individual opposition leaders, naming several of them Prime Minister in turn. Tshisekedi wa Muliunba, a leading government opponent who had been repeatedly imprisoned as a prisoner
ZAIRE
of conscience since 1980, was twice appointed Prime Minister but did not actually take office owing to disagreements with President Mobutu. President Mobutu resisted attempts to transfer responsibiUty for the security forces away from his supporters.
An army mutiny which broke out in Kinshasa on 23 September precipitated widespread violence throughout the country. Soldiers protesting against inadequate and irregular pay engaged in widespread looting of property. At least 250 people were killed nationwide, many of them shot by soldiers. Some of the killings appeared to be extrajudicial executions. In October the army Chief of General Staff authorized members of the security forces to use firearms if they felt that their lives were threatened. No steps were taken to prevent unlawful killings.
The Ministry for the Rights and Freedoms of the Citizen, which had been established in 1986 to investigate alleged human rights violations and other abuses, was abolished in April: its responsibilities were transferred to the Ministry of Justice.
Hundreds of suspected government opponents were detained, in virtually all cases without being charged or having their cases referred to the courts. Some were held only briefly but others were detained incommunicado for weeks or months in breach of legislation limiting police custody to no more than a few days.
Those detained included about 15 members of the Union pour !a démocratie et le progrès social (udps), Union for Democracy and Social Progress, who were arrested in Kinshasa in January and held for a week. About 200 supporters of the udps and the Parti lumumbiste unifié (palu). Unified Lumumbiste Party, were held for a day in April, severely beaten and then released.
Scores of students were also detained for suspected involvement in anti-govem-ment protests, some of them violent. Most were released after a few days but about 40, including students detained in both January and April, were held together with criminal prisoners in Kinshasa's Makala central prison. Few details were available, although some were said to have been tortured, and it was unclear at the end of the year whether they were still being held.
Journalists working for the Elima newspaper, whose Kinshasa headquarters was destroyed by a bomb in October, were also
subject to harassment and arrest owing to the newspaper's anti-govemment stance. Nsasse Ramazani, Elima's director for east-em Zaire, was held for two weeks in February and its editor, Essolomwa Nkoy ea Linganga, was held for about 10 days in May. He had previously been detained in October 1990. Both were prisoners of conscience.
A niunber of releases of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience were reported during the year. Among them were seven senior army officers who were known or suspected supporters of opposition parties. They were arrested in late December 1990 and accused of plotting to overthrow the government. They were held incommunicado by the security services before being released uncharged in January. Five palu members arrested in November 1990 while trying to join a peaceful demonstration were released untried in April.
General Mukobo Mundende Popolo, a former army chief of staff, was released in May from a four-year period of internal banishment (see Amnesty International Report 1991). It was unclear whether several other military officers banished at the same time were also freed.
The year was marked by a series of violent attacks by the security forces on opposition supporters. In April troops in the southern town of Mbuji-Mayi opened fire on udps supporters who were protesting at earlier arrests of udps members and looting by soldiers. In all, 42 people were believed to have been killed, although the authorities acknowledged only nine deaths. Dozens of other udps supporters were injured and one woman reportedly killed when the security forces took violent action to prevent a udps demonstration in Kinshasa on 24 April.
Further killings of government opponents occurred in Kinshasa on 2 September when troops fired at people protesting against price rises. Two days later members of the paramilitary Civil Guard and supporters of the ruling party attacked the offices of two opposition parties, killing at least three people, including Augustin Kapendi, a member of the Union des fédéralistes et des républicains indépendants (uFERi), Union of Federalists and Independent Republicans.
There were two trials before the Supreme Court of Justice arising from an
ZAIRE/ZAMBIA
attack on Lubmnbashi miiversity campus in May 1990 in which up to a dozen students were reportedly killed by the security forces (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The incident had led to widespread protests and calls by human rights groups and others for an independent and impartial inquiry. Seven officials, including the former governor of Shaba region, were convicted in May of complicity in the attack and sentenced to prison terms ranging ft'om three to 15 years. Charges against four others had been dropped before the trial. However, the trial, which was attended in part by an Amnesty International observer, failed to throw light on the identities of the attackers, or on the extent of official complicity, or to clarify precisely how many students had been killed. The government continued to maintain that only one student had died and refused to order a further inquiry,
hi the other trial Digekisa Piluka, a student leader, was charged in connection with assaults on three students suspected of being government informers, which had precipitated the attack on the campus. Charges against 26 other students, none of whom had been arrested, were dropped. Digekisa Piluka escaped while the trial was in progress and was sentenced in absentia to 13 years' imprisonment.
Beatings of demonstrators by the security forces were frequently reported and torture of detainees was reportedly widespread. Some deaths as a result of torture were alleged,
Information was received suggesting that 10 Ugandans had died in the custody of Zairian security forces at Lhume in North Kivu region as a result of torture. The 10, who included Yakobo Balye, were said to have been arrested in December 1990, and to have died later that month. No inquest or other official investigation into these reported deaths was known to have been held.
Bikela Mafuila, a trade unionist arrested with 11 others in early Jime, was reported to have died after being beaten by the security forces. Again, no inquiry was known to have been carried out.
Twenty-four people convicted of murder and robbery in 1989 remained under sentence of death. There were no reports of new death sentences or executions.
Amnesty International urged the government to establish an independent
inquiry into killings by the security forces and repeatedly pressed for limits to be imposed on the use of firearms. It also expressed concern to the authorities about cases of apparently unlawful detention, urging that political detainees should be brought to trial or released. It expressed concern about alleged deaths in custody and called for the introduction of full safeguards to protect detainees fi-om torture or ill-treatment.
