PORTUGAL
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and in military and civilian prisons. Judicial and administrative inquiries into these allegations were often slow and inconclusive.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police custody continued throughout the year; some of the incidents took place in 1990. Ofíicers of the Policia Judiciária (pj), Judiciary Police, the Policia de Seguranga Pública (psp). Public Security Police, and the Guarda Nacional Republicana (gnr), National Republican Guard, were cited in the allegations.
In July Pedro Mariz Pires Neves Martins complained to the pj in Lisbon that he had been beaten by four officers of the psp after he had been detained in Parque da Liber-dade (Liberty Park) in Sintra on 30 June. He stated that they hit him with truncheons and punched and kicked him in the face and stomach. He was taken to the psp station where he claimed he was punched, slapped and beaten by two officers who also threw water over him. He was then handcuffed and taken on a stretcher to Sintra hospital for treatment. He appeared in court the next morning and was charged with attempted assault on a police officer. The judge immediately released him because of his physical condition. In August he was reported killed in an accident, but his family said they would continue with a criminal action against the police.
In September two psp officers were charged with the ill-treatment of two youths in Oporto in September 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). One officer charged with causing bodily harm was reported to have slapped and punched José Luis Barros in the face and stomach while questioning him. The other officer was charged with causing grievous bodily harm, resulting in serious disfigurement, to Paolo Jorge Gomes Almeida.
Judicial inquiries were opened into other allegations of torture or ill-treatment but these were often slow and inconclusive. even in cases where there was substantive medical evidence.
One such case was that of Isidro Albuquerque Rodrigues, who had been arrested by the pj on 26 June 1990 in Alcántara on suspicion of assault, robbery and being an accessory to murder. He alleged that during interrogation in Setúbal he had been stripped naked and handcuffed, kicked in the stomach and punched in the face. He also claimed that a shampoo bottle had been forced into his anus and that he had been whipped with a length of flexible metal hose-pipe. Two of his teeth were
PORTUGAL/ROMANIA
broken, his ribs were scarred and over a year later he was still suffering from back pain. After committal to prison he received medical treatment in the prison hospital at Caxias. A judicial inquiry into his allegations was still open in August 1991, when the Director General of the pj reportedly stated in a radio interview that the allegations had been investigated but were considered unfounded. No further news on the progress of the judicial inquiry had been reported by the end of the year.
A number of allegations of torture and ill-treatment concemed inmates of military and civilian prisons. In April Seaman First Class Antonio Rodrigues Louro was serving a sentence for desertion and petty crime in the Naval Prison of Alfeite. He stated that on 16 April he was taken to a small cell with a bed but no mattress or bedclothes and no external light. He alleged that two senior non-commissioned officers beat him with a mbber hose-pipe until he was unconscious. He was later taken in handcuffs to the infirmary, then returned to the same cell. Two days later, a civilian doctor examined him and reported extensive bmising, cuts and swellings on his body. His father asked the naval authorities to initiate a full inquiry but no inquiry appeared to have opened by the end of the year.
On 6 September José Paulo Santos Silva, an inmate of the civilian prison of Linhó, was sentenced to 10 days' isolation in a punishment cell for fighting with another prisoner. He stated that before he was taken to the punishment cell, two guards punched and kicked his head and back, injuring him. He alleged that although he was an epileptic, he was denied essential medication and any medical assistance for his injuries. This report followed other allegations of torture and ill-treatment in Linhó prison which had led to disciplinary proceedings against prison officers (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). The Director General of Prison Services reportedly announced an internal inquiry into José Paulo Santos Silva's allegations.
Amnesty Intemational sought information on inquiries into individual allegations of torture and ill-treatment and asked to be kept informed of the progress and outcome of any judicial or administrative proceedings.
In April Amnesty International wrote to
the Minister of Justice to express concern about persistent reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees and prisoners. Among the cases cited were some where inquiries had been slow and inconclusive. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
