PANAMA
Three leaders of a disbanded paramilitary auxiliary force continued to be held on charges which appeared to be politically motivated rather than for a specific criminal act. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment in several prisons. At least two prisoners reportedly died in custody in unclear circumstances. Prison conditions were reported to be very harsh.
In August Panama ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
In January, in an effort to tackle prison overcrowding, the government of President Guillermo Endara Galimany issued Law No. 3, which required judges to allow those accused of offences for which the minimum penalty was less than two years' imprisonment to benefit from one of several alternatives to pre-trial prison custody, including house arrest. Law No. 3 often appeared to be applied inconsistently and the criteria by which courts granted or refused bail to defendants who had formerly been government ofiicials or Panamanian Defence Forces (pdf) members caused political controversy and conflict between the government, the Attorney-General's office and the courts. Many of the defendants granted bail under the new law faced charges of corruption, embezzlement or misuse of public funds, or charges relating to human rights violations. In February Judge Guillermo Salazar ordered the release from prison of former Attorney-General Carlos Augusto Villalán Barrios, who was accused of embezzlement and other offences, and he was allowed to return home under house arrest. However, following President Endara's public objection to the decision and an outcry in the press, Carlos Villalán was rearrested and returned to prison, and Judge Salazar was dismissed by a higher court. Similar public objections led to the rearrest in June of Marcos Justine, a former pdf colonel held on corruption charges who had been granted bail by a judge earlier that month. In October, however, the Supreme Court upheld a request for bail on behalf of Omar Miranda Vega, who was co-accused of the murder of opposition leader Hugo Spadafo-ra Franco in September 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1991], despite the fact that bail is not available under Panamanian law to those charged with murder.
Three former leaders of the disbanded Dignity Battalions continued to be held on vaguely defined charges which appeared to be politically motivated, rather than being charged with having committed a specific criminal act. The Dignity Battalions had been created by the former de facto ruler General Manuel Noriega as paramilitary auxiliaries to the pdf. Benjamin Colamarco Patino, Enrique Carlos Thompson Morales and Arturo Martínez Franco were among
PANAMA/PAPUA NEW GUINEA
approximately 50 other Dignity Battalion and pdf members still held in pre-trial detention since their arrests shortly after the United States invasion of Panama in December 1989. The three were the only prisoners held solely on charges of endangering national security: they had originally been accused of advocacy of crime but this charge was dropped in June. The remaining charges against them related solely to their role in recruiting government employees to the Dignity Battalions and another civilian "defence" group, the Comités Institucionales de Defensa de ¡a Patria y la Dignidad, Institutional Committees for the Defence of the Fatherland and Dignity. This was considered by the prosecutor to have "exposed Panama to the risk of a war or the rupture of international relations" under Article 312 of the Penal Code.
There were reports of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in several prisons. In August the government appointed a special commission, including a church representative, to investigate allegations of torture by military personnel in the penal colony on Coiba island. According to the allegations, prisoners had been hung for long periods by their thumbs or feet from posts and beaten with hoses or clubs as punishment for insubordination or unsatisfactory work. One prisoner, Amelio Ameth, was alleged to have died in July as a result of such beatings, although the official cause of death was a drugs overdose. In August the Attorney-General stated that the commission's report following its visit to Coiba had confirmed that torture had taken place. The military official in charge of the colony was dismissed and replaced by a civilian director. In September four prison guards were reported to have been detained in connection with the abuses.
In November Rudy Fajardo Rodríguez, 18, an inmate in Cárcel Modelo, Modelo Prison, died. Prison authorities reportedly stated that he had sustained muscular injuries after slipping in the bathroom and died while being transferred to hospital for treatment. However, other inmates alleged that he died on a stretcher in the prison's infirmary. According to reports, Rudy Fajardo had been given insufficient medical attention for a serious illness he reported, and was only taken to the prison infirmary after he and other inmates insisted. The death certificate stated the cause
of death was a "gigantic intercerebral tumour". His body showed a significant gash wound, which reportedly was not registered in the death certificate.
Prison conditions were reported to be very harsh, particularly because of severe overcrowding, dilapidated facilities, inadequate medical provisions and endemic violence. According to government statistics issued in October, 1,050 prisoners were held in Modelo Prison, in Panama City, which was built to house only 300 inmates. Sanitary and medical provisions were reported to be deficient, and because of overcrowding prisoners had to sleep without bedding on the concrete floor, often in corridors.
During a research visit to Panama in October, an Amnesty International representative met the Attorney-General, the President of the Supreme Court, members of the Court's penal division and officials of the prison department of the Ministry of Government and Justice to discuss the organization's concerns.
