EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Five prisoners of conscience and several untried political detainees were held throughout the year. Two other prisoners of conscience were released. Scores of people, most of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were arrested for advocating political change. There were further allegations of torture and one person reportedly died as a result.
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
The Constitution was amended in November to introduce a multi-party political system following increased demands for political reform by government opponents at home and abroad. Some rights, such as the right to strike, were strengthened but the rights to protection against tortiue and arbitrary arrest were deleted from the Constitution. President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo was given the power to declare and prolong states of emergency almost without limitation, and was personally given immimity against prosecution for any acts imdertaken before, during or after his term as President. No laws were passed to give effect to the constitutional amendments and no political parties other than the President's ruling Partido Democrático de Guinea Ecuatorial (pdge). Equatorial Guinea Democratic Party, had been formally established by the end of the year. The national hiunan rights commission established in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) was not reported to have taken any effective action to investigate or prevent human rights abuses.
Four prisoners of conscience, all supporters of an opposition group formed in exile, continued to serve sentences imposed after an unfair trial in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1991). Two other prisoners of conscience - Julián Nguema Abogo and Jesús Ntutumu Nsong — who had been sentenced with them to 12 years' imprisonment, were released in August to mark the 12th anniversary of the President's accession to power. Sergeant Venancio Mikó, who had been convicted in an unfair trial in 1983 of plotting to overthrow the government and whose death sentence had subsequently been commuted was also released (see Amnesty International Reports 1984, 1986, 1989 and 1991).
Antonio Ebang Mbele Abang, another prisoner of conscience and former Vice-President of the Chamber of People's Representatives, Equatorial Guinea's Parliament, continued to be detained without charge or trial throughout the year. In August he was transferred from Micome-seng, where he had been under house arrest, to prison in Bata after he reportedly refused a pdge invitation to form a new political party. He had been arrested in November 1990 together with at least ñve other advocates of political pluralism (see Amnesty International Report 1991). At
least four of them remained in detention without charge or trial throughout the year and may have been prisoners of conscience.
Scores of people were arrested for advocating political reform. Dozens were reportedly confined to their homes in March but later released. However, at least two. Angel Masié Ntutumu, a former Interior Minister and a member of the Chamber of People's Representatives, and Ricardo Nvu Mbá Bindang, a farmer, were restricted to the vicinity of their homes for the rest of the year. These restrictions, which had no legal basis, were imposed after a letter they had addressed to President Omar Bongo of Gabon asking him to promote democracy in Equatorial Guinea was apparently intercepted by the Equatorial Guinean authorities.
In April, after Roman Catholic priests had criticized government policies from the pulpit and in a pastoral letter, several priests were briefly detained and accused of fomenting political unrest. In May there were reports that at least 40 people were briefly imprisoned or placed under house arrest after anonymous leaflets calling for political reforms appeared in the streets of Malabo, the capital on Bioko island, and Bata, the capital of the mainland province of Rio Muni. They included Alfonso Nsué Mokuy, a journalist who had been arrested on previous occasions for his opposition to government policies. Alfonso Nsué Mokuy was arrested again in August with three other people. They were accused of propagating subversive ideas and were still being held at the end of the year.
One political trial was reported. Andrés Abaga Ondo Mayé, whose two brothers had been briefly detained in May, was arrested after complaining that his family had received death threats. He was reportedly convicted of defaming the authorities and sentenced to three years' imprisonment by a military court in late July or early August. However, few details of the proceedings were available.
Government opponents and others arrested in 1991 were said to have been tortured or ill-treated and some sources suggested that at least one person had died as a result. One of those held was reported to have been tied up in a painful position, suspended with ropes and severely beaten.
Amnesty International called for the release of Antonio Ebang Mbele Abang and
EQUATORIAL GUINEA/EST0NI/VETHI0P1A AND ERITREA
the six prisoners of conscience convicted in 1988, and welcomed the release in August of two of the six. The organization called for an end to the unlawful imprisonment and house arrest of suspected government opponents. Amnesty International repeated its calls to the government for the introduction and implementation of safeguards against torture, but without response.
In a written statement to the un Commission on Human Rights, Amnesty International described its concerns in Equatorial Guinea, including torture, unfair trials and the death penalty.
