UGANDA
Eighteen people charged with treason were prisoners of conscience and other possible prisoners of conscience were held on similar charges. Thousands of other
suspected opponents of the government were detained briefiy by soldiers during coimter-insurgency operations in the north. Some were quickly released but others were detained illegally in military barracks for months and over 1,000 were sentenced administratively to prison terms by military panels. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees in military custody remained common and there were numerous reports of extrajudicial executions by government troops during military operations. Both military and ordinary courts passed death sentences and at least 23 people were executed.
Preparations for a new constitution continued, but political parties, while allowed to exist, were still not allowed to organize any activities. The National Resistance Movement government of President Yow-eri Museveni continued to face armed opposition in various parts of the country, particularly the north and northeast. Many of the human rights violations committed by the government's National Resistance Army (nra) took place in these areas. Rebel groups were themselves reported to have abducted civilians, including 43 schoolgirls from Gulu,- and to have mutilated and killed captives.
Uganda acceded to the 1977 Additional Protocols I and II of the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 in March.
In March and April, 18 prominent politicians fi?om the north of the country were arrested. They included three members of parliament, Daniel Omara Atubo, then Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Irene Apiu Julu and Zachary Olum. After being held in military barracks for between three and six weeks, the 18 were charged with treason on 7 May. When they appeared in court, they were bruised and dishevelled, having been beaten by soldiers. An inquiry into their treatment was mounted by the Inspector General of Government, Uganda's hxunan rights Ombudsman. Although officials stated that the inquiry would be prompt and its conclusions made public, its outcome had not been revealed by the end of the year.
The treason charges automatically prevented the defendants from applying for bail for 16 months, although three were in fact released on bail on health groxmds before the end of 1991. The charges did not indicate what specific acts by the accused were considered to constitute treason. The
UGANDA
High Court ruled in August that the charges were defective but refused to dismiss them. This increased concern that the charges had been brought as a pretext to justify the imprisonment of suspected opponents of the government. Since 1987 the courts had failed to challenge this practice.
Treason charges were used to hold 43 soldiers and civilians arrested in 1988. They had been held in military custody for over 15 months before being charged and were then held for a further 19 months. Thirty-foiu- were released in August when the state acknowledged that they had no case to answer. The remaining nine were charged with more precise offences.
Around 136 other people were believed to be held on treason charges. It appeared possible that many were prisoners of conscience. Among them was Moses Ali, former Minister of Youth, Culture and Sports, who was released on bail in December after being held for 19 months on remand.
Thousands of civilians were detained for "screening" during counter-insurgency operations by the army in the northern districts of Gulu, Kitgum, Lira and Apac between March and July. According to a government minister, by mid-May 3,000 rebels had been captured in one sub-county alone. Several hundred were detained without charge or trial in military barracks in Gulu and Lira for up to four months, while the majority were released after a few days or weeks. Some, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained in detention at the end of the year. One was William Thomas Otto, a community leader from Gulu District, arrested in April and held in army custody. In contrast to previous years, a number of detainees arrested in the north were referred to the courts. On 18 October, for example, 63 people apparently arrested between March and July were charged with treason in Gulu.
Unlike previous years, relatively few of those arrested by the army were detained without trial as "lodgers" in civil prisons. However, over 1,000 young men from the north were reportedly sentenced to between five and 10 years' imprisonment, without being permitted a fair trial, for alleged desertion from the nra or allied militia known as Local Defence Units. Many were of fighting age, but not all were nra soldiers. Individual prisoners did not appear before a military tribunal, but were
allotted sentences in groups by military panels as an administrative measure rather than at the conclusion of a hearing.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the nra remained common and new information was received about cases of torture in 1990. For example, Haji Abdu Mbogo, a suspected armed robber, was reported to have been suspended by his arms and legs and beaten while held at Lubiri barracks in Kampala in June 1990. In March 1991 military police were reported to have severely beaten several youths who were among 435 people rounded up in Kampala following the killing of four police officers dxuing a riot.
nra soldiers engaged in "screening" operations in rural areas were also frequently accused of committing rape and other abuses. For example, between 16 and 18 April, soldiers at Bucoro in Gulu District were reported to have raped three women, beaten two men to death and suffocated four captives in a smoke-filled pit.
Many prisoners taken by the nra in the north, notably in Gulu and Kitgum Districts, were said to have been extrajudicially executed, although details were available only in a few cases. For example, on 10 April army units based at Atanga in Kitgum District reportedly detained several hundred men and women and shot dead 35 of them. Among the victims were a local community leader, Santo Alero, and his son, Ochieng. In another incident, a schoolboy was reported to have been extrajudicially executed in Kitgum town in late May.
No official action was known to have been taken against the soldiers responsible for these killings, despite repeated government assurances that a commission of inquiry had been established into alleged nra killings in Gulu District in late 1988. After a period of inactivity, this commission was apparently reconvened in August 1991 to investigate killings reported between 1988 and April 1990, but not after that. However, no details were available about its proceedings or findings. Other investigations into reported extrajudicial executions, announced by the army in 1989 and 1990, also failed to make any findings public.
In June nine prisoners convicted of murder and aggravated robbery were hanged in Luzira Maximum Security Prison. The Supreme Court dismissed the
UGANDA/UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
appeals of at least nine other prisoners sentenced to death, while the High Court condemned another eight to death when they were convicted of murder or aggravated robbery, both of which carry mandatory death sentences. In December Isaac Newton Ojok, Minister of Education in the government of former President Milton Obote, was sentenced to death for treason. At least 26 other civilian prisoners on death row were in imminent danger of execution after decisions by the Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy not to advise President Museveni to exercise clemency.
At least 14 soldiers convicted imder the nra's Code of Conduct were executed by firing-squad. Many such executions since 1986 have been in public and have followed summary trials which failed to meet international standards for fair trial. Three of those executed in 1991 were shot by firing-squad in June, immediately after an nra field court-martial found them guilty of rape and robbery. More than 100 other soldiers were believed to be under sentence of death in Luzira Prison. In May two civilians, illegally tried by military tribunals in Kitgum District, were saved from execution by firing-squad after the intervention of the Army Commander.
Amnesty International urged the government to release all prisoners of conscience including the 18 charged with treason, and sought information about the outcome of the inquiry into their alleged ill-treatment. The organization also criticized the use of apparently false treason charges to imprison suspected government opponents and called for a review of the 'Cases of all those charged with treason and for the release or fair trial of all political prisoners. Amnesty International called for better safeguards against torture or ill-treatment and for the commutation of all death sentences.
In August two Amnesty International delegates who visited Uganda met the government minister responsible for northern Uganda and other officials to discuss human rights. The minister said she had personally visited one village after receiving reports of torture and extrajudicial executions, but had found no evidence to substantiate the allegations. Amnesty International nevertheless continued to urge thorough, prompt and independent investigations into all reports of extrajudicial executions by government forces.
