CAMEROON
Over 120 political prisoners arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, were released by April. Hundreds of people were arrested and held, mostly for short periods, on political grounds. They included leaders of opposition organizations who were detained without charge or trial and in several cases reportedly tortured. More than 50 people were killed by the security forces during political disturbances.
Political unrest intensified during 1991 with strikes and demonstrations, some violent, spreading from the capital, Yaounde, to towns throughout Cameroon. Protesters demanded political reform, the release of all political prisoners and a national conference to discuss Cameroon's future. In response, President Paul Biya granted an amnesty to political prisoners in April and
CAMEROON
promised multi-party elections in 1992. Although meetings took place between the government, opposition and community leaders in November, the government continued to refuse to concede demands for a national conference.
Dozens of political parties were officially recognized, but opposition leaders continued to be harassed and detained. Seven of the country's 10 provinces were placed under military rule for most of the year and political gatherings were frequently banned, particularly in Yaoundé and Douala. In June the government declared an opposition coordinating committee illegal under laws passed in December 1990, and in July the activities of six human rights and other groups were banned under the same legislation. These laws, portrayed by the government as political reforms, proved in practice to be as repressive as the measures they replaced (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Over 120 political prisoners arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, were released by April under an amnesty for all political prisoners. About 80 of these prisoners had been arrested after an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1984. Some 60 of them were still serving prison sentences imposed after unfair trials before military tribunals. At least 20 were held in administrative detention: some had been neither charged nor tried; others had been acquitted or had completed their prison sentences but had not been freed. Among them were a number of prisoners of conscience, such as Oumcirou Aman who was acquitted by a military tribunal in 1984 but rearrested in January 1985 and sent to Yoko prison. He was finally released on 15 January.
Restriction orders imposed on most of the 140 political prisoners released in 1990 were also lifted in March. Among those to benefit was prisoner of conscience Ahmadou Bello, a former airline executive, who had been restricted to Poli in Northern Province after six years' administrative detention.
There were hundreds of arrests of demonstrators, government critics and opposition leaders during 1991. In January Célestin Monga, an economist, was detained for a few days. He and Pius Njawe, editor of a Douala newspaper, were subsequently prosecuted for publishing an article criticizing the government. They
were convicted of showing contempt for the National Assembly, given suspended prison sentences and fined; the maximum penalty for this offence had been increased in 1990 from one to three years' imprisonment.
A pattern emerged of short-term detention and ill-treatment in police custody. In early April over 200 students were briefly detained following demonstrations at the University of Yaounde. Eye-witnesses reported seeing about 50 of the students being beaten in a police station. A further 250 students were arrested and two were said to have died during clashes between the security forces and students in Yaounde in early May. All but two were released without charge shortly afterwards. Student leader Senfo Tonkam received a suspended prison sentence and another student was acquitted on charges of organizing an unauthorized public meeting. A judicial commission of inquiry into these disturbances concluded in July that no students had died as a result of brutality by the security forces. It found that many had been beaten, but said there was insufficient evidence to prosecute those responsible.
After the banning of public meetings in Yaounde in early July, hundreds of people were arbitrarily detained to prevent them from joining demonstrations. Some of them, as well as many others arrested at demonstrations and political rallies during the year, were believed to have been held for short periods without charge. The government announced releases in November and December which included over 90 people reportedly held for several months. They appeared to have been detained illegally since no state of emergency was in force. Over 300 people were detained, mostly for a few days, after an opposition rally in Douala on 4 August. Over 70 were held without charge or trial until 31 August including four opposition leaders who went on hunger-strike demanding to be released.
Senfo Tonkam, previously arrested in May, was again detained on 18 November after attending an opposition meeting in Douala. Charged with carrying false papers, he was reported to have been kept in chains at Nkondengui prison in Yaounde, and had not been brought to trial by the end of the year. The real reason for his detention appeared to be an open letter he had written to the President.
CAMEROON/CANADA
Some government opponents held for short periods were subjected to severe beatings or other forms of torture. At least 20 people were arrested after a demonstration on 4 September in Douala when journalists protested against the banning of seven independent newspapers under 1990 legislation. Two newspaper editors were said to have been brutally beaten by police.
Jean-Jacques Ekindi, founder of the Mouvement progressiste (mp), Progressive Movement, was arrested on 23 September when he tried to organize a political rally in Douala. An eye-witness recounted seeing him in his cell, his buttocks and the soles of his feet bleeding as a result of beatings. Some 15 opposition leaders were detained for about 24 hours when they organized a demonstration in protest at his detention. At least four were admitted to hospital upon their release, apparently as a direct result of ill-treatment in detention. One of them, Charles Tchoungang of the Organisation camerounaise des droits de I'homme (ocdh), Cameroon Human Rights Organization, said that they had been beaten on the soles of their feet with an iron bar and whipped with wire encased in a rubber tube.
Many of the prisoners released in the first part of the year had become seriously ill as a result of inadequate diet and medical neglect. Several were reported to have been blind or nearly blind on their release.
More than 50 people were killed by the security forces during demonstrations and disturbances throughout the year, In some cases demonstrators had resorted to violence but the security forces were said to have opened fire indiscriminately. Four people, including a teenage boy, were shot dead by the police in Douala during political violence on 16 May. The police announced that an inquiry would be held but no news was received of its outcome. There were reports that at least two people were killed by the security forces at a rally in Bamenda on 26 May, and two others during demonstrations following the arrest of opposition leaders in late September.
Following weeks of peaceful demonstrations in Bamenda at least two people were shot dead when a political rally scheduled to take place on 2 October was banned by the authorities, and the security forces opened fire with live ammunition and grenades on demonstrators who were trying to disperse. At least 50 people were
reported to have been severely injured, some 10 losing hands or limbs. One, Joe Awah, lost a hand reportedly when a grenade was thrown by the security forces at John Fru Ndi, Chairman of the Social Democratic Front. Others were apparently forced to carry grenades at gunpoint. No inquiry is known to have been held into these killings, nor did it appear that any measures were taken by the authorities to prevent or limit the number of deaths caused by the security forces.
One death sentence was passed for murder. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International called on the government to release all prisoners of conscience and to introduce strict controls on members of the security forces, in accordance with international standards, to ensure that excessive force was not used against demonstrators. It appealed to the government to repeal or amend provisions in the legislation of December 1990 which allowed the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience or arbitrary administrative detention without legal safeguards. It also urged the government to introduce safeguards to protect all prisoners from torture and ill-treatment.
