ALBANIA
Between January and July all remaining political prisoners were released, including many hundreds of prisoners of conscience detained for attempting to exercise their rights to freedom of expression and movement. Police allegedly assaulted and beat people following demonstrations and when dealing with successive waves of mass emigration. In April four men died after being shot during demonstrations. Six people were sentenced to death; four of them were executed.
At the end of March multi-party elections took place and the communist party, renamed the Socialist Party, was returned
ALBANIA
to power. However, in June the government resigned following widespread industrial unrest, and a coalition government was formed. As economic conditions worsened tens of thousands of people attempted to emigrate. Most of them went to Italy, which returned some 17,000 would-be emigrants to Albania in August.
Legislative changes promoting guarantees for the protection of human rights, which had begun in 1990, continued. On 29 April an interim constitution was adopted, pending the drafting of a new constitution. Unlike its predecessor, the interim constitution guaranteed "fundamental human rights and freedoms ... recognized under international treaties". It explicitly guaranteed freedom of religion and political association and provided for the depoliticization of executive bodies.
In Jime Albania joined the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce) and in September accepted all the cscE human rights commitments. In October Albania acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
In January 200 political prisoners were released by presidential pardon and at least 500 others were released in the following months. In July the authorities said the last political prisoners had been released including those convicted of "espionage, sabotage, terrorism, slandering state bodies and participating in illegal demonstrations". This was confirmed by unofficial sources. Those released included at least 50 people sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment in connection with anti-government riots in December 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991] and some 70 people convicted of participating in anti-communist demonstrations in February 1991. However, a large number of people previously detained for political reasons in internal exile, although formally free, were unable to leave their camps because of lack of alternative accorrunoda-tion and employment. On 30 September the People's Assembly passed a law declaring all former political prisoners, except those who had committed acts of terrorism resulting in death or other serious consequences, to be innocent. The law was in response to the demands of about 200 former political prisoners who staged a hunger-strike.
On 20 February anti-communist demonstrators in the capital Tirana pulled down the statue of Enver Hoxha, the country's former leader. A call by a group of military officers and cadets to reinstate the statue led to further anti-communist demonstrations on 22 February outside the military academy in Tirana. During and shortly after these demonstrations at least three people died, one of them a policeman. Fifteen others were wounded, including several people who were assaulted in their homes by members of security forces. Among the wounded were Olta Cekciri, aged 13, and Dorian Doci, aged two. Up to 200 people were arrested in Tirana and elsewhere in cormection with the demonstrations, although many were released a few days later. In a separate incident on 22 February, Artan Lenja was reportedly shot dead by an army patrol after he had intervened on behalf of two men who had been stopped by the patrol to examine their identity cards.
On 23 March border guards opened fire on a large group of Albanian citizens attempting to cross into Yugoslavia without official permission. Five or six were reportedly wounded.
On 25 March there were clashes in Dur-res between would-be emigrants seeking to leave the country by sea and security forces attempting to turn them back. Eye-witness-es alleged that police beat several people they had arrested before taking them away in a truck. There were further reports that police officers in Durres had beaten other would-be emigrants the following day.
Following the March elections there were anti-communist demonstrations in Shkoder on 2 April alleging vote-rigging. During the protests three men, Arben Broci, Besnik Ceka and Bujar Beshanaku, were shot dead by police. A fourth, Nazmi Kryeziu, was also shot by police and died shortly afterwards. Fifty-seven others were injured. Arben Broci, a leader of the local opposition Democratic Party, was reportedly shot in the back while appealing for calm to police and demonstrators gathered outside the Socialist Party headquarters in Shkoder. Opposition sources stated that demonstrators became violent only after police had opened fire. On 26 April a cross-parliamentary commission, established under opposition pressure to investigate the events of 2 April, blamed the security forces for the deaths of the four
ALBANIA/W-GERIA
and reported that seven people had been arrested in connection with the killings. On 29 July three of those arrested - the former police chief of Shkoder, his deputy and the head of Shkoder's internal affairs department - went on trial before a military bench of the district court in Shkoder. Two days later the trial was adjourned, after the prosecutor demanded that the case be sent back for further investigation. The trial had not been concluded by the end of the year,
Eleven offences were punishable by death, including embezzlement, theft of state property, treason, espionage and murder. Six men were sentenced to death for murder or other offences resulting in death. Four of them were executed: in June Oltion Mema and Ramadan Sadushi were executed after being convicted in separate trials of terrorism and murder respectively; in August two soldiers, Bujar Beqiri and Bujar Uzeiri. were executed for killing and robbing three people. One death sentence was commuted and the Supreme Coiurt ordered a retrial in the case of the sixth person sentenced to death.
In January and March Amnesty International wrote to the authorities urging the release of all prisoners of conscience. In February and March Amnesty International urged the authorities to initiate investigations into the allegations of violations perpetrated by police in connection with the demonstrations in Tirana and Durres. The organization also called for an investigation into reports that border guards had opened fire on Albanian citizens trying to cross into Yugoslavia. In June Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister expressing concern that in an interview published in the Italian press he had reportedly stated that, if necessary, Albanian coastal guards would shoot at Albanian citizens attempting to leave the country without official permission. The Prime Minister assured the organization that it was not government policy to shoot at would-be emigrants.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to commute the death sentences about which it learned.
In January Amnesty International published a report, Albania: Legislative Change since May 1990 and Amnesty International's Concerns.
