LITHUANIA
Lithuania gained independence after over 50 years' incorporation in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (ussr). Earlier, some detainees were allegedly ill-treated by ussr soldiers and 13 demonstrators were killed by ussr troops (see ussR entry). Lithuania abolished the death penalty for all offences except premeditated murder. No executions were reported.
LITHUANIA/MADAGASCAR
In September Lithuania, headed by President Vytautas Landsbergis, became a member of the United Nations and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. Earlier that month the State Coxm-cil of the ussr had recognized the republic's independence, following the failed coup in August in the ussr.
In November Lithuania acceded to the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its first Optional Protocol, and the International Covenant on Economic, Social £ind Cultural Rights.
In the newly independent republic call-up for military service lasting 12 months began in November. According to the Law on Compulsory (Altemative) Labour Service of October 1990, the length of alternative service for conscientious objectors was 24 months. There were no reports of people imprisoned for refusing conscription on grounds of conscience.
On 3 December an amendment to the criminal code reduced the number of offences punishable by death from 13 to one -premeditated murder under aggravating circumstances. Official sources reported that three people had been sentenced to death since March 1990, when Lithuania first declared independence, but all the sentences were commuted,
Amnesty International wrote to the authorities in April and October expressing its concern at the length of alternative service. The organization urged an official moratorium on the use of the death penalty, the commutation of any pending death sentences and the publication of full death penalty statistics. In December President Lansbergis responded, affirming the republic's commitment to international human rights standards, and explaining recent changes in the application of the death penalty.
