UNITED KINGDOM
The Court of Appeal quashed convictions in a number of controversial cases, some dating back to the mid-1970s. A Royal Commission on the Criminal Justice System was set up by the government. Official investigations continued into police misconduct in connection with the "Guildford Four" and "Birmingham Six" cases. After war broke out with Iraq, about 90 Arab nationals were detained pending deportation on national security grounds, many of whom were prisoners of conscience. One prisoner of conscience, a conscientious objector to military service, was imprisoned for 14 months on charges including desertion. Several people were killed in suspicious circumstances by the security forces in Northern Ireland. Detainees were reportedly ill-treated in police custody in Northern Ireland.
The number of killings in Northern Ireland by both Republican and Loyalist armed groups increased. Republican armed groups, notably the Irish Republican Army (ira), are predominantly Catholic and seek a British withdrawal ft'om Northern Ireland and a united Ireland. Loyalist armed groups, notably the Ulster Volunteer Force (uvf) and the Ulster Freedom Fighters (uff), from the Protestant community, want Northern Ireland to remain a part of the United Kingdom (uk). During the year 40 people were reportedly killed by the ira, including 16 active members of the security forces. Seven people were killed by other Republican armed groups and 41 in attacks attributed to Loyalists. Many of those killed were civilians - victims of dehberate and arbitrary killings by reason
UNITED KINGDOM
of their religion or political views. British soldiers and Royal Ulster Constabulary (ruc) personnel reportedly killed six civilians.
In March the Court of Appeal quashed the convictions of the "Birmingham Six" on the grounds that fresh evidence had undermined both the scientific and confession evidence against them, the latter because of police misconduct (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 to 2992). The six were released after 17 years' imprisonment. The Home Secretary subsequently established a Royal Commission into the Criminal Justice System in England and Wales.
In June the Court of Appeal quashed the convictions of seven members and friends of the Maguire family after crucial forensic evidence was re-examined and rejected. They had been arrested in connection with the "Guildford Foiu-" cases and convicted in 1976 of possessing and handling explosives: six of them served sentences of between five and 14 years' imprisonment and one died in custody.
In June a magistrate dropped the charges against three police officers accused of conspiracy to pervert the course of justice in the "Guildford Four" cases. The prosecution appealed the decision. In November four detectives were charged with perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice in the "Birmingham Six" cases.
The May Inquiry, a judicial inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the convictions of the "Guildford Four" and the Maguire family and friends, resumed its bearings in October to look into the procedures used by the Home Office to reinvestigate cases of possible miscarriage of justice. The report of these hearings had not been issued by the end of the year.
In September the Home Secretary requested the Court of Appeal to review the case of Judith Ward, particularly the forensic evidence. Judith Ward had been imprisoned since 1974 after an ira bombing of a bus in England which killed 12 people.
A police investigation, supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, into allegations of police misconduct by members of the West Midlands Serious Crimes Squad between 1986 and 1989 was completed (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 2991). A report was issued in
November. By October convictions had been quashed in eight criminal cases investigated by the West Midlands Serious Crimes Squad, mainly because of alleged police misconduct in obtaining confessions.
On 25 November the Court of Appeal quashed the conviction of Winston Silcott, who had been given a 30-year minimum prison sentence for the 1985 murder of a policeman during riots on the Broadwater Farm housing estate in London (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1991]. New evidence indicated that police officers had falsified notes of interviews with Winston Silcott. His two co-defendants, Engin Raghip and Mark Braithwaite, were released and their convictions were quashed on 5 December after the court heard that their confessions were unreliable because of "the apparent dishonesty" of the senior investigating police officer.
During the Gulf War about 90 Arab nationals, mainly Iraqis, were detained pending deportation on national security grounds. Many of them were prisoners of conscience. Thirty-five of them, including 32 students, were classified by the government as prisoners of war. All of the detainees were released by 8 March. Under the 1971 Immigration Act the government was not obliged to give detailed reasons for these detentions, and the detainees had no right of judicial appeal. Detainees were allowed to make representations to an advisory panel of three people, appointed by the Home Office. The hearings were closed and the detainees were not entitled to legal representation.
The same procedure was used in the case of Karamjit Singh Chahal, a Sikh separatist who had lived in the uk for 20 years. In August 1990 he was arrested and detained pending deportation to India. He sought asylum in the uk, claiming that he would face torture if forcibly returned and alleging that he had already been tortured by the security forces during a 1984 visit to India. His asylum application was rejected in March; he appeared before the advisory panel in June after which his deportation order was confirmed. In a judicial review of this decision in November the High Coiul ordered the Home Secretary to reconsider the case.
In September Vic Williams, a soldier in the Royal Artillery who declared his conscientious objection to military service in
UNfTED KINGDOM
the Gulf War. was sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment for desertion and public statements against the war. He said he had seen no altemative to desertion because the information on how to apply for conscientious objector status was not available to soldiers. The lack of such information was acknowledged by the judge advocate at the court-martial.
Kevin McGovem, a student, was shot dead on 30 September by police officers in Northern Ireland. He was neither armed nor involved in any illegal activities. The ruc first claimed he ran away when challenged and was shot after an object was thrown at police officers, but later said he was shot after he "appeared" to throw something at the police, which eye-witnesses denied.
On 3 November Gerard Maginn, aged 17, was shot dead by the ruc in Belfast while he was sitting in the back of a stolen car. The ruc claimed that they fired at the car during a high-speed chase. However, eye-witnesses stated that the car had already stopped when two ruc officers approached it and fired without waming.
In July six British Army soldiers were charged in connection with the killing in Belfast of two unarmed teenagers, Karen Reilly and Martin Peake, who had been shot dead in September 1990 in a stolen car (see Amnesty International Report 1991). One soldier was charged with murdering Karen Reilly, two with attempting to murder Martin Peake, and all six with attempting to pervert the course of justice and obstructing the police investigation into the shooting. One soldier faced an additional charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice by permitting himself to be struck on the leg by a colleague in order to support their account of a soldier being stmck by the car moments before the shooting.
In three other cases in which soldiers in Northern Ireland had killed people in disputed circumstances in previous years, financial settlements were agreed out of court with the victims' families.
Five House of Lords judges heard an appeal in November conceming the Coroner's Rules in Northem Ireland on whether written statements by security force personnel allegedly involved in killings should be admitted as evidence at inquests if the secxuity force members refuse to give verbal testimony or submit to questioning.
The judgment was not available by the end of the year. No inquests into disputed killings took place during the year because of this pending appeal case.
People stopped on the street or detained in police custody under emergency legislation in Northern Ireland alleged that they were ill-treated. Some people detained at Castlereagh interrogation centre in Belfast alleged that they had been coerced into making confessions in the absence of lawyers. In May and June at least 12 young men and women were arrested and interrogated in connection with the ira killing of a police officer. Five of them, including two 17-year-olds, were charged with murder. The five alleged that they were ill-treated, including being hit, punched and threatened during interrogation in the absence of their lawyers and families. Damien Austin, also 17, was arrested at the same time and alleged ill-treatment, but was released without charge; he was rearrested in August and was reportedly ill-treated and threatened. In August a number of young men were arrested in the Ballymurphy area of Belfast in connection with a bomb attack on the security forces. Five of them were charged with murder, but alleged that their confessions were obtained under duress in the absence of their lawyers.
In November the United Nations Committee against Torture expressed serious concems about interrogation and detention procedures in Northem Ireland. The Committee referred specifically to the practice of preventing suspects arrested under emergency legislation from having their lawyers present during interrogation,
Several people were convicted in Northern Ireland because judges drew an inference of guilt from the defendants' refusal to testify to either the police or the courts about circumstantial evidence. The trials were held in "Diplock Courts", single-judge courts without juries, which operate only in Northem Ireland.
Amnesty Intemational sent observers to the appeal hearings in the Broadwater Farm cases, and those of the "Birmingham Six" and the Maguire family and friends. The organization welcomed the release of people who had been wrongly convicted. It called for an immediate review of the cases of all those who had been convicted of offences connected with the Broadwater Farm riots on the basis of uncorroborated and contested confessions obtained in the
UNITED KINGDOMAJNITED STATES OF AMERICA
absence of lawyers. In addition the organization submitted a paper to the Royal Commission on the Criminal Justice System, highlighting Amnesty International's concerns about convictions based on uncorroborated and contested confessions obtained in the absence of lawyers, and making specific recommendations for bringing legislation and practice into conformity with international standards. The organization regretted that the Royal Commission's terms of reference did not extend to Northern Ireland.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in February about the detention of Arab nationals during the Gulf War, urging that such detention be subject to judicial scrutiny, as required by international standards, and expressing concern that many had been prisoners of conscience arrested and detained solely because of their nonviolent political views or activities or their nationality.
In April Amnesty International urged the government not to forcibly return Karamjit Singh Chahal to India so long as he risked torture or ill-treatment.
In June Amnesty International published a paper entitled United Kingdom: Human Rights Concerns. Among the issues it raised were ill-treatment, unfair trials and killings by security forces in disputed circumstances in Northern Ireland.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in July about killings by members of the security forces in Northern Ireland, expressing grave concern that the government continued to rely on procedures shown to be inadequate either to elicit essential information or to make it publicly available. FamiUes of the deceased had not been kept informed of the investigations into the killings and were refused access to autopsy reports. Investigations carried out did not meet the minimum requirements set out in international standards.
Amnesty International wrote to the government on several occasions concerning allegations of ill-treatment in police custody, including an appeal in August on behalf of Damien Austin. In November Amnesty International published a paper on allegations of ill-treatment of suspects held in special interrogation centres for people arrested xmder emergency legislation. It concluded that existing safeguards were inadequate to prevent ill-treatment. The organization called on the government
to institute urgent reforms of interrogation and detention procediues.
Amnesty International called for the immediate release of Vic Williams because it considered him to be a prisoner of conscience, imprisoned without having been given reasonable access to information about procediures for registering his conscientious objection to military service.
Amnesty International observed court proceedings in Northern Ireland because it was concerned about the withdrawal of the defendant's right to silence in light of international standards guaranteeing the presumption of innocence and the right not to be compelled to testify against oneself.
