LAOS
Eleven critics or opponents of the government, including at least five prisoners of conscience, remained in detention without charge or trial or restricted for "re-educa-tion". However, 25 others, including prisoners of conscience, who had been held without charge or trial since the mid-1970s were released and the releases
of over 183 other political prisoners in earlier years were confirmed.
The political structure of the Lao People's Democratic Republic (lpdr) was reorganized, with Kaysone Phomvihan giving up the post of Prime Minister to become President in August. He continued to head the Lao People's Revolutionary People's Party, the country's only legal political party. A constitution, the country's first since 1975, was promulgated in August and confirmed a one-party system. Rights to freedom of expression, opinion and assembly were proclaimed in the Constitution. However, they were qualified by restrictions suggesting that people could still be imprisoned for attempting to exercise these rights peacefully.
Three prisoners of conscience, all former government officials, remained in Samkhe prison in Vientiane, the capital. Thongsouk Saysangkhi, Latsami Kham-phoui and Feng Sackchittaphong had been arrested in October 1990 for criticizing the country's political and economic systems and for holding meetings advocating a multi-party system (see Amnesty International Report 1991). They were allegedly held in solitary confinement in small, dark cells. They reportedly asked to be brought before a covurt in order to contest the legality of their detention, to meet legal counsel and to be given access to documents to prepare their defence, but their requests were denied. In August a deputy foreign minister publicly reiterated accusations that the three had "acted against the law to overthrow the administration". However, it appeared that no charges were brought against them nor was any evidence presented to suggest that they had used or advocated violence. The Law of Criminal Procedure under which they were believed to be held prohibits detention without charge or trial for more than one year, suggesting that their continuing detentions at the end of the year were unlawful.
Eight people held without charge or trial since the mid-1970s were still restricted for "re-education" to the Sop Pan area of the northeastern province of Houa Phanh. Two - Khamphan Pradith, 57, and Thuck Chokbengboun, 66 - were known to be prisoners of conscience. The six others also appeared to be prisoners of conscience. All were former officials of the administration that was overthrown when the lpdr was established. The deputy foreign minister
LAOSAATVIAAEBANON
said in August that they had "committed some crime or committed some illegal action", but none of them had been charged with a criminal offence. They were reportedly told by local officials that they were being kept under restriction because they were "counter-revolutionaries" and "backward socialists".
Twenty-five other political prisoners sent without charge or trial for "re-educa-tion" in Houa Phanh in 1975 or 1976 were released between May and September. They included at least three prisoners of conscience - Houmphan Norasing, Salat Rajasak and Tiao Sisoumang Sisaleumsak. Amnesty International also learned that 185 political prisoners who had been detained without charge or trial and sent for "re-education" to the southeastern province of Attapeu in the mid- or late 1970s had been released in phases between 1987 and 1990.
In March Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Phomvihan welcoming the release of political prisoners in Attapeu. It urged an end to the restriction vrithout charge or trial of political prisoners held in Houa Phanh. In September Amnesty International welcomed the releases of political prisoners from Houa Phanh but expressed concern about those remaining there and called for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience,
