SENEGAL
More than 300 prisoners suspected of supporting a separatist movement were held for political reasons at the beginning of the year; among these were possible prisoners of conscience. New cases of imprisonment, torture and extrajudicial execution were reported during the first months of the year. All political prisoners were released in an amnesty announced on 28 May. Past cases of torture, some of which had resulted in the victims' deaths, and alleged extrajudicial executions carried out by government soldiers were not investigated adequately.
The post of Médiateur de la République, Ombudsman, was created in February to investigate complaints against public services, but it was not clear how far its role would extend into protection of human rights.
President Abdou Diouf appointed Habib Thiam to the newly restored post of Prime Minister in April and asked him to form a government composed of opposition party members as well as members of the ruling Socialist Party.
At the beginning of the year, the government faced continuing armed opposition in the Casamance region, largely from the separatist Mouvement des Forces Démocratiques de la Casamance (mfdc). Movement of Casamance's Democratic Forces. Several arrests were reported: some of those held may have been prisoners of conscience. However, a cease-fire was announced on 31 May after negotiations between the government and mfdc representatives. A few days earlier the government announced an amnesty for all those imprisoned in con-
nection with the events in Casamance. This resulted in the release of more than 300 people awaiting trial on charges of endangering the security of the state, which arose out of the Casamance conflict. None of those arrested in 1990 or early 1991 had been brought to trial by the time of these releases. The far-reaching nature of the amnesty also seemed to grant inununity from prosecution to those responsible for committing human rights violations in connection with the Casamance conflict, although this was not stated explicitly.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees suspected of supporting the mfdc continued to be reported early in the year and at least two were reported to have died as a result. Others were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed. All these reports preceded the cease-fire agreement.
In January Anmesty International published a report, Senegal: An escalation in human rights violations in Casamance Region. This expressed concern about the deterioration in the human rights situation which had occurred in Casamance over the previous year. It also detailed cases of alleged torture and extrajudicial executions of suspected government opponents and other human rights violations. In response, the government issued an official report entitled: Les faits en Casamance - Le droit contre la violence, The Facts about Casamance - Law against violence. This included some information on cases raised by Amnesty International. The report said that judicial investigations had been initiated into several deaths in 1990 which Amnesty Intemational had suggested were extrajudicial executions. It also said that torture allegations would be investigated even if the victims had not formally made complaints - previously the authorities had said they were unable to investigate such cases unless they had received a formal complaint. However, Amnesty Intemational received no response to its subsequent request for information about the outcome of these inquiries: it appeared that the May amnesty had effectively halted any investigations then under way and prevented any new ones being started.
