JAMAICA
Death warrants were issued for two prisoners but they were granted a stay of execution. The courts imposed at least 30 death sentences. At least 15 death sentences were commuted or overturned on appeal. Around 270 prisoners were on death row at the end of the year. The last executions were carried out in 1988. The Himian Rights Committee, which supervises implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr), adopted the view that there had been violations of the iccpr in the cases of four prisoners under sentence of death.
Legislation to amend the Offences Against the Person Act, which provides a mandatory death sentence for murder, was being prepared. If the proposed amendments are approved, the death penalty would apply only to first degree murder; killings resulting firom quarrels, fights or domestic disputes would not be punishable by death. The bill was to include a clause to allow the retroactive application of the new rules to the cases of those already sentenced to death.
Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan were scheduled to be executed on 7 March despite an April 1989 recommendation by the Human Rights Committee that their sentences should be commuted because Jamaica had violated the icc3»r in their cases (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1991). This was the third time warrants had been issued for their execution. Lawyers filed a constitutional motion on behalf of Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan and a stay of execution was granted on 5 March
JAMAICA/JAPAN
by the Governor General on the advice of the Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy pending a hearing by the Supreme Court. In late April the Court heard the motion, which alleged that the two men's constitutional rights had been violated, and rejected it on 18 June. The prisoners appealed the Supreme Court's decision to the Court of Appeal; a hearing was pending at the end of the year.
In April the Human Rights Committee adopted the view that Jamaica had violated the rights of Paul Kelly, who had been tried and sentenced to death in February 1983. The Court of Appeal rejected his appeal in April 1986 but did not issue a written decision. The Human Rights Committee found a violation of iccpr Article 9(3), the right to be brought before a judge promptly after arrest; of Article 14, the right to a fair trial; and of Article 6, the right to life, since the death sentence had been imposed after judicial proceedings that fell short of international standards. The Committee concluded that he was "entitled to a remedy entailing his release". In November the Committee adopted similar views in the cases of Aston Little and Raphael Henry, sentenced to death in July 1984 and March 1985 respectively. The Committee found that the death sentences had been imposed in violation of their right to a fair trial and their right to life. The Committee recommended they be released. At the end of the year Paul Kelly. Aston Little and Raphael Henry were still on death row.
The Human Rights Committee adopted the view that iccpr Articles 7 and 10(1) had been violated in the case of Willard Collins, sentenced to death in March 1983, on account of ill-treatment he had been subjected to on several occasions during his detention on death row. The Committee m-ged the Jamaican Government to take measures to ensure his "physical integrity and to grant him an appropriate remedy for the violations he had suffered".
Adrian Campbell, a juvenile offender sentenced to death in 1990, and his two co-defendants who may also have been under 18 when the crime was committed (see Amnesty International Report 1991] were released by the Coiut of Appeal in September. The court held that the trial judge had misdirected the jury.
A coroner's inquest started its task of determining criminal responsibility for the deaths of three prisoners during a prison
riot in May 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. It had not been concluded by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Governor General, Prime Minister Michael Manley, and other senior government officials in Febmary expressing grave concern about the death warrants issued for Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan. The organization noted that no country had ever executed a prisoner in direct contravention of the Hiunan Rights Corrunittee's views that the iccpr had been violated. Amnesty International urged the govemment to respect its obligations under intemational human rights treaties by preventing the executions of the two men and by ensuring that their death sentences were commuted.
In March Amnesty Intemational welcomed the stays of execution granted to Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan and renewed its appeal for the commutation of their death sentences, as well as those of others under sentence of death including Adrian Campbell and his co-defendants. The letter also reiterated Amnesty International's concems about the deaths of three prisoners during a riot in May 1990 at St Catherine's Adult Correctional Centre (see Amnesty International Report 1991] and at other places of detention, and requested information about the results of any investigations into those cases. There had been no reply by the end of the year.
