NICARAGUA
A number of demobilized contra rebels were alleged to have been killed by individuals linked to the security forces although the circumstances in many cases were disputed. There were no prosecu-
tions in connection with the killing of a former army officer by one of the Vice-President's bodyguards and the death of a youth allegedly shot by military escorts. Relatives of several people who had "disappeared" under the previous government identified remains found in four clandestine graves. The National Police was alleged to have used excessive force in the context of labour disputes. An amnesty law passed in December provided continued immunity from prosecution for human rights violations and other acts of political violence committed before that date.
Political violence escalated during 1991, generated by increasing friction between the forces which had been at war dming the previous government of the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (fsln), the Sandinista National Liberation Front. Several hundred former rebels of the Resistencia Nicaragüense, Nicaraguan Resistance, (known as contra), which had demobilized following the coming to power of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro in 1990, took up arms again. They alleged that they were being persecuted by Sandinista sympathizers and soldiers of the Ejército Popular Sandinista (eps), the Sandinista Popular Army, the official Nicaraguan army. The rearmed contra rebels, known as re-contra, were allied to certain sectors within the ruling coalition Unión Nacional Opositora (uno), the National Opposition Union. During 1991 the re-contra attacked police and army units and carried out targeted killings of police and military personnel, as well as killing Sandinista opposition activists.
Conflicts over land sparked off further violence in the countryside, aggravated by the government's failure to provide demobilized combatants of both sides with land after the war. Former contra rebels, demobilized soldiers and landless peasants
NICARAGUA
carried out occupations and armed attacks on agricultural cooperatives and state farms. In ensuing clashes with campesinos (peasant farmers) defending the land, dozens of people were killed or wounded. Very few of the killings attributed to either side in the context of agrarian clashes were thoroughly investigated. In only one case, in which five reportedly unarmed former contra rebels were shot dead in February by pro-Sandinista workers defending a state farm in Jinotega, did investigations lead to the arrest of those allegedly responsible.
uno politicians suffered threats and attacks on their homes, allegedly carried out by Sandinista supporters, following the proposed repeal of property laws passed during the Sandinista administration. Demobilized members of the eps joined civilians to form armed groups (known as re-compas) which staged violent protests in defence of agrarian and other Sandinista reforms. In November the bombing of the tomb of fsln founder Carlos Fonseca provoked protests by Sandinista activists who set fire to the house of the uno mayor of Managua.
The government created broad-based disarmament commissions to defuse the increasing conflict between rearmed groups of former rebels and of Sandinista supporters. In mid-November representatives of the rival groups signed a peace pact after talks mediated by members of the international commission set up in 1989 to monitor the demobilization process (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Nevertheless, according to reports at the end of the year, armed groups which had shunned the negotiations continued to carry out attacks and killings.
Dozens of demobilized contra rebels were killed in the period since the end of the war in 1990, some allegedly by individuals linked to the eps or to the fsln. Many of the deaths appeared to have occurred in the course of armed confrontations, and the circumstances of other killings were disputed. In February former contra commander Enrique Bermùdez was shot dead by unidentified gunmen outside a Managua hotel. Former rebels attributed the killing to the Sandinista opposition acting in complicity with the security forces. However, in a letter written two months before his death Enrique Bermiidez himself suggested that former rebel factions conciliatory towards the fsln would be responsible for
any attempt on his life. A presidential commission found serious anomalies in the initial police investigation into the killing, but said it found no evidence that could lead to the identification of suspects.
In August a former eps officer, Francisco Lacayo Montenegro, was shot dead by a former contra allegedly acting as bodyguard to Vice-President Virgilio Godoy during a public meeting organized by the uno in Matagalpa. According to most witnesses, the victim, who had been drunk and abusive towards the uno representatives, was unarmed and was shot in cold blood. The man identified as responsible for the killing had not been arrested by the end of the year. The judicial authorities claimed that proceedings could not move forward as the suspect was in hiding.
In March police investigations concluded into the death of 16-year-old Jean Paul Genie Lacayo, shot dead in his car in October 1990 as he attempted to overtake a military escort near Masaya. Evidence indicated that the military escort was that of Humberto Ortega, head of the armed forces. However, the police investigation failed to name any suspects and was marked by numerous irregularities, including reportedly failing to follow up possible leads and the death in suspicious circumstances of a police sub-commander responsible for the initial investigations. In August Venezuelan judicial police officers, requested by a specially appointed National Assembly commission to assist its inquiries, identified Humberto Ortega's escorts as prime suspects in the wilful murder of Jean Paul Genie Lacayo.
Over 50 bodies were exhumed between February and April from four mass graves in Jinotega, Madriz and Bluefields. The Asociación Nicaragüense Pro-Derechos Humanos (anpdh), the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights, which carried out the exhxrmations, stated that three of the graves contained the bodies of people who were killed or "disappeared" at the hands of the army under the Sandinista govemment and that the other contained the remains of two people murdered by the contra in 1988. Not all the bodies were identified and, as had been the case with similar exhimiations in 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991), the procedures used to identify the remains were criticized by other human rights groups. Many of the 44 bodies unearthed in April from the
NICARAGUA/NIGER
grave in Santa Matilde, Bluefields, were thought to have been those of contra soldiers killed in combat. However, in other cases, remains were identified by local residents as relatives who had reportedly been killed or seized by the eps. In April four bodies found in San Juan del Rio Coco, Madriz, were identified by relatives as men who had been arrested and killed by the eps in 1981. The bodies of three men were exhumed in El Bojazo in March and identified by relatives. According to local residents, the three had been detained in Jinotega in 1988 by members of the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (dgse). General Directorate of State Security, and extrajudicially executed on suspicion of being contra collaborators.
The results of the four exhumations were presented to the departmental Attorney General's Office. The cases of Santa Matilde and El Bojazo were also presented to the Military Auditor's Office. Neither the military nor judicial authorities were known to have taken steps to investigate the deaths, nor was any progress reported in investigations initiated in 1990 by the Military Auditor's Office following the discovery of a mass grave in Mokorón, Jinotega (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991).
The National Police was accused of using excessive force during a wave of strikes called in March and April by unions protesting against the effects of the government's economic structural adjustment policy. In April at least 16 people were injured when riot police forcibly evicted striking workers from a conference centre in Managua. In testimonies to the Centro Nicaragüense de Derechos Humanos (cenidh), Nicaraguan Centre for Human Rights, several workers said they had been beaten severely with batons and kicked. Two pregnant women were said to have miscarried as a result of the use of tear-gas. Although the centoh presented a complaint to the police monitoring body, the Inspectoría Civil, no investigation was known to have been carried out. There were further complaints that the police used excessive force against workers involved in protest occupations in Granada and Managua in October and November.
The amnesty law passed in 1990 continued to shield those responsible for past abuses from being brought to justice (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The
pattern of impunity was consolidated in 1991 by the paucity of effective investigations into alleged human rights violations and other politically motivated acts of violence committed after the amnesty law came into force. In December President Chamorro decreed another amnesty law covering political and related common crimes committed since the passing of the 1990 amnesty law, with the stated aim of encouraging armed rebels and promoters of violence to abandon criminal acts. President Chamorro warned that the amnesty did not mean criminal actions in the future would be tolerated.
Amnesty International monitored the cases of possible extrajudicial executions, the investigations into past human rights abuses and allegations of ill-treatment by the National Police. The organization was concerned that the propagation of amnesty laws preventing investigations into alleged human rights violations would prevent efforts to bring the truth to light and bring the perpetrators to justice, and would encourage the persistence of human rights violations.
