BAHRAIN
Two death sentences were imposed. No executions took place; the last execution was carried out in 1986. At the end of the year there were 23 prisoners on death
Dozens of suspected government opponents were detained without charge or trial early in the year and held for several months. They included possible prisoners of conscience. Other government opponents were brought to trial, and between 80 and 90 political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years con-tinned to be imprisoned.
Members of the majority Shi'a community continued to be subjected to arbitrary arrest and detention without trial on political grounds, particularly dvuing the early part of the year at the time of the Gulf War. Dozens were arrested in Sitra, Bani Jamra and Ra's Roman and held under the 1974 Decree Law on State Secimty Measures, which empowers the Minister of the Interior to authorize administrative detention
BAHRAIN
without charge or trial for renewable periods of up to three years (see Amnesty International Report 1990). 'Abdallah Fakhrou. aged 60, was arrested at the end of January and detained without charge or trial for over four months, apparently because he was suspected of opposing Bahrain's involvement in the Gulf War. In March two Shi'a clerics, al-Sayyid 'Alawi al-Biladi and al-Sheikh 'Ali 'Ashour, were briefly detained following a peaceful demonstration held in Manama to protest against Iraq's treatment of Grand Ayatollah Kho'iy. Most of those held in administrative detention were believed to have been released by the end of the year.
Other Bahrainis were detained when they returned to the country from abroad, apparently because they were related to political prisoners or government opponents. Some, who appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were held for days or weeks and then expelled from Bahrain. They included 'Atiqa 'Ali Ibrahim, the wife of a political prisoner serving a 15-year sentence in Bahrain. She was arrested with her two children at Bahrain's international airport when she returned to the country from Syria and detained for one week before being forcibly returned to Syria. In September. however, she was allowed to enter Bahrain and remain in the country.
On 14 December Dr 'Abd al-Latif Mah-moud Al Mahmoud, assistant professor of Islamic studies at Bahrain University, was arrested at the airport following his return from delivering a lectiue on future perspectives for unity among Gulf Cooperation Council member states at a seminar organized by the University of Kuwait. Dr Al Mahmoud, a prominent Sunni scholar, was held until 28 December, when he was released on bail.
Between 80 and 90 political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years remained in prison throughout the year. They included possible prisoners of conscience. Most were allegedly connected with banned Islamic groups such as the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain, the Islamic Enlightenment Society and Hizballah, Party of God. They included several dozen people sentenced in connection with an alleged coup attempt in 1981 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1991). At least 30 other political prisoners were believed to have been released in March and April after completing all, or all but a few months, of their sentences. Those freed included Tawfiq al-Mahrous and several alleged members of the Bahrain National Liberation Front who had been jailed after an unfair trial in 1987 (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 and 1989). Others released later in the year included 'Omran Hussein 'Omran (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
At least 20 people were tried on political charges before the Supreme Civil Court of Appeal, whose procedures fall far short of international standards for fair trial (see Amnesty International Report 1990). 'Abd al-'Adhim al-Rayyis was sentenced early in 1991 to one year's imprisonment but was released as he had already spent a longer period in custody. The trial began of about 15 alleged members of a banned political organization who had been held since June 1990 and were said to have been tortured or ill-treated to make them confess. All but one were released on bail in October and their trial was still continuing at the end of the year.
Political prisoners continued to protest against harsh prison conditions and several hunger-strikes took place. Conditions reportedly improved in some respects later in the year and some prisoners were transferred to hospital for treatment.
Amnesty International sought information about possible prisoners of conscience, and expressed concern to the government about the use of prolonged incommunicado detention, which can facilitate torture, and unfair trials of political prisoners. It continued to urge the government to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and other international
BAHRAIN/BANGLADESH
human rights treaties, and to apply their provisions in law and practice to safeguard hiunan rights.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Bahrain for United Nations (un) review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. In May Amnesty International published a summary of its concerns in recent years in a report, Bahrain: Violations of Human Rights. In June the Minister of the Interior wrote to Amnesty International in response to the report and the organization's submission to the un. He said that Amnesty International's allegations were "malicious rumour and disinformation". He stated that there were no prisoners of conscience in Bahrain and that "allegations of incommunicado detention and ill-treatment are utterly refuted". He also invited Amnesty International representatives to visit Bahrain, but by the end of the year no date for the visit had been agreed.
