HAITI
At least 20 political prisoners detained by the government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide were held for up to seven months without charge or trial; other political prisoners apparently received unfair trials. Five people were apparently summarily executed in July. Following a violent military coup in September, security forces shot and killed hundreds of unarmed civilians. More than 300 people, including many prisoners of conscience, were arrested arbitrarily, and many of them were detained without charge for longer than the constitutional maximum of 48 hours. Many detainees were tortured or ill-treat-ed. Prison conditions continued to be harsh.
In January Roger Lafontant, a prominent member of deposed President Jean-Claude Duvalier's government and the former head of the armed civilian militia known as the tontons macoutes, led an attempt to overthrow the government by force. He and his accomplices intended to prevent Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who had been elected President in December 1990, from taking office. The coup attempt failed, but about 30 people were reportedly killed in the ensuing wave of violence.
President Aristide took office in February. His government initiated some prosecutions against those responsible for human rights violations under previous governments. In March a landowner was arrested in connection with the 1987 killing of more than 200 peasants at Jean-Rabel by people who were acting on behalf of local landowners and were believed to include members of the tontons macoutes (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Two other people implicated in the same killings were arrested in April. In April Elysée Jean-François was convicted of
murder in connection with the 1988 St Jean Bosco Church killings (see Amnesty International Report 1989) and sentenced to life imprisonment with forced labour, He was released after the September coup. Chefs de section (rural police chiefs), notorious for human rights abuses under past governments, were instructed to turn in their weapons and were placed under civilian authority in April. Some of those known to have committed the worst human rights abuses were dismissed. In August the government set up a commission of human rights workers and politicians to investigate human rights abuses committed between 1986 and 1990.
On several occasions crowds attacked or threatened suspected political opponents of President Aristide leading to violent incidents in which a number of people died. In August, for instance, a senator thought to support a proposed motion of no confidence in the government was attacked and beaten. President Aristide appeared to condone several such incidents.
On 29 September a military coup overthrew the democratically elected government of Haiti. President Aristide was deposed and went into exile in Venezuela. In October Supreme Court judge Joseph Nerette was appointed provisional president; Jean-Jacques Honorât, Executive Director of the Centre haïtien des droits et hbertés pubhques (chadel), Haitian Human Rights Centre, became provisional prime minister. The coup was condemned by the United Nations (un) General Assembly and other international bodies. The Organization of American States (oas) mediated in negotiations between the new authorities and deposed President Aristide, who was still in exile at the end of the year.
In December the de facto authorities granted an amnesty to all those "arrested, prosecuted, tried or convicted for political crimes committed between 16 December 1990 and 27 September 1991". Many of those covered by the amnesty had been convicted of committing serious human rights violations anc^ had reportedly been released immediately after the coup.
In February Haiti acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
During President Aristide's administration more than 20 people accused of plotting against the security of the state were
HAITI
held for prolonged periods without charge or trial. At least two of them. Major Isidore Pongnon and Anthony Virginie St-Pierre, were former government officials allegedly involved in past human rights abuses.
Roger Lafontant and 21 others charged with crimes against state security following the failed January coup attempt were tried and convicted in July. Their lawyers were refused access to them before the trial, thereby infringing their right to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of their defence. Roger Lafontant was sentenced to life imprisonment with forced laboiu, although the Penal Code stipulates a maximiun sentence of 15 years' imprisonment for such an offence. He was shot and killed inside the National Penitentiary on 30 September in circumstances which remain unclear.
At least 21 men deported from the United States of America after completing prison sentences there were arrested upon arrival in Haiti early in 1991 and held for several months without any apparent legal basis at the National Penitentiary.
Ill-treatment by the security forces decreased after February but continued to be reported. In May lawyer Monique Bris-son was beaten by a prison officer at the National Penitentiary-when she presented a court order for the release of a client. According to her testimony, the officer refused to release the prisoner, then slapped Monique Brisson and hit her with a metal object on the head, causing her to bleed profusely. She was locked in a cell for several hoiu-s and denied medical treatment.
Five people were apparently surrunarily executed in July. Stevenson Desrosiers, an 18-year-old student, was shot dead by a police officer identified by eye-witnesses as the chief of the Service d'investigation et de recherches anti-gang, Anti-Gang Investigation Service. Four witnesses to the shooting, Jacques Nélio and three teenagers who had been in Stevenson Desrosiers' car, were taken away in a police vehicle. Their bodies were found at the General Hospital morgue the following day, riddled with shotgun wounds and bearing signs of ill-treatment. The police claimed that the young men were criminals killed while resisting arrest. One police lieutenant was arrested and the chief of the Anti-Gang Investigation Service was suspended during an investigation which had not been
completed by the time of the coup.
The days immediately following the 29 September coup were marked by violent repression, particularly in impoverished communities where support for President Aristide had been strongest. Many people were killed by soldiers in circumstances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed. Soldiers deliberately opened fire into crowds, killing and wounding hundreds of people, including children, sometimes in the course of demonstrations against the coup. In Gonaïves, Artibonite department, six people were shot dead by the security forces after demonstrators set up barricades in the city. After a soldier was killed by a crowd in Lamentin 54, Port-au-Prince, soldiers reportedly raided private homes and shot more than 30 unarmed people dead, then forced relatives and other local people to bury the bodies.
Jacques Gary Siméon, known as Jacky Caraïbe, a journalist and director of Radio Caraïbe, was seized on 30 September by a group of soldiers who arrived at his home and beat him severely in the presence of his family. The soldiers took him to an unknown destination, His bullet-riddled body was later found in the Delmas 31 district of Port-au-Prince, bearing the marks of severe tortiue.
In the aftermath of the coup over 300 people, including many prisoners of conscience, were arbitrarily arrested by the military. They were often held without charge for longer than the 48 hours laid down by the Constitution before being released.
There were widespread reports of torture by members of the armed forces, including severe beatings and the use of the technique known as the djak - a baton is wedged under the thighs and over the arms of the victim who is then beaten repeatedly. Many torture victims who sustained serious injuries were repeatedly refused medical attention.
On 7 October Evans Paul, the mayor of Port-au-Prince and a prominent supporter of President Aristide, was arrested at the airport by about 20 soldiers. He was on his way to meet oas representatives, and was then scheduled to travel to Venezuela for talks with the ousted President. Before his arrest, Evans Paul had reportedly received assiuances of safety from General Raoul Cédras, commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Evans Paul was severely beaten and
HAITI/HONDURAS
otherwise ill-treated in custody. He suffered fractured ribs, a back injury, eye damage and severe bums. He was released late in the evening of 7 October and subsequently went into hiding.
In October soldiers arrested Aldajuste Pierre, the leader of a rural cooperative and a member of the Mouvement paysan de Papaye (mpp), Papaye Peasant Movement. He was reportedly accused of possessing a clandestine newspaper, and was severely beaten before being transferred to a military hospital in Hinche, where he remained in custody. At least two other mpp members were also briefly detained, apparently for their membership of that organization.
In November about 20 street children, aged between 10 and 15 years, were arrested and detained at the National Penitentiary. They were apparently held because they came from Lafanmi Selavi, the orphanage founded by President Aristide. They had reportedly been released by the end of the year.
On 12 November uniformed policemen and men in civilian clothes broke up an apparently peaceful student demonstration in support of the retum of President Aristide, at the National University. According to their testimonies, many students were attacked with sticks and rifle butts. More than 100 students and eight journalists were arrested, and taken in army vehicles to the Anti-Gang Investigation Service and to the National Penitentiary, where they were again severely beaten. One student, Marie-Claude Paul, suffered a broken arm. About 30 students remained in detention without charge at the end of the year.
At least one person reportedly "disappeared" in military custody. In November a military street patrol in Port-au-Prince discovered Adelin Télémaque writing a proAristide political slogan on a wall. The soldiers beat him severely in front of witnesses before taking him away. The military later denied holding Adelin Télémaque, and his fate and whereabouts remained unknown.
Conditions at the National Penitentiary, Saint-Marc, Gonaïves, Cap Haïtien and other detention centres were harsh throughout the year. Beatings and other ill-treatment were ft^uently reported. Many inmates suffered from malnutrition and lack of medical treatment. Boys aged between 11 and 17 were held widi adults at the National Penitentiary and Cap Haï-
tien prison, sometimes for several months. In June, following a prisoners' protest at the National Penitentiary, the govemment promised to end prison beatings and to establish a permanent commission to examine prison conditions.
In May Amnesty International delegates visited Haiti, met human rights organizations and individuals, and presented the organization's concerns to the government. In October and November Amnesty International wrote to the new Haitian authorities to communicate its concems in the aftermath of the coup. No response was received.
In February in an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights, Amnesty Intemational welcomed the Commission's decision in 1990 to give increased scratiny to the human rights situation in Haiti.
