NEPAL
Hundreds of civil servants campaigning for higher wages were detained without charge or trial for up to several weeks: they included many prisoners of conscience. The fate of scores of victims of "disappearance" and possible extrajudicial execution in previous years remained unclarified, despite the completion of two commissions of inquiry. Four people sentenced to death in absentia were pardoned.
Multi-party elections took place in May, following the hfting in April 1990 of a 30-year ban on party political activity and the subsequent promulgation by the interim government of a new constitution providing increased human rights protection (see Amnesty International Report 1991). They were won by the Nepali Congress Party, which stated a commitment to human rights protection in its election manifesto, and a new government took office on 26 May imder Prime Minister Cirija Prasad Koirala.
In May, shortly before the interim government of Prime Minister Krishna Prasad Bhattarai relinquished office, Nepal acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr), the first Optional Protocol to the iccpr, the International Covenant on Economic. Social and Cultural Rights, and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
During July and August hundreds of
NEPAiyNETHERLANDS
members of the Nepal Civil Servants Organization (ncso) were detained after launching a nationwide campaign for higher wages and increased benefits. Most were held without charge or trial under the 1970 Public Offences Act for periods of up to one month pending investigation. However, they were all released after the ncso called off its campaign at the end of August. The leader of the parliamentary opposition and three opposition members of parliament were also briefly detained after they had visited four ncso hunger-strikers in hospital.
Two independent commissions established by the interim govemment in 1990 to inquire into allegations of torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions under previous govemments submitted their reports, one in January and the other in May. The investigations of the two commissions spanned the previous 30 years and included the suppression of the 1990 campaign for multi-party democracy (see Amnesty International Beport 1991). The government had not published either of the reports by the end of the year, nor had it announced any actions that it would take in response to their findings.
Isolated reports of torture and ill-treat-ment in police custody, involving both political and criminal detainees, were received throughout the year.
In July a possible extrajudicial execution was reported in Khotang district, where one person was shot dead by police. The government sent two Nepali Congress Party members to investigate: their findings reportedly supported an earlier statement by the Home Minister that the police had fired at people breaking a local curfew. However, others, including human rights workers and opposition parliamentarians, alleged that the death had occurred earlier during a demonstration in support of ncso strikers. No independent, official inquiry was known to have been held.
The death penalty was retained for exceptional crimes, despite apparent provision for abolition in the 1990 Constitution (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Four people convicted in 1987 of causing bomb explosions in 1985 and sentenced to death in absentia (see Amnesty International Report 1988) were pardoned in June.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in August urging the release of all civil servants held solely for the peaceful
exercise of their rights to freedom of expression and association. Amnesty International also urged the govemment to establish an independent and impartial investigation into the shooting of an ncso member in Khotang. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly requested information from the government about the fate of six prisoners detained after the 1985 bomb explosions who reportedly "disappeared" from police custody. Their cases were among those investigated by one of the two govemment-appointed commissions investigating torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. In June, eind again in August, the government informed Amnesty Intemational that the report of the commission was being studied by the govemment. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly urged the govemment to publish in full the reports of the two commissions and to ensure that any person implicated in human rights violations was brought to justice.
