GRENADA
Twenty-two people, including 14 former military and government officials in the People's Revolutionary Government (prg), had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment. One person was sentenced to death and four people remained under sentence of death at the end of the year. No executions had been carried out since 1978. At least six people were sentenced to be flogged, a cruel, inhuman or degrading pimishment.
Grenada acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in September.
In an oral judgment delivered in mid-July, the Grenada Court of Appeal upheld the convictions and death sentences passed
GRENADA
on 14 members of the prg and People's Revolutionary Army (pra). They had been sentenced to death in December 1986 for the murder of prg Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and 10 others in October 1983. The court also upheld long prison terms imposed on three other defendants convicted of manslaughter in the same case.
Maurice Bishop and the other victims had been killed at the pra headquarters at Fort Rupert in October 1983 following a power-sharing dispute within the Central Committee of the pro. Ten of the 14 sentenced to death were members of the Central Committee, who had not been present when the killings took place but were found guilty of ordering or instigating them. They included prg Deputy Prime Minister Bernard Coard. Phyllis Coard and General Hudson Austin, Corrunander-in-Chief of the pra. The defendants had refused to participate in the trial proceedings, except to make unsworn statements from the dock denying their involvement in murder. Their appeal against conviction, which beg an in May 1988, ended in September 1990 with judgment reserved (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In late July, some two weeks after the dismissal of their appeal, Grenadian newspapers reported that a decision had been taken to execute five of the 14, including Bernard Coard. Although the government neither confirmed nor denied the reports, it was feared that the hangings would take place before 1 August - the date on which Grenada was due to retiun to the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (oecs) court system (ft-om which the prg had withdrawn in 1979). A return to this system would restore the right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, the highest court of appeal for many British Commonwealth countries.
On 29 July lawyers for the 14 filed an emergency motion before the Grenada Court of Appeal, seeking a stay of execution until after a complaint submitted to the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights (iachr) had been considered. They also argued for the appeal to be reheard on various legal grounds. The complaint before the iachr asserted that execution of the defendants would violate the American Convention on Human Rights, to which Grenada is a State Party, including Article 4 which states that, "In no case shall capital punishment be inflicted for political
offences or related common crimes". The complaint was still pending before the iachr at the end of the year.
On 30 July, while the hearing of the emergency motion was pending, the Governor General revoked an earlier proclamation setting 1 August as the date for return to the oecs court system. He stated that it was "no longer expedient" to return on that date.
The emergency motion was dismissed by the Court of Appeal on 8 August after a one-day hearing and executions of five of the defendants were again feared to be imminent. On 14 August Prime Minister Nicholas Brathwaite announced that the Mercy Committee had recommended that the Governor General commute the death sentences of all 14 prisoners to life imprisorunent. In an address to the nation, the Prime Minister said that the decision had been taken in a spirit of national reconciliation, that there had been enough bloodshed in Grenada, and that there had been "many persons, groups and organizations at home and abroad who pleaded for clemency". He also stated that the Mercy Committee would soon make a similar recommendation on behalf of other prisoners on death row. Two days later it was announced that Grenada had retiuned to the oecs court system on 15 August. On 27 September, eight other prisoners had their death sentences commuted. At the end of the year foiu* prisoners remained under sentence of death: three whose legal appeals were still pending and one who was in hospital undergoing psychiatric evaluations.
During the year six people convicted in separate cases of sexual offences against children were sentenced to be flogged in addition to prison terms. Previously this punishment had not been imposed for several years.
Amnesty International appealed for clemency to be granted to the 14 prg and pra members in July after their appeal was dismissed and again when it was feared that five of them faced imminent execution, as well as to the other people under sentence of death. *
In letters to the Prime Minister and the Mercy Committee on 29 July and 6 August, Amnesty International stressed that the resumption of executions in Grenada after 13 years would be a retrograde step for human rights. It expressed concern about the apparent speed with which the
GRENADA/GUATEMALA
decision to execute some of the prisoners had been taken, contrary to practice in other cases and before the written Court of Appeal judgment had been made available. Amnesty International urged the government, at the very least, to grant a stay of execution until the complaint submitted to the lachr had been considered.
The organization also raised a nimiber of concerns about the trial of the 14 which provided strong additional groimds for clemency. These included evidence suggesting bias on the part of members of the trial jury, and the conditions in which a number of the defendants were held following their arrest in October and November 1983. Several of the defendants had signed confession statements after being held in oppressive conditions and denied access to legal counsel for several weeks; some alleged also that they had been ill-treated during interrogation.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Grenada in early August and met the Prime Minister to present its concerns about the possible resumption of executions in Grenada.
Amnesty International warmly welcomed the decision to commute the death sentences. Amnesty International said that this was a valuable measure in promoting respect for human rights in Grenada and in the region, in keeping with international human rights standards and world progress toward elimination of the death penalty.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General to express concern about the réintroduction of flogging as a punishment, pointing out that this was contrary to international standards prohibiting cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
