MYANMAR (BURMA)
More than 1,500 opponents of the government were prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience, but in all thousands were believed to be held for political reasons. Some were detained without charge or trial and others were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials. There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Government troops continued to seize arbitrarily, ill-treat and extrajudicially execute members of ethnic minorities in areas affected by armed insurgency. Over 100 people were under sentence of death, but no executions were known to have been carried out.
The ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (sLORc), headed by Senior General Saw Maung, continued to enforce martial law provisions enacted in 1988. These included Martial Law Order 2/88, which prohibits gatherings of more than five people, and Notification 8/88, which prohibits public criticism of the military. In August the SLORC issued Law No 11/91, which amended the 1975 State Protection Law to allow up to five years' detention without charge or trial.
The slorc had still not convened the People's Assembly elected in May 1990 by the end of 1991, and refused to hand over power to the National League for Democracy (nld), which had won the election. The slorc repeatedly declared its intention to "destroy" nld politicians and other members of the civilian opposition if they persisted in calling for a transfer of power.
At least one armed opposition group was responsible for abuses. Ln August the Democratic Alliance of Burma (dab) sentenced two people to death for allegedly passing information to the slorc. They were said to have received a form of trial, although details were not provided. Amnesty International appealed to the dab in September not to proceed with its plans to execute the two men, citing its total opposition to the torture or killing of prisoners. Amnesty International subsequently learned that both men had been executed.
Information about human rights violations was limited, owing to government imposed restrictions on access to Myanmar by human rights monitors and others. Information was further limited by martial law provisions curtailing freedom of expression. However, more than 1,500 people could be identified as prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience, including almost 600 who were arrested for opposition to the slorc in the first seven months of 1991 alone. In all, the number of people imprisoned for opposing the slorc was believed to be several thousand.
U Nu, a former prime minister, and the nld leader Aung San Suu Kyi, who was awarded the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, continued to be held without charge or trial under the 1975 State Protection Law. nld leader Tin U, who was sentenced in December 1989 to three years' imprisonment by a military tribunal for sedition, remained in custody, and 56 elected members of parliament, who were arrested in 1990, were still in detention at the end of the year. More than 80 Buddhist monks arrested in 1990 were also believed to be still held at the end of 1991. U Oo Tha Tun, an 82-year-old prisoner of conscience, died in detention. All other prisoners of conscience arrested in 1990 were apparently still being held at the end of 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Those arrested during 1991 included members of legally registered political
MYANMAR
parties and clandestine political groups, as well as members of ethnic minority, communist and student armed opposition groups. Some were believed to have been involved in violence. However others, including some charged with treason or inciting unrest, or accused of having links with armed opposition groups, were believed to be advocates of a peaceful transfer of power from the military to the elected civilian government.
Prisoners of conscience included U David Hla Myint, an elected member of parliament for the nld, who was arrested in January for flying the nld flag at the same height as the Myanmar flag. He was convicted of violating the State Flag Law. Nai Nawn Dho, a Buddhist monk and member of the Mon minority, was imprisoned for using the Mon language in a imiversity examination. He was believed to have been tried by a civilian court and to have received a seven-year prison sentence. Daw Cho Cho Kyaw Nyein, the General Secretary of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (afpfl), was arrested in January and reportedly sentenced in May to seven years' imprisonment, although no details were available. U Kyi Myint, General Secretary of the Burma United Democratic Party, was arrested in March after reportedly comparing Senior General Saw Maung to Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, and was still held at the end of 1991. Other prisoners of conscience included U Khin Maung Win and two other nld leaders from Bago Division, who were arrested after making anti-govemment speeches at the time of the Martyrs' Day anniversary in July.
Hundreds of students were reportedly arrested in December at the Yangon (Rangoon) Arts and Sciences University in connection with apparently peaceful protests calling for the release of previously detained students and Aung San Suu Kyi. Those held were detained by military intelligence personnel and included Bo Bo Htun, Zaw Min Khing and Ba Htoo Maung, all of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
At the end of 1991, it remained unclear in some cases whether those arrested during the year were still being detained without charge or trial or had been tried and sentenced by military tribimals. These tribunals, which were established in July 1989 to try people accused of martial law
offences, use summary procedures and do not satisfy international fair trial standards. They can waive "unnecessary" witnesses, and defendants have no right of appeal to a higher court. Those convicted are liable to one of three sentences: at least three years' imprisonment with labour, life imprisonment or the death penalty. The civilian courts, before which some political prisoners have been tried, also fail to satisfy international fair trial standards: the defendant's right to legal counsel is restricted and the independence of the judiciary is in doubt.
At least 46 people, including 32 elected members of parliament, were sentenced to prison terms by military tribunals in May on treason or related charges. Khin Maung Swe and Chan Aye, both nld members of parliament arrested in October 1990, reportedly received 10-year sentences for allegedly failing to report treason. Two other senior nld officials, Kyi Maung and Chit Khaing, were said to have had their earlier sentences of 10 and seven years' imprisonment doubled after being convicted on similar charges. Few details of the trials or the evidence against the defendants were available, but it appeared that many or all of those sentenced could be prisoners of conscience. About 33 other political prisoners were sentenced during the year to long terms of imprisonment.
The death in custody in January of U Tin Maung Win, an nld member of parliament arrested in October 1990, was attributed to natural causes by the authorities, but relatives and others suspected that his death may have resulted from ill-treatment. No official inquiry into the death was known to have been carried out.
Members of ethnic minority groups in rural areas in which armed opposition groups were active continued to be subjected to human rights violations by government troops. Some, who were forcibly conscripted as porters, were made to walk in front of army patrols in order to detonate any land-mines laid by opposition guerrillas. Among the cases reported was that of a Buddhist belonging to the Karen minority who was punched and stabbed in February by soldiers who had seized him and made him drive his cart along a path they feared might be mined. A Muslim Indian woman seized as a porter in April was beaten to death by soldiers after suffering an epileptic seizure and a Mon farmer
MY/WMAR/NAMIBIA
was beaten in April because he could not speak Burmese when soldiers questioned him. In May a Karen Buddhist made to act as a porter was killed by soldiers because they discovered that his brother was an insurgent.
Over 100 people were known to be under sentence of death at the end of the year, including seven people who were sentenced in 1991. Myo Aung Htwe was one of five people sentenced to death in March, although he was only 17 years old when convicted. No executions were reported: none was known to have been carried out for some years.
Amnesty International called repeatedly for the release of all prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners and for the commutation of all death sentences. It pressed too for a full investigation of all reports of torture, ill-treatment and extrajudicial executions. In August Amnesty International published a report, Myanmar: Continuing killings and ill-treatment of minority peoples, and in September, Myanmar: Unfair Political Trials. In December Amnesty International published a further report detailing recent arrests of opposition activists and the trials of some 80 political prisoners between January and July.
In oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about prisoners of conscience, mass political arrests, torture, extrajudicial executions, arbitrary detention of minority groups and unfair trials in Myanmar. In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Myanmar for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Coimcil Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. The slorc responded to Amnesty International's reporting of human rights violations in Myanmar by categorically denying that torture was used or that those held were political prisoners.
