ETHIOPIA (and ERITREA)
Several hundred political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were freed in May when the government of President Mengistu Haile-Mariam was overthrown by opposition forces. Most had
ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA/FIJI
been detained without trial, some for over a decade, and tortured. The Mengistu government was responsible for gross human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions, which continued imtil its overthrow. Both the new government in Addis Ababa and the newly formed government which took power in Eritrea in late May detained thousands of former officials and soldiers, who they said would be accused of war crimes and human rights violations and would receive fair trials. By the end of the year some had been freed but most remained in detention without charge.
The Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (eprdf), headed by the Tigray People's Liberation Front (tplf), launched a major military offensive against the Mengistu government in early 1991. The Eritrean People's Liberation Front (eplf) also scored new victories in its military campaign for independence for Eritrea. President Mengistu Haile-Mariam fled the country on 21 May, and within a week Addis Ababa fell to the eprdf and Asmara, the Eritrean capital, fell to the eplf.
Peace talks arranged by the United States of America took place in London in May while the fighting was in progress: they resulted in an agreement between the eprdf, eplf and Oromo Liberation Front (olf) about transitional government arrangements. An eprdf government took power in Addis Ababa and the eplf formed a new administration in Eritrea, which it governed as a separate area, no longer under control from Addis Ababa.
Both were provisional governments scheduled to hold office for a two-year transitional period, leading up to multiparty elections in Ethiopia and an internationally supervised referendum in Eritrea
to decide whether it should be fully independent. In July the eprdf government gave way to a broad-based Transitional Government headed by the leader of the eprdf and tplf, Meles Zenawi, who became President. A Council of Representatives was appointed as the new legislature with members from the eprdf, olf and 22 other groups. A Transitional Charter, which replaced the suspended 1987 Constitution, declared support for the Universal Declaration of Hmnan Rights, a democratic political system, an independent judiciary and the right of nationalities and peoples within Ethiopia to self-determination. The formation of political parties and the holding of meetings and demonstrations were permitted from August.
The fall of the Mengistu government ended 30 years of armed conflict in Eritrea. However, there was further fighting in the Gojjam region until August between eprdf forces and the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (eprp), which had also fought against the Mengistu government. There was also new fighting in the east of the country in the second half of 1991 involving Oromo and Afar groups, and inter-ethnic clashes which resulted in scores of deaths.
The eplf government in Eritrea forcibly expelled about 120,000 people from the territory in June. About 80,000 were captured Ethiopian government soldiers: the others, all non-Eritreans, were mostly relatives of the expelled soldiers but some were Ethiopian teachers and former officials. They were put across the border with Ethiopia without transport. Hundreds died of starvation or illness in transit camps or while making their way south.
The first part of the year saw a continuing pattern of political imprisonment, torture and extrajudicial executions under the Mengistu government.
In January government forces arrested scores of people in Asmara and surrounding areas in reprisal for eplf military successes, and similar arrests of suspected supporters of other armed opposition groups occurred in Gondar and elsewhere. In April over a dozen famine relief truck drivers were detained for several weeks as suspected eprdf supporters.
Political detainees continued to be tortured by security police in interrogation centres and special "safe" houses, including one in Addis Ababa known as the
ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA/FIJI
"Bermuda Triangle" since prisoners taken there "disappeared". Torture methods included beatings on the soles of the feet while being suspended from a horizontal pole, electric shocks and near-drowning in a barrel of water.
At the beginning of the year, hundreds of untried political detainees and other political prisoners were being held in Asmara, Addis Ababa and elsewhere. Some had been held without charge or trial for years in appalling conditions. They included prisoners of conscience such as Aregai Gebre-Igziabeher, a Tigrayan student arrested in 1979; Tadelech Haile-Michael, a journalist and eprp member who had initially been sentenced to death after she was caught trying to flee the country in 1979; Mulugetta Mosissa, an Oromo civil servant detained without trial since 1980; and many former government officials arrested in Tigray in 1984. Tesfa-Mariam Zeggai, a United Nations (un) staff member, blinded by torture after his arrest in 1981, was serving a life sentence imposed after an unfair trial, and Genet Mebratu, another un official, was detained without trial following a 1989 coup attempt in which her husband, the army commander and coup leader, was killed. Other prisoners included Eritrean combatants captured in the late 1970s, members of the Anuak ethnic group held in M^u in the southwest since 1986, and members of an opposition group from Somalia, the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (dfss), held since 1985 and 1986.
Shortly before the fall of Addis Ababa in May, the outgoing government freed 187 political prisoners, mostly army officers held since the 1989 coup attempt. All remaining political prisoners were freed when the eprdf and eplf captured Addis Ababa, Asmara and other towns with prisons. Five prisoners were reportedly summarily executed in Asmara in January and a further 12 political prisoners were executed there in April. ¿i Gondar, over 120 political prisoners were extrajudicially executed in April when eprdf soldiers were about to capture the town.
Both main opposition forces were reportedly responsible for human rights abuses before they took power in May. Hagos Atsbeha continued to be detained by the tplf following his abduction from Sudan in 1986, together with other dissidents within the organization, although
some were reportedly released in May. In Eritrea the eplf assassinated leading supporters of the Ethiopian Government, and both the eprdf and eplf were said to have executed alleged criminals.
Immediately after taking power the eprdf was faced with hostile demonstrations in Addis Ababa and other towns; they were forcibly suppressed, leaving several demonstrators dead. The new authorities then arrested thousands of people connected with the former government or ruling party as well as military and police officers. In June the government said the detainees would face war crimes and human rights charges and receive fair trials, open to observers from Arrmesty International and other organizations.
In the second half of the year many former local government officials were arrested, together with members of the former ruling party, which was banned. Many had been publicly accused of committing human rights violations, particularly during the "Red Terror" campaign in the late 1970s (see Amnesty International Report 1978).
Several thousand of those arrested were freed uncharged before the end of 1991. However, hundreds of others remained in detention without charge or trial, or any opportunity formally to challenge their detention, while their cases were under investigation. None had been brought to trial by the end of the year.
The new detainees were held in civilian centres (such as a former political institute in Addis Ababa), local administration compounds, private houses, police or military barracks (some of them in remote areas), or in prisons previously used by the seciuity police, such as Maikelawi prison in Addis Ababa. There were reports of poor conditions in some of these detention centtes due to overcrowding and lack of facilities. Detainees, however, were allowed access to relatives, medical treatment and food from their families.
In November three leaders of the National Democratic Union, a new political party, were detained after distiu-bances at a demonstration in Addis Ababa. They were accused of inciting violence but were still held without charge at the end of the year.
There were also hundreds of arrests in Eritrea of former government and ruling party officials and soldiers when the eplf assimied power in May. An amnesty was
ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA/FIJI
declared in June for people who had worked for or collaborated with the overthrown government, except for those who were suspected of committing crimes. More arrests were reported later in the year which may have been politically motivated. Five hundred detainees were released in December but several hundred people were still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1991. Among them were believed to be several Eritrean opponents of the eplf who were abducted from Addis Ababa at the end of May or in July. Nine hundred military officers detained in May were still held: the authorities said they would be returned to Ethiopia for investigation or trial.
There was no information about any court-imposed death sentences or executions in Ethiopia or Eritrea during the year. In May about 60 condemned prisoners in Addis Ababa went free when the government fell. No death sentences were known to have been pronounced in Ethiopia or Eritrea between May and December, but there were believed to have been dozens of summary executions of alleged criminals by eprdf and eplf soldiers, without formal judicial proceedings.
In the first part of 1991 Amnesty International continued to appeal to President Mengistu to release prisoners of conscience, to ensure that other political prisoners were given fair trials or released, and to stop torture and extrajudicial executions. There was no response.
In late May Amnesty International published a report, Ethiopia: End of an era of brutal repression - a new chance for human rights. This documented the gross human rights violations of the Mengistu years and proposed a "human rights agenda" to the new governments in Addis Ababa and Asmara, urging the introduction of safeguards to prevent any repetition of past human rights violations. It called for the fate of the "disappeared" to be clarified and for those responsible for tortiu«, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions under the former government to be brought to justice.
Amnesty International delegates visited Addis Ababa in July and met released political prisoners and others concerned about human rights. A further delegation to Ethiopia in December had talks with members of the government about human rights protection. Among other things, it urged that
detained former officials should be released if they were not to be formally charged with recognizably criminal offences.
Similar talks were held in December with the head of the Provisional Government of Eritrea, Issaias Afawerki, dvuing the organization's first visit to Eritrea.
