SOUTH AFRICA
Hundreds of opponents of the government were victims of politically motivated killings carried out by the security forces or with their acquiescence. Some were assassinated, others were killed in mass attacks on residents of black townships and squatter camps. The authorities announced various inquiries into such killings but rarely brought those responsible to justice. Over 800 critics and opponents of the government were detained under security legislation, including many prisoners of conscience. There were new reports of torture and ill*treatment of prisoners, with at least 17 deaths in police custody in suspicious circumstances. At least 420 prisoners remained under sentence of death. Two prisoners were executed.
The government of I'resident F. W. de Klerk continued the process of dismantling apartheid by repealing the Group Areas and Land Acts. It also amended the Internal Security Act, reducing but not eliminating police powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial. There were further negotiations between the government and the African National Congress (anc), led by Nelson Mandela. In December a multiparty Convention for a Democratic South Africa (codesa) was convened to consider proposals for a future constitution, including a Bill of Rights.
Despite a 1990 agreement by the government to release all political prisoners by April, at least 400 were still held at the end of 1991. Others were released only after going on hunger-strike to protest against the delays, including prisoners in the nominally independent Bophuthatswana "homeland", which was not covered by the 1990 agreement.
In September the government agreed to the return of political exiles under the auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. However, the government reserved the right to exclude certain returnees from a general amnesty.
There was a continuing high level of political violence in Natal, the Johannesburg and Cape Town areas and elsewhere. Over 2,500 people were killed, mostly as a result of conflict between supporters of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party (dt) and supporters of the anc and its allied organizations. Evidence of the government's role in the violence emerged when it transpired that the iff had received secret security police funding for some years. It also transpired that several hundred iff members had secretly received military training from the South African Defence Force between 1986 and 1989. The authorities denied that those iff members who had been trained had been involved in politically motivated killings, but press reports in December indicated that some had carried out killings of government opponents in Natal and elsewhere.
Following various unsuccessful attempts to stem the violence, a peace accord was signed in September by the government, the anc, the iff and other political parties. This established procedures for resolving conflicts at local level and for monitoring violence at regional and local level. A commission chaired by a senior judge was set
SOUTH AFRICA
up to investigate the causes of the violence. By the end of the year, sub-committees of the commission had begun hearings on several major incidents involving mass killings and individual assassinations. The peace accord established a nevi^ code of conduct for the police, and "police reporting officers", who were to be independent of the police, to investigate allegations of police misconduct. These officers had still to be appointed at the end of the year.
The police and military Special Forces units were widely alleged to have taken part in political assassinations and to have assisted those responsible for such killings. The police were also alleged to have acted in a biased manner in favour of the iff and against the anc by failing to protect anc supporters from attack, and by not investigating killings or bringing those responsible to justice. The government denied these allegations, but a growing body of evidence emerged during the year which pointed to official responsibility for or acquiescence in a series of political killings, largely of anc supporters.
In January the Supreme Court concluded that newspaper reports accusing a senior police general of supplying poisons to police operatives to kill anc members were credible. The general, however, remained in his post pending an appeal and no official investigation was mounted.
Chief Mlabunzima Maphumulo, president of the anc-aligned Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa (contralesa), was shot dead in February. An inquest court was later told by former members of the security forces that they had been involved in a security police "death squad" which was responsible for Chief Maphumulo's death, as well as the deaths of other political activists in Natal. The inquest was still continuing at the end of the year.
Among other cases, in May two anc members were shot dead in Soweto by the police who said that they had acted in self-defence. However, according to the findings of an autopsy, one of the two, Samuel Padi, was shot while lying down. The police officers involved were previously alleged to have threatened to kill Samuel Padi when interrogating his father three months earlier. Former political prisoners and others who returned to South Africa from exile abroad went into hiding after finding that their homes were under
surveillance by armed men, including their former police interrogators.
In addition to targeted killings, it was widely alleged that the police and military were implicated in attacks by armed iff supporters on tovmship communities believed to support the anc. There were persistent reports that the security forces failed to intervene to prevent or stop such attacks. For example, at least 27 people were killed at Swannieville squatter camp in May by a large force of ifp supporters. The police stood by while the attackers travelled some 10 kilometres to Swannieville and afterwards escorted them, still armed, while they left. Eye-witnesses alleged that uniformed police and white men in civilian clothes actively participated in the attack. Eye-witnesses also accused police of participating in a series of night attacks on the homes of anc supporters at Khayelitsha near Cape Tovm between July and September, in which at least 15 people were killed. In October a team of apparently professionally trained gunmen fired on mourners leaving the funeral of Sam Ntuli, an assassinated East Rand community leader, killing at least 18 people. Eye-witnesses said they had identified police officers amongst the attackers.
Despite the weight of evidence to the contrary, the Minister of Law and Order repeatedly denied any police involvement in politically motivated killings. In general the authorities failed adequately to investigate reports of police complicity in such killings or to ensure that those responsible were brought to justice. In one case, however, seven police officers were put on trial for the murder in 1988 of 11 people in Natal. They were alleged to have carried out the murders at the behest of a local if? leader.
Peaceful demonstrators were also killed in shootings by the security forces. In March Johannes Mafatshe, a teacher, was shot dead in Bophuthatswana. The authorities announced an investigation, but it had not been held by the end of the year. In May, 12 demonstrators were shot dead by police in Daveyton township. An inquest court later recommended prosecution of the police officers responsible. However, they had not been brought to trial by the end of 1991: neither had nine other police officers who the Minister of Justice announced in February were to be prosecuted for killing 12 demonstrators at
SOUTH AFRICA
Sebokeng in March 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
The Internal Security Act was amended in June, removing police powers of indefinite incommunicado detention without trial. However, the police remained empowered to hold uncharged political detainees incommunicado for up 10 days without informing their relatives or lawyers, and to hold detainees for 14 days for "preventive" purposes. In specifically designated "unrest areas", the security forces were empowered to detain people without charge for up to 30 days. There were arrests and detentions in these areas and in the Ciskei and Bophuthatswana "homelands", where separate security legislation was in force. More than 350 people were detained briefly during a three-week state of emergency in Ciskei in November and hundreds of others, mostly anc supporters, were detained in Bophuthatswana.
There were new reports of torture of political detainees and others by police and military personnel. In one case, Isaac Padi was reportedly subjected to electric shocks in February at Protea police station in Soweto. In another case, Israel Mabote, an anc activist in Thokoza township, was reportedly abducted by 12 police officers in September and beaten, kicked and nearly suffocated with rubber tubing while they interrogated him. In the same month, Tusha Manzini and five other residents of northeastern Zululand were allegedly tortured with electric shocks, beaten and partially suffocated by soldiers. There were also numerous reports of prisoners being assaulted in Bophuthatswana.
At least 17 people died in suspicious circumstances while in police custody, including Solly Maele Mogashoa, a teacher who died the day after his arrest by Lebowa "homeland" police in October. An autopsy revealed that he had sustained a fractured skull following his arrest.
In most cases the authorities failed to investigate adequately reports of torture and deaths in custody. In several cases families and lawyers of detainees who had died in custody were either not notified or were not given sufficient notice of when inquests were to occur, resulting in verdicts based on police evidence only. In one case a high-level investigation was ordered, after allegations of systematic tortiue and killings at Welverdiend police station near Carletonville. Human rights activists and
witnesses who made statements against the police were harassed, falsely charged in court, threatened with death and, in one case, shot and wounded by a suspended police officer.
The moratoriiun on executions announced by the government one year earlier (see Amnesty International Report 1991) was ended in February. One execution was scheduled but legal action resulted in a stay of execution and there were no hangings in 1991 other than in the Venda "homeland", where two people were executed in February. At the end of the year at least 420 prisoners were under sentence of death, 294 in Pretoria and the remainder in the Bophuthatswana, Venda and Transkei "homelands". However, a moratorium remained in effect in Transkei and the death penalty was abolished in the Ciskei "homeland" in February.
A review tribunal continued to consider death sentences imposed before July 1990, when legislation granting an automatic right of appeal was introduced. It confirmed the death sentences in most cases. However, death sentences imposed in 1989 on the "Upington 14" (see Amnesiy International Report 1990) were overturned by the Appeal Coiul in May and murder convictions on all but three defendants quashed.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience. It also appealed on behalf of detainees at risk of torture and prisoners facing imminent execution. When proposed amendments to the Internal Security Act went before Parliament for consideration. Amnesty International campaigned for the incorporation of provisions which would protect those in custody from ill-treatment and torture.
Amnesty International appealed for action by the authorities to prevent political killings, in particular to protect individuals at risk of assassination. The organization urged the government to ensure effective investigations into reports of unlawful conduct by members of the security forces, including their direct or indirect complicity in assassinations, and to bring those found to have acted unlawfully to justice.
In a written statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February and in an oral statement to the un Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on southern Africa in July, Amnesty
SOUTH AFRICA/SPAIN
International described its concerns about human rights violations in South Africa.
Amnesty International representatives visited South Africa on several occasions. An observer attended the May appeal hearing of the "Upington 14". In July another observer attended part of the inquest proceedings into the death in 1990 of Internal Security Act detainee Donald Madisha. In December an Amnesty International delegation visited the Johannesburg area, Natal and Cape Town to investigate the role of the police in political killings in those areas. The delegates visited black townships affected by the violence and met human rights monitors, as well as police and justice department officials, and the Deputy Minister of Law and Order.
