CHAD
At least 75 alleged government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial. Some were reportedly tortured. At least 40 other suspected government opponents, mostly members of the Hadjerai ethnic group, were reported to have been extrajudicially executed. Four people were publicly executed.
Following the overthrow of former President Hissein Habré in December 1990, the new government headed by Idriss Deby invited political exiles to return from abroad and provided for the formation of political parties other than the ruling Mouvement patriotique du salut ímps). Patriotic Movement for Salvation. No additional parties had been formally established by the end of 1991. Official guidelines published in October, from which the mps was exempt, required new political parties to have representatives in each of the country's 10 regions and to have a balanced
membership by sex, religion and profession.
The commission of inquiry into human rights violations and other abuses during President Habr6's years in office, which the new government had established in December 1990, began its work in January. Chaired by a senior procuracy official, it heard evidence from former prisoners and others, including relatives of the "disappeared", and identified and visited the sites of mass graves where victims of extrajudicial executions had been buried, notably around the capital. N'Djamena. The commission, which was expected to complete its investigations in early 1992, estimated that at least 1,700 prisoners had died from tortiue and that about 10,000 others had been executed between 1982 and 1990.
The new government was faced with continuing tensions within the army. These surfaced in June when about 40 army officers from southern Chad were arrested in N'Djamena after signing an open letter demanding recognition of their seniority in terms of pay and responsibilities. They were detained at the former presidential offices in N'Djamena and reportedly deprived of food and denied family visits for several days. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience. They were released after about a month but reports suggested that some of them were then placed under house arrest. There were further outbreaks of violence within the army in September when mutinies in two military garrisons in northern Chad left dozens of soldiers dead.
Violent clashes broke out in October between members of the Hadjerai ethnic group and those belonging to other ethnic groups. Maldom Bada Abbas, the mps Vice-President and Minister of the Interior and Security, and several dozen others, mostly Hadjerai, were arrested and accused of plotting to overthrow President Deby. No evidence to support these allegations was produced and they had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
At least two journalists were detained or assaulted by soldiers. For example, Loumaye Ndombidje, a journalist with the newspaper N'Djamena-Hebdo, was arrested in August by soldiers and accused of taking photographs of a military plane, one of a number which had been sold to private individuals abroad. He was held for two weeks at the Territorial Brigade of the
CHAD/CHILE
National Gendarmerie in N'Djamena, then released without charge.
Some political detainees were reportedly subjected to beatings and other torture, including partial suffocation and starvation. Places that had been used for torture and illegal detention by the security police of the previous government, including a converted swimming pool in N'Djamena, were reportedly reopened. Raymond Natangar, Director of Studies at the Higher Teachers College in N'Djamena, was said to have died from injimes sustained under tortiure in October.
Following the alleged coup attempt in October, at least 40 people, mostly Hadjerai from N'Djamena, were said to have been extrajudicially executed by soldiers loyal to President Deby. Some were killed trying to prevent the seizure of their property; others were reportedly executed after being taken to a place about 25 kilometres north of N'Djamena,
In November President Deby issued a decree setting up a commission of inquiry, chaired by a N'Djamena Court of Appeal judge, to investigate human rights violations committed in the aftermath of the alleged October coup attempt. However, the commission had not started its work by the end of the year.
Three soldiers and a civilian were publicly executed in October before a large crowd in N'Djamena. They had all been sentenced to death between June and August after unfair trials before a military court which had been established in April to combat a rise in crime, particularly by soldiers. The four, who had no right of appeal, had been convicted of murder, armed robbery and other criminal offences.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about reports of torture and extrajudicial executions, and called for urgent government action to halt the violations, and investigate those that had occurred. Amnesty International protested against the public executions in October and luged the authorities to prevent further executions.
In March an Amnesty International delegation visited Chad to collect information about past human rights violations and to urge the new government to introduce full safeguards against future hiunan rights violations. The delegation, which' met President Deby and several government ministers, called for an end to the use
of incommunicado detention, which had facilitated torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions.
In April Amnesty International submitted updated information about its concerns in Chad for United Nations review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
