SWITZERLAND
Scores of conscientious objectors to military service were sentenced to prison terms. Many served prison sentences during the year and were considered prisoners of conscience. Following a change of legislation in July, some conscientious objectors were sentenced to periods of compulsory work.
Military service remained a binding obligation under the Constitution, with male citizens carrying out approximately 10 months' service between the ages of 20 and 42. There was limited access to unarmed military service but no provision for alternative civilian service. Parliament approved an amendment to the Constitution which would introduce alternative civilian service. The amendment did not come into force during 1991 as it still required the approval of a national referendum.
The Federal Council and the National Coimcil approved a proposal to eliminate the death penalty from the Military Penal Code and thus for all offences. It was awaiting approval by the Council of States (the second chamber of parliament) at the end of the year.
A national referendum in June amended the Military Penal Code, altering the penalties available for certain categories of conscientious objection. Under these new provisions, which came into force in mid-July, refusal to perform military service remained a criminal offence. However, when a military tribunal concluded that a conscript was unable to reconcile military service with his conscience because of "fundamental ethical values", he was sentenced to a period of work in the public interest, which did not entail a criminal record. The law provided for sentences of compulsory work ranging from one and a half times the total length of military service refused to two years. However, some tribunals reportedly imposed sentences equal to the length of service refused.
No sentences of compulsory work were served during the year as the enabling legislation had not been completed. A number of conscientious objectors whom the tribunals considered eligible for a sentence of compulsory work announced during their trials that they would not serve any such sentence. They did not consider that a sentence imposed by a military tribunal following a trial for a criminal offence constituted a genuine alternative civilian service. There were also reports that some tribunals used a rather narrow interpretation of what constituted "fundamental ethical values" irreconcilable with military service. Conscientious objectors who failed to convince the tribunals that they qualified for a sentence of compulsory work and those who declared they would not carry out such a sentence were liable to up to three years' imprisonment. In practice, sentences of up to 10 months' imprisonment were imposed.
The majority of conscientious objectors sentenced to imprisonment under the amended Military Penal Code entered appeals and did not serve their sentences during 1991. Conscientious objectors tried before the Code was amended continued to enter prison up to the end of the year to serve sentences of up to 10 months' imprisonment. If a military tribimal recognized that a conscript had a "severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical groimds, the maximum sentence was six months' arrêts répressifs or semi-détention, allowing approved work outside prison during the day.
Amnesty International continued to
SWITZERLAND/SYRIA
appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience. Before the June referendum it distributed to the Swiss public a statement of its position on conscientious objection. This expressed concern that the amendment to the Military Penal Code would continue to punish people refusing military service on groimds of conscience and would not provide a genuine alternative service outside the military system. It urged the govemment to support proposals aimed at introducing such a service.
