CUBA
There were scores of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. perhaps two or three hundred, at the end of 1991. Many were critics of the government or human rights activists detained in the course of their peaceful activities. Others were arrested for trying to leave the country without authorization. Access to defence lawyers in political cases continued to be severely limited. Reports of ill-treatment and, in isolated cases, torture were more frequent than in recent years. At least two executions were carried out.
The government of President Fidel Castro took increasingly harsh measures against internal opponents. Several organizations which had emerged in recent years, some overtly advocating political change and others concerned more specifically with respect for religious or human rights, faced growing harassment. None had had their requests for official recognition
CUBA
granted. In June the authorities set up Destacomentos Populares de Respuesta Rápida, Rapid Response People's Detachments, to crack down on signs of imrest or dissent. Ordinary citizens were asked to volunteer for these units, which worked closely with the security forces and Communist Party activists.
Freedom of expression and association, including independent monitoring of human rights, continued to be severely limited. No independent international human rights monitors were known to have been allowed to visit the country. It was consequently difficult to obtain up-to-date. reliable information about political prisoners and other matters. However, prisoners held for political reasons were believed to number several hundred.
In February the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights requested the un Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative to investigate the human rights situation in Cuba. The Cuban Government rejected the terms of the resolution and refused the Special Representative any cooperation, including access to the country.
In August the government reduced the age limit for people to apply to emigrate to 20. It had been reduced in 1990 to 35 for men and 30 for women. Bureaucratic delays and difficulties in obtaining visas from other coimtries meant that many people continued to try to leave without authorization.
From June onwards, when the Rapid Response People's Detachments were set up, several incidents knovra as "actos de repudio", "acts of repudiation", took place. Political opponents of the government and human rights activists were subjected to verbal and physical abuse in the streets or even inside their homes by large groups of people chanting pro-government slogans, believed to be members of the Brigades. In several cases, when security forces intervened the attackers went free but those under attack were detained. Some were released shortly afterwards; others were tried and sentenced to prison terms.
On 19 November one such incident resulted in the imprisonment of Maria Elena Cruz Varela, President of an unofficial opposition group called Criterio Alternativo, Alternative View. About 300 people, some of them armed and using walkie-talkies, were reportedly transported
to her home in Havana in official vehicles. According to eye-witnesses, members of the crowd forced their way in, shouting abuse, and assaulted the people inside, injuring several. Police detained her and two other people for several hours, released them, then rearrested her and several others. She was tried a few days later on charges of illegal association, clandestine printing and defamation, and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. Seven other members of the group received prison sentences of between one and two years on similar charges.
On 6 September foior members of the Movimiento Pacifista Solidaridad y Paz, Solidarity and Peace Pacifist Movement, were arrested after attempting to hold a peaceful demonstration outside the headquarters of the Departamento de Seguridad del Estado (dse), Department of State Security, in Havana. They were tried in a municipal coiut on charges of public disorder and incitement to commit a crime. They were sentenced to between 10 months' and two years' imprisonment. At the end of the year they were still held as prisoners of conscience.
Three other prisoners of conscience were arrested on 4 October. The three, members of the Asociación Defensora de ¡os Derechos Políticos (adepo). Association for the Defence of Political Rights, were charged with illegal association, clandestine printing, and incitement to commit a crime after adepo had called a demonstration. They were tried in a municipal court only days after arrest and sentenced to between two years three months' and three years' imprisonment, adepo President Luis Alberto Pita Santos, who was arrested at the same time and who had been interned by the Cuban authorities in psychiatric institutions in the past, was sent to the Havana Psychiatric Hospital. A month later, he was reportedly transferred back to a Havana police station after being found ñt to stand trial on similar charges to the others. However, in late November he was moved to the psychiatric wing of a military hospital in Havana.
On 20 December Yndamiro Restaño Díaz, the President of an unofficial political group called Movimiento de Armonía (mar), the Harmony Movement, was arrested in Havana and taken to the dse headquarters. Three other members of the group were arrested on 26 December. By the end
CUBA
of the year, no official information was available concerning the reason for their arrest but some reports indicated that they were being investigated on a charge of rebellion. They were believed to be prisoners of conscience.
Other prisoners of conscience were convicted of "enemy propaganda", the state security charge most commonly brought against non-violenl opponents of the government. However, only in a few cases was detailed information available. For example, the case of Alexi Rodríguez Roque and two other youths came to light in August. They had been sentenced to between 18 months' and two years' imprisonment in December 1990 after being convicted of writing anti-govemment slogans in public places. They were released in November 1991.
Large numbers of people, most of them probable prisoners of conscience, continued to be arrested and held for trying to leave the country without permission.
Esteban González González and three men convicted with him remained prisoners of conscience {see Amnesty International Report 1991). Two others from the same case, Mario Jesús Fernández Mora and Edgardo Llompart Martin, were unexpectedly released in March, well before their prison sentences of six and three years respectively were due to expire,
Prisoner of conscience Dr Alfredo Samuel Martinez Lara, a leading member of the Partido Pro Derechos Humanos en Cuba (ppdhc), Party for Human Rights in Cuba, was found guilty in February of "rebellion" in association with "other acts against state security". He had been held for investigation in the dse headquarters in Havana since March 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). He was given a non-custodial sentence of three years' "restricted liberty", unusually lenient for such offences. Later in the year he was allowed to go to the United States of America.
Three other prisoners of conscience were released during the year. Huber Jérez Mariño, President of the unofficial Comité Martiano por los Derechos del Hombre, "Martí" Committee for the Rights of Man, was released in February upon expiry of his 18-month prison sentence, His co-defendant, Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz, President of the unofficial Comisión Cubana de Derechos Humanos y Reconcil-
iación Nacional, Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, was conditionally released in May, three months before his two-year prison sentence was due to expire (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Orlando Azcué Rodriguez was unexpectedly released in July, 21 months before his sentence was due to expire. He had been arrested in April 1990, accused of distributing anti-govemment leaflets and sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "enemy propaganda".
The last two "plantados históricos" (political prisoners held since the 1960s and 1970s who refused to take part in prison rehabilitation programs or to obey certain prison regulations) were released. Ernesto Diaz Rodriguez was freed in March, purportedly on health grounds, after serving 21 years of a 40-year prison term imposed for two separate offences. The second sentence of 25 years' imprisonment was imposed for allegedly plotting to overthrow the government from inside prison. Mario Chañes de Armas was freed in July upon expiry of his 30-year sentence. Amnesty International had frequently urged a judicial review of the cases of the "plantados históricos" and had expressed concern about the harsh conditions in which they were held in earlier years.
Trials of political prisoners continued to fall far short of international standards. Political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were tried either in provincial coxirts (for crimes against state security) or in municipal courts (for public order offences). Trials before municipal courts usually took place within days of arrest, with little or no opportimity for the defendant to obtain legal counsel. Defendants in state security cases were often held for several months without access to lawyers before being brought before a court.
Reports of beatings were received throughout the year as well as isolated reports of torture in prison. In January, 13 political prisoners held in Combinado del Este Prison refused to wear their prison uniforms, demanding political change and respect for human rights. In response, the prison authorities transferred them to other prisons. Three prisoners taken to Kilo 7 Prison in Camagiiey - Orlando Domínguez de la Coba, Israel López Toledo and Orlando Azcué Rodríguez - went on hunger-strike and continued to refuse to wear uniform. As pimishment they were
CUBA/CYPRUS
reportedly held for more than 17 days with their arms outstretched and chained to the iron bars of their cells. They were also said to have been deprived of drinking water for several days. Israel López and Orlando Azcué were reportedly beaten by guards at least three times while they were in chains. Orlando Azcué was transferred to yet another prison after giving up his protest. He was later released. Israel López and Orlando Domínguez were eventually transferred to hospital.
Several prisoners involved in a riot at Nieves Morejón Prison in Sancti Spiritus in May, in the course of which at least seven prisoners died, were reported to have been beaten with chains and blunt instruments after they had been handcuffed and forced face down on the floor. It was not clear whether they were among those who died. At least two other prisoners were reported to have died after being beaten by guards in other prisons.
In lune reports were received that foiu-probable prisoners of conscience held in Alambradas de Manacas Prison, Santa Clara, had been threatened with additional sentences for trying to make public their complaints about prison conditions.
At least two executions took place during 1991, the first reported since luly 1989. Jorge Luis González Norona was executed in March. He had been convicted of triple murder while on the run from prison. Joaquin Emiliano Dueñas Carbonell was believed to have been executed in April after being convicted of killing two police officers. No definite news was received about continuing reports that the authorities were considering extending the range of capital offences to include some drug-related crimes.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the Cuban authorities to release all prisoners of conscience, to ensure adequate access to defence lawyers for political prisoners, to investigate all reports of ill-treatment and suspicious deaths in detention, and to end the use of the death penalty. No substantive response was received.
