YUGOSLAVIA
Following the outbreak of armed conflict in Croatia in July, there were reports of extrajudicial executions of civilians and unarmed combatants by federal army and Croatian governmental forces, and by Croatian and Serbian paramilitary forces. People detained in connection with the fighting were reportedly tortured. Several thousand civilians were detained, usually without charge; many were released in prisoner exchanges. In recent years most convicted prisoners of conscience serving
YUGOSLAVIA
long-term sentences were ethnic Albanians from Kosovo province in southern Serbia and from Macedonia; in 1991 their numbers continued to decrease and by the end of the year there were probably fewer than 10. However, in Kosovo province, several hundred ethnic Albanians were imprisoned for up to 60 days for peacefully expressing nationalist views. There were frequent reports that police in Kosovo province had tortured and ill-treated ethnic Albanians in custody, allegedly resulting in at least two deaths. No death sentences or executions were reported.
On 25 June the Republics of Croatia and Slovenia declared independence, a move opposed by the Republic of Serbia and its allies. Units of the Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija (jna), the Yugoslav National Army, were sent into Slovenia where fierce fighting followed. They withdrew after an agreement was signed in Brioni on 7 July. jna reinforcements were sent to areas of Croatia where enclaves of the Serbian minority had clashed with Croatian forces after setting up self-proclaimed "Serbian autonomous districts", which refused to recognize Croatian authority and demanded to be joined with Serbia. The armed conflict in Croatia spread to border areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina. By 7 September, when a European Community-sponsored peace conference opened, Serbian paramilitary forces and jna units had gained control of about a third of Croatian territory, and Yugoslavia's federal institutions had largely ceased to operate. These developments were marked by a breakdown of law and order in many areas and atrocities in war zones. Information was often contradictory, one-sided and hard to obtain: over 20 jom-nalists were killed while reporting on the conflict.
In September Yugoslavia ratified the United Nations Convention against Tortme and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
There were numerous allegations that parties to the conflict had committed atrocities, including massacres of civilian populations. Many such allegations could not be substantiated, but there was evidence to support others. On 21 September, for example, 13 jna soldiers who had surrendered in Karlovac were shot dead and others wounded by a special unit of the Croatian police force of Karlovac. The Croatian Ministry of Internal Affairs later
stated that a police officer had fled after this incident, and that a warrant for his arrest on charges of murder and attempted murder had been issued. On 20 November refugees from the villages of Skabrnja and Nadin near Zadar alleged that during the two previous days jna troops and Serbian paramilitaries had attacked the villages and massacred unarmed civilians. According to a list of 45 people killed in the two villages issued by the pathology department of Zadar Medical Centre, all but 14 died as a result of being shot at close range. They included six women, aged between 40 and 70. Serbian paramilitary forces were reported to have deliberately and arbitrarily killed civilians and unarmed or wounded combatants in villages in Croatia, including Struga, Banija region, and Cetekovac, Slavonia.
There were frequent allegations that people detained in connection with the fighting had been beaten and ill-treated, and that in a number of cases they had died as a result. Cedomir Biga, a Serb from the village of Rakovica near Slunj, was arrested in August and died on 2 September in police custody in Dreinik. According to a police report he died of a heart attack. However, an autopsy reportedly found that his body was severely bruised with several ribs broken and concluded that he had died from injuries caused by blows.
On 15 October a group of 10 Croatians from the Slunj area, including two Roman Catholic priests and two nuns, were travelling under jna escort with a guarantee of safe passage in order to carry out burials. They were handed over to Serbian paramilitaries who took them to Titova Korenica, held them in a local police station and beat them. The next day the two nuns and one of the priests. Father Mile Peci6, were released. Father Pecic was treated for his injvuies at a hospital in Rijeka, which issued a certificate stating that he bore "traces of blows ail over his body and limbs, particularly on the left side of his chest".
Several thousand civilians were taken prisoner in areas of armed conflict. They included Dr Vesna Bosanac, the acting head of Vukovar hospital, and Dr Juraj Njavro, chief surgeon, who were among some 500 medical staff and patients from the hospital who were detained by jna troops following the capture of Vukovar in
YUGOSLAVIA
November. The two doctors were among a munber of prisoners held by the jna who were released in prisoner exchanges in December. Many other civilians arrested in Vukovar, including the journalist SiniSa Glava§evic, had not been released by the end of the year.
The number of long-term prisoners of conscience (all of them ethnic Albanians) continued to drop. In July at least six prisoners of conscience were released and nine others had their sentences reduced by an amnesty law. The law reduced by a quarter sentences imposed on people convicted under the federal criminal code (with the exception of drug-dealers). By the end of the year, probably fewer than 10 long-term prisoners of conscience remained in prison.
In February the trial of six ethnic Albanians opened before the district court of Pec. Arrested in November 1990, Isat Mushkolaj and five co-defendants were charged with preparing "to change the borders between republics and autonomous provinces in an unconstitutional way". They had written a draft statute for the town council of DeCane based on a constitution adopted in September 1990 by ethnic Albanian deputies of the suspended Kosovo assembly (see Amnesty International Report 1991). This constitution, regarded by the Serbian authorities as illegal, proclaimed Kosovo province (part of the Republic of Serbia) an independent republic. The trial was adjourned after defence counsel challenged the composition of the court. It was resumed in March when all the accused were found guilty and sentenced to between two and four and a half years' imprisonment. They were freed pending appeal and had not started to serve their sentences by the end of the year.
Several hundred ethnic Albanians were administratively sentenced and imprisoned for up to 60 days for peacefully expressing nationalist views. They were charged with "disturbing public order" or "offending the socialist and patriotic sentiments of citizens". Among them were the journalists Rexhep Rifati, Xhemail Rexhepi, Jonuz Fetahu and Blerim Shala, who were all convicted in connection with their writings, In September over 40 ethnic Albanians were imprisoned for up to 60 days for organizing an unofficial referendum in Kosovo province. The referendum pro-
posed proclaiming the province as a sovereign and independent state with the right to take part in an association of sovereign states within Yugoslavia. In the second half of the year up to 6,000 ethnic Albanian school and university staff in Kosovo were dismissed from their posts for refusing to teach according to curricula laid down by the Serbian authorities. Many schools were closed. In October some 30 school directors and teachers were among those imprisoned for up to 60 days for their part in demonstrations by ethnic Albanian pupils and staff protesting against the school closures. On 11 November, 17 members of the Democratic League of Kosovo (the main ethnic Albanian opposition party in Kosovo) were arrested at a party meeting in Lipljan. They were taken to a local police station, where they were questioned and allegedly beaten. Four were sentenced to 60 days' imprisonment on charges of having "incited national hatred". On 29 November three were released after a higher court annulled their sentences.
There were almost daily reports that police in Kosovo province beat or ill-treated ethnic Albanians in detention or while searching their homes. For example, in September' police allegedly beat the wife, son and 12-year-old daughter of Nazif Dubova, in his absence, at their home in the village of Gornje Livoc after a search failed to produce any weapons. On 31 October Mikel Marku, a lavi^er from Pec, was stopped by a police patrol while driving. On the grounds that the car was not registered in his name, he and two passengers were taken to the local police station in Pe6. There they were held overnight and reportedly beaten by the police. Mikel Marku lost consciousness, but despite the pleas of his companions, he was not taken to hospital until the next day. He remained in a coma until his death on 11 November. On 25 November Ali Haxhiu, a refugee from Albania, was arrested and held overnight in UroSevac. The following day he was taken to Pri§tina prison to serve a 30-day sentence previously imposed on him for making a political gesture deemed to be an offence. He was reportedly found dead by a prison guard two hours later. On 27 November his body, allegedly severely bruised and with several teeth broken, was returned to his family.
Police in Belgrade were also reported to have beaten and ill-treated people they
YUGOSLAVIA/ZAIRE
arrested on 9 March dining clashes between police and demonstrators protesting against the control of the Serbian news media by the ruling Socialist Party. During the demonstrations two people were killed - a police officer and a young man - and many others were injured. Several hundred were arrested, most of whom were released within a few days. Students who had been arrested said that they were taken to a police station and made to run the gauntlet, with pohce officers beating them with truncheons.
In November a new constitution adopted in the Republic of Macedonia abolished the death penalty. Laws in Serbia, Bosnia-Hercegovina and Montenegro continued to provide for the death penalty. In October four members of the federal Presidency ruled that military coxuts were to apply provisions in federal law covering offences committed in time of war or iromediate danger of war. Under these provisions, various military offences, including desertion and avoiding military service, could be punished by the death penalty. Military sources stated in December that up to 10,000 men had committed such offences, but to Amnesty International's knowledge, no death sentences were imposed for military or any other offences.
Following the outbreak of armed conflict in Croatia, Amnesty International repeatedly raised with all parties to the conflict its concern about reports of extrajudicial executions and the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. It appealed to them to treat all prisoners in their custody humanely and to protect them and other non-combatants under their control. In October Amnesty International wrote to members of the federal Presidency expressing its total opposition to the death penalty and urging the authorities to recognize the right to conscientious objection to military service. In November Amnesty International published a report, Yugoslavia - Torture and deliberate and arbitrary killings in war zones.
In February Amnesty International delegates observed the opening of the trial of Isat Mushkolaj and five co-defendants before the district court of Pec.
Throughout the year Amnesty International repeatedly expressed its concern about allegations of police abuses in Kosovo province and called for thorough and impartial investigations into them. In
March it wrote to the Serbian authorities about reports that police had beaten demonstrators in Belgrade and called for the release of all those detained for their peaceful political activity.
