INDONESIA/ EAST TIMOR
More than 150 real or alleged government opponents were prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience: most were serving lengthy sentences for subversion imposed after unfair trials. At least 200 other political prisoners also continued to serve sentences imposed after unfair trials in previous years. Hundreds of others were arrested in Aceh, North Sumatra and East Timor as suspected advocates of independence for these areas and were held without trial for up to several months. Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and criminal suspects was common and reportedly resulted in deaths. In Aceh, hundreds of people were extrajudicially executed by government forces and in East Timor about 100 people were killed when government troops opened fire on a peaceful procession. Four people were sentenced to death for murder and one political prisoner was executed.
The government of President Suharto continued to face armed opposition from groups seeking independence for Aceh, Irian Jaya and East Timor. Government forces were used against workers, farmers, students and others striking or demonstrating in support of increased freedom of expression and association. Human rights organizations and other non-govemmental organizations involved in peaceful political activities were threatened with legal sanctions by the government, Hundreds of thousands of former members of the Indonesian Commimist Party (pKi) remained subject to restrictions affecting their freedom of movement and civil rights, and some were arbitrarily arrested and ill-treated. Candidates for elections scheduled for 1992 were required to undergo a political screening process to identify and disqualify possible communist sympathizers. A Presidential Decree regulating election campaigning, due to be issued in early 1992, would prohibit political parties from criticizing the state ideology Pancasila and the Constitution, and from "insulting" the government or its ofiicials. At least 17,000 people, including Indonesian and foreign nationals, remained on an official government black list restricting entry to and exit from the country.
The United Nations (un) Special Rapporteur on Torture visited Indonesia and East Timor for the first time in November and was in Dili, East Timor's capital, when troops fired on a peaceful procession killing about 100 people. The killings provoked an international outcry, the cancellation of a un-sponsored meeting due to take place in Jakarta, and the threatened suspension of some foreign aid. The government at first said "only 19" had been killed but when this was widely disputed it appointed a National Commission of Inquiry. This issued a preliminary report in December in which the number killed was stated to be "about 50". Despite eye-wit-ness and other evidence to the contrary, it concluded that the soldiers had been provoked into firing and had not been acting under orders to kill demonstrators.
In Aceh and North Sumatra, 35 alleged supporters of Aceh Merdeka, Free Aceh, an armed opposition group seeking independence for Aceh and parts of Sumatra, were sentenced to prison terms of up to 20 years. Some appeared to be prisoners of conscience, including Drs Niudin
INDIA/INDONESIA-EAST TIMOR
Abdurachman, a university professor. He received a nine-year sentence in May for attending "clandestine meetings" in 1990 at which an independent Acehnese state was discussed, although he had apparently advocated the use of diplomacy rather than violence to secure independence.
Arswendo Atmowiloto, the editor of a weekly magazine, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment by a Jakarta court in April. He was convicted of blasphemy for publishing the results of a popularity poll ranking the Prophet Muhammad alongside pop singers. President Suharto and others. In July the High Court reduced his sentence by six months. In December the four-and-a-half-year sentence was confirmed by the Supreme Court which ruled, however, that he had deliberately abused the press, not committed blasphemy. He was a prisoner of conscience.
More than 50 of an estimated 300 Islamic activists imprisoned for subversion in previous years, and serving sentences of up to life imprisonment, were also believed to be prisoners of conscience. They included people convicted of involvement with usroh groups, which advocate closer ties among Muslims and a stricter adherence to Muslim teachings. Others had been sentenced after unfair trials in 1989 and 1990 for undermining Pancasila and attempting to establish an Islamic state (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991).
Hundreds of people were arrested during and after the killings by troops in Dili in November. At least 61 were held awaiting trial at the end of the year, including 37 who were arrested diu-ing and after the incident in Dili and 21 arrested after a peaceful protest demonstration in Jakarta a week later. Four East Timorese students were also being held in Bali. The government said some of the 37 held in Dili and four of those arrested in Jakarta would be tried for subversion and others would be tried for "expressing feelings of hostility, hatred or contempt" towards the government. Seven other East Timorese political prisoners remained in prison in Jakarta and Dili serving sentences imposed after unfair trials in previous years.
At least 80 of the more than 130 political prisoners from Irian Jaya sentenced in previous years were believed to be prisoners of conscience. All were convicted of subversion, because they advocated independence for the province of Irian Jaya. In
January more than 70 of the 130 were transferred from Irian Jaya to East Java, making it extremely difficult for their relatives to visit them. Some had their sentences increased by between four and 11 years after appeals to the Supreme Court. Drs Jacob Rumbiak, who was arrested in early 1990 with three others after being refused asylinn by the Papua New Guinea authorities, initially had his 17-year sentence for subversion reduced to six years by the High Court, but then restored to 17 years by the Supreme Court in May (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
More than 30 prisoners sentenced after unfair trials for alleged involvement in the
1965	coup attempt or for pki membership remained in prison, seven of them on death row. Most were believed to be prisoners of conscience. They had been arrested in the late 1960s and most were elderly. Dr Subandrio, a 77-year-old former Foreign Minister arrested in March 1966, had been sentenced to death for subversion by an Extraordinary Military Coini: in October
1966	and denied a ri^t of appeal. He was serving a life term following the commutation of his death sentence in December 1980.
Five prisoners of conscience jailed in previous years for their peaceful political activities in university groups remained in jail. In August the Supreme Court upheld the eight-and-a-half-year sentence of Bonar Tigor Naipospos who had been convicted of subversion in 1990 for disseminating Marxist teachings and distributing banned literature. Two Bandung Institute of Technology students also remained in prison. They had both been sentenced to three years' imprisonment in February 1990 for insulting the Minister of Home Affairs at a demonstration. The Supreme Court rejected their appeals in December 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). The authorities announced in October that foxu other students from the same institute sentenced at the same time were to be conditionally released.
Ten other political prisoners, six of them prisoners ✓ of conscience, were released during the year; all had been sentenced in previous years after imfair trials. In April Drs Susilo, a veterinary surgeon, was released after serving 23 years in prison for subversion. Two other pki prisoners, Marto Suwandi and Rewang, who had been detained for more than
INDIA/INDONESIA-EAST TIMOR
three years after completing their sentences, were released in July. Professor Dr Oesmany al-Hamidy and Hasan Kiat, sentenced to six and seven years' imprisonment respectively in 1986 for delivering "seditious" sermons, were released in August. A prisoner of conscience from East Timor, David Dias Ximenes, was released at the same time after serving a 15-year sentence for his alleged links with Fretilin, the armed opposition group seeking independence for East Timor. Paulina Waing-gai, sentenced to two years' imprisonment in 1989 for taking part in a peaceful flag-raising ceremony in Irian Jaya, was also released (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991).
Serious doubts remained about the fairness of political trials, particularly those held under the vaguely-worded Anti-Subversion Law, which carries a maximum penalty of death. As in previous years, defendants were frequently held incommxmicado for several months before being charged or tried, and denied access to legal counsel of their choice. Some were convicted on the basis of uncorroborated confessions and testimony allegedly extracted under torture. Drs Adnan Beuran-syah, who received an eight-year sentence in May for alleged involvement in Aceh Merdeka, was held incommunicado for several months during which he was burned with cigarettes and given electric shocks by his interrogators.
Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and criminal suspects were widespread and sometimes resulted in death. In Aceh and North Sumatra hundreds of suspected supporters of Aceh Merdeka were reported to have been tortured or ill-treated, including a man named Syaifulah, who was held for at least five months at the Police Mobile Brigade headquarters in Medan. Witnesses said he was Idcked and beaten, stripped naked and had his genitals squeezed with metal pliers while detained in February. He then "disappeared". In Irian Jaya, two political prisoners died in disputed circumstances in August after allegedly escaping from a military prison. Melkianus Salosa, sentenced to life imprisonment for subversion in March after being forcibly returned to Indonesia by the Papua New Guinea authorities, was found dead outside the military prison where he had been held. Military authorities said that he had died
of exposure after escaping firom the prison; evidence suggested that he may have been tortured and extrajudicially executed (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Criminal suspects were beaten and tortiu-ed by police and police auxiliaries seeking to extract confessions. Some died as a result. Beni, a Pontianak construction worker, died in police custody in March three days after his arrest. The police said he had died of natural causes but an eye-witness said three police officers had beaten him and relatives pointed to cuts and bruises on his corpse as evidence of tortiue. No official investigation was known to have been held.
A few members of the security forces were convicted of tortxuing or ill-treating criminal suspects and given short prison sentences, but virtually no action was taken against those accused of torturing political detainees. Despite repeated government assurances that prompt action would be taken against human rights violators, the soldiers allegedly responsible for the torture and extrajudicial execution of Candido Amaral in March 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) had still not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
Hundreds of people were extrajudicially executed by government and government-backed forces in East Timor, Aceh and North Sumatra, About 100 people were killed and over 100 wounded in November when troops opened fire on a peaceful procession at the Santa Cruz cemetery in Dili, East Timor. Some were shot while attempting to flee and others were beaten and stabbed. There were unconfirmed reports that dozens of others, including witnesses to the Santa Cruz massacre, were extrajudicially executed in the following weeks. In Aceh, hundreds of people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed during counter-insurgency operations. By the end of the year, more than 2,000 people were estimated to have been extrajudicially executed in Aceh since 1989.
At least four people were sentenced to death for murder and one political prisoner was executed. Azhar bin Muhammad Safar, an Islamic activist sentenced to death in 1982 for subversion and involvement in an aircraft hijacking, was executed by firing-squad on 8 February. At least 33 people were on death row at the end of 1991, eight of whom were feared to be in
INDONESIA-EAST TIMOR/IRAN
imminent danger of execution. These included seven elderly men sentenced for involvement in the 1965 coup attempt or for pki membership.
Amnesty International appealed throughout the year for the release of prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners, and for urgent government action to halt torture and extrajudicial executions. It protested against the execution in February and called for all death sentences to be commuted. The government responded to such appeals by asserting that it observed the rule of law and said Amnesty International should not interfere in Indonesia's domestic affairs.
In an oral statement to the un Special Committee on Decolonization in August, Amnesty International included reference to serious human rights violations in East Timor, including extrajudicial executions, "disappearances", and a continuing pattern of short-term detention, torture and ill-treatment of alleged political opponents. Following the 12 November killings in Dili, Amnesty International appealed to the un Secretary-General to initiate a prompt and impartial international investigation into the incident and its aftermath.
In meetings and correspondence with representatives of the government. Amnesty International reiterated its request, originally submitted in 1989, to visit Indonesia and East Timor. In August the government said that the organization had launched a campaign of "slander and lies" against Indonesia and that a visit was therefore "inconceivable".
