COTE D'IVOIRE
Four students and two journalists imprisoned for several months appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Other students were reportedly beaten in police custody and two soldiers were said to have died in custody in suspicious circumstances. One person was sentenced to death but there were no executions.
Strikes and demonstrations by students and teachers were met with considerable violence by the security forces. Following a confrontation between police and students, the military launched an apparently punitive raid on Abidjan University's Yopougon student residence on 17 May. According to some sources four students were killed but it was not clear, in fact, whether any deaths occurred. About 180 students were held for several days before being released uncharged. Some women students were reportedly raped by soldiers during the raid.
The army's action was widely criticized.
CÔTE DWOIRE/CUBA
Georges Coffy, a journalist who wrote an article in the newspaper Liberté (Liberty) accusing President Félix Houphouët-Boigny of personally ordering the raid, and Uberté's editor, Jacques Kacou, were both arrested in early June and charged with insulting the Head of State. They were both convicted in July and jailed for three months, although Jacques Kacou's sentence was subsequently reduced to two months on appeal. Both journalists appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
Faced with continuing criticism, in June the government established a commission of inquiry into the army raid composed of parents of some of the students, judges, lawyers, members of parliament and religious leaders. However, neither its precise terms of reference nor its findings or details of its investigations had been made public by the end of the year.
The government banned the Fédération estudiantine et scolaire de Côte d'Ivoire (fesci), Ivorian Federation of Students and School Pupils, in June, accusing it of responsibility for the murder of a student suspected of being a police informer. Four students were detained in Yopougon in July for allegedly trying to reorganize the FEsa. The four, who included Tanoh Kadio and Danite Kamabou, appeared to be prisoners of conscience. They were released uncharged in September.
Innocent Kobena Anaky, a leading member of the opposition Front populaire ivoirien (fpi), the Ivorian Popular Front, was released from prison imder a presidential amnesty in September. He had been sentenced in February 1989 to 20 years' imprisonment on fraud charges amid suggestions that his prosecution was politically motivated. He did not appear to have received a fair trial.
Fifteen students detained in connection with the murder of a suspected police informer were reportedly beaten and ill-treated during interrogation in June. They were released in August when charges against them were dropped after negotiations between the government and teachers' representatives.
New reports of torture surfaced in July when a group of soldiers was arrested following dissent within the army and reportedly tortiured. The state controlled press reported the deaths of two soldiers, but gave no other details. Opposition sources claimed that the two had been tortured to
prevent them disclosing information about the 17 May raid. There was no official inquiry into the deaths and the military refused to disclose details of the arrests, but implied that a niunber of soldiers had been planning violent and illegal acts. The army's chief of staff said that what had occurred was an internal army affair and that an internal investigation was under way.
In September one death sentence was passed for premeditated murder, but there were no executions. Since independence in 1960, all death sentences have been commuted by President Houphouet-Boigny.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and called for an official inquiry into reports of torture and beatings of prisoners.
