ANGOLA
The conclusion of a peace agreement in May between the government and the armed opposition Uniao Nacional para a IndependSncia Total de Angola (untta). National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, resulted in the release of about 2,000 political prisoners who had been held by the two sides to the conflict. The fate of many others, however, remained unclear and dozens of support* ers of separatist groups were arrested in the Cabinda enclave both before and after the May peace agreement. All death
ANGOLA
sentences were commuted, no new death sentences were imposed and there were no executions.
In March the People's Assembly approved amendments to the Constitution introducing a multi-party political system and increasing human rights safeguards. New laws extended press freedom and limited the circumstances in which a state of emergency could be declared. It was expected that the Constitution would be further amended in 1992 after consultation between the government, unita and political parties formed as a result of the constitutional amendment.
The agreement signed in May by President José Eduardo dos Santos and unfta's leader, Jonas Savimbi, brought an end to the 16-year conflict in which thousands of civilians were killed or maimed, and thousands of others were displaced or sought refuge abroad. The agreement provided for the release of all those imprisoned as a result of the conflict, and for fundamental human rights and freedoms to be respected. Government and unita troops were required to move to and remain at specified assembly points. A Joint Political-Military Commission (jpmc) was established to supervise implementation of the agreement and a United Nations Verification Mission (unavem), which had monitored the withdrawal of Cuban troops under an earlier agreement, supervised the movement of the troops to their designated assembly points. unavem was also mandated to monitor the actions of the police.
The peace agreement effectively ended the fighting between the government and unffa, and in September Jonas Savimbi returned to Luanda, where unita had already opened an office.
Following the agreement, the government released about 950 suspected unita supporters, which it said was the total number still held after the reported release of more than 3,000 prisoners in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Among them were about 80 who had been taken prisoner in the early months of 1991. Around 250 were released shortly after the agreement and a further 700 in October.
In July unita released 272 prisoners from its headquarters at Jamba, but only 60 left Jamba, leading to allegations that some had been coerced by unita security officials into remaining there. By November unita had released about 1,000 prisoners: about 600 of them reportedly told representatives of the jpmc and delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross monitoring the releases that they wished to remain in Jamba, unita said it was preparing to release a further 2,000 prisoners once the monitors had completed interviewing the first thousand.
Some arrests were made after the peace agreement but those held, including Albino Lohoka and Valentin Kalueyo, who were detained in Luanda in July for distributing pro-untta leaflets, were quickly released. The government also released 17 political prisoners in July: they included Moisés André Lina, who had been under death sentence since 1987, and 13 members of a religious sect convicted of violent offences in 1989, all of whom had received unfair trials (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 and 1990).
Despite the releases, thousands of people remained imaccounted for. They included himdreds of detainees who had "disappeared" in the custody of government forces, including suspected unita supporters and people detained in coimec-tion with an abortive attempt to overtluow the government in 1977. Others still missing included government soldiers and civilians taken prisoner by unita, and alleged dissidents within the organization who were said to have been secretly killed or publicly burned to death by unita in 1982 and 1983. There was no further news of two senior unita officials, Tito Chingunji and Wilson dos Santos, who apparently remained restricted in Jamba (see Amnesty International Reports 1989, 1990 and 1991).
In the Cabinda enclave, dozens of people suspected of supporting separatist
ANGOLA/ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA/ARGENTINA
groups were briefly detained. They included Hil^ic Bala Cazo, a member of the Frente da Libertagao do Enclave de Cabin-do (flec), Cabinda State Liberation Front, who was held for several days in July after flec documents were found in his possession. Fxuther arrests of supporters of separatist groups occurred after a demonstration in November in favour of Cabin-da's independence, The authorities said the demonstration was violent, but flec claimed it was peaceful until troops opened fire. At least six people were killed and many others wounded. Cabindan separatists reportedly detained after the incident were said to be held in unacknowledged incommunicado detention. No official investigation was known to have been held into the November shootings.
The jpmc investigated the killing in September of Colonel Lourengo Pedro Makanga, UNTTa's Deputy Secretary General, at a road-block near Malanje. The investigation's outcome was unknown. UNITA said he was shot by government soldiers but the authorities said that he was killed by common criminals.
The government commuted all death sentences in June but did not indicate how many prisoners benefited; at least five prisoners had been under sentence of death in Luanda. No new death sentences were imposed and there were no executions. In April the Congress of the ruling Movimento Popular para a Libertagao de Angola (mpla), People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola, called for the abolition of the death penalty.
Amnesty International sought information about Hilario Bala Cazo and others arrested in Cabinda who included possible prisoners of conscience, and called for an inquiry into the November shootings in Cabinda. There was no response.
In February Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the commission drafting amendments to the Constitution urging the introduction of strong human rights safeguards. The organization published this memorandum in June in a report entitled Angola: Human Rights Guarantees in the Revised Constitution. The report also called for the inclusion of safeguards omitted from the Constitution when it was amended in March. There was no formal response from the authorities but several officials made statements favouring abolition of the death penalty.
