BULGARIA
All prisoners convicted of political offences were released but reportedly at least one person was imprisoned for conscientious objection to military service. Police officers were alleged to have ill-treated Vietnamese nationals, two of whom died in unclear circumstances. There were few attempts made to investi-gate past human rights violations and to bring those responsible to justice. A moratorium on executions remained in force.
In January all remaining prisoners convicted of political offences were released following an amnesty of December 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In July a new constitution, which included safeguards for human rights, was adopted by the parliament, the Grand National Assembly (gna). As the gna had fulfilled its objective, it was dissolved and new elections were held in October. They resulted in a narrow defeat for the ruling Bulgarian Socialist Party. The main opposition group, the Union of Democratic Forces, formed a minority government after it failed to form a coalition with the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, the mainly ethnic Turkish party.
Military service remained compulsory. Despite Article 59 of the new Constitution, which envisages an alternative service, no such alternative existed in Bulgaria. A number of people refused military service
on grounds of conscience and reportedly at least one was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment.
In March two people died and many others were injured when police clashed with Vietnamese nationals in Sofia following a dispute between a Bulgarian taxi-driver and some Vietnamese passengers. OSicial reports stated that police opened fire after being attacked by hundreds of Vietnamese nationals armed with knives and clubs and after shots were fired at them. However, others alleged that police stormed the hostel where the Vietnamese lived and beat the inhabitants, and that the police opened fire when some bottles were throwTi at them as they were leaving the building. A number of Vietnamese were arrested and allegedly ill-treated in custody before being released.
Information emerged on a number of earlier cases of alleged torture and ill-treat-ment of ethnic Turks detained for opposing the past assimilation campaign against the ethnic Tmldsh minority (see Amnesty International Reports 1986 to 1991). These events took place before the resignation of Todor Zhivkov as head of state in November 1989, but apparently there had been no investigation into them and those allegedly responsible remained in their jobs.
Amnesty International called for a full and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the deaths of the Vietnamese and the allegations of ill-treatment by the police. It also called for full and impartial investigations into the allegations of past torture and ill-treatment and for those responsible to be brought to justice. In Jime it urged the authorities to ensure that a number of human rights safeguards were introduced in the new Constitution and called for the formal abolition of the death penalty.
