TURKEY
Dozens of prisoners of conscience held since the early 1980s were among an estimated 29,000 prisoners released under the new Anti-Terror Law. However, scores of prisoners of conscience were held for short periods in police custody during the year. Hundreds of political prisoners were sentenced by State Security Courts to terms of imprisonment after legal pro-
ceedings that did not meet international standards for fair trial. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees, both political and criminal, continued to be practised throughout Turkey, sometimes resulting in death. There were reports of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". The death penalty remained in force, but all existing death sentences were commuted.
A general election in October resulted in a coalition government with Siileyman Demirel, leader of the Dogru Yo! Pañisi (dyp). True Path Party, as Prime Minister and Erdal inonu, leader of the Sosyal Demokrat Halkçi Partisi (shp), Social Democratic Populist Party, as Deputy Prime Minister. In November Prime Minister Demirel introduced his government's program, which included a number of plans for reform in the area of human rights. He said, "Torture is a crime against humanity ... It is our duty to prevent this."
At the end of the year a state of emergency was still in force in 10 provinces of southeast Turkey where the secxuity forces were engaged in counter-insurgency operations against Kurdish secessionist guerrillas of the Partiya Karkeren Kurdistan (pkk), Kurdish Workers' Party. Many human rights violations by the security forces were alleged to have taken place in the context of this conflict. There were also many reports of guerrillas killing civilians, taking hostages and executing prisoners.
The Anti-Terror Law, passed in April, contains several positive measures which commuted death sentences and repealed laws previously used to convict prisoners of conscience. However, it also contains several retrograde measures. These concern the treatment of prisoners arrested for offences within the law's very broad definition of terrorism. Allegations that detainees held under the Anti-Terror Law have been tortured are subject to a preliminary investigation by the local civil administration. This investigation has the power to rule that legal action should not be taken against the alleged torturer, Article 16 of the Anti-Terror Law specifies that all those arrested or convicted for offences under this law are to be held in special prisons in solitary confinement or small group isolation, a regime which medical experts have established can endanger physical and mental health.
None of the draft legislation for safeguards against torture became law. Turkish
TURKEY
law continued to permit detention in police custody for up to 15 days, and up to 30 days in a region under state of emergency legislation. Even these very long periods were exceeded in a niunber of well-documented cases. In May the Justice Ministry issued the latest of a succession of circulars requiring police and prosecutors to ensure that detainees were allowed access to a lawyer. Nevertheless, with only very few exceptions, detainees in police custody continued to be denied access to legal counsel.
Articles 140, 141, 142 and 163 of the Tiukish Penal Code (tpc) and Law 2932, under which many prisoners of conscience had been convicted, were repealed by the Anti-Terror Law. As a result, all known prisoners of conscience were released in April. Approximately 29,000 other prisoners convicted of political and ordinary criminal offences were also conditionally released under this law.
However, during 1991 scores of other prisoners of conscience were arrested. Some were tried under Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law which forbids all separatist propaganda. In August the Turkish singer Yeliz ipek was arrested under this provision for shouting a slogan in Kurdish. She was acquitted by Diyarbakir State Security Court in September. In August Demet Demir, a transvestite and activist for homosexual rights, was detained and allegedly beaten at Beyoglu Pohce Station in Istanbul. He was charged under Statute 5816 with insulting the memory of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, founder of the Republic of Turkey. Demet Demir was released in October but his trial continued at the end of the year. In August Sinami Orhan, editor of the Islamic political magazine Ak-Dogu§ (Bright Dawn), was prosecuted under Statute 5816 and served four months' imprisonment for publishing controversial historic documents concerning Mustafa Kemal Ataturk.
Hundreds of political prisoners were sentenced to terms of imprisonment by State Security Coiuts in proceedings that did not meet internationally recognized standards for a fair trial. In particular, these courts continued to allow statements allegedly extracted under torture in police custody to be used in evidence, while making no attempt to investigate the torture allegations.
Torture and ill-treatment continued to
be widely and routinely inflicted on political and criminal detainees. Methods frequently described by detainees included squeezing the testicles, electric shocks, falaka (beating on the soles of the feet), and being suspended by the arms or by the wrists tied behind the back. In many cases these allegations were supported by medical reports.
Among hundreds of political prisoners tortured was Erdogan Kizilkaya who was detained in Kayseri in August. He stated that during five days of interrogation at Kayseri Police Headquarters he was blindfolded and that electric shocks were applied to his penis, hands and feet, that he was suspended by the wrists and that his testicles were twisted and his penis beaten. On the last day of police detention a doctor issued a medical report stating that an examination had shown "no marks of blows or force". The same day Erdogan Kizilkaya was charged by Kayseri State Security Court with membership of an illegal organization and committed to prison. There he was examined by a prison doctor who reported signs of blows on various parts of his body. He was referred to Kayseri State Hospital where a farther report described bruising to the face, arms, legs and penis, and second-degree burns, "possibly caused by electrical current". At the end of the year the complaint was being examined by the local administrative council.
In August Mediha Curabaz, a nurse, was detained in Adana and taken to the Anti-Terror Branch of Adana Police Headquarters. She remained there inincom-municado detention for five days before being charged with membership of an armed organization and committed to prison. She was acquitted of the charge in November. Mediha Ciurabaz made an official complaint stating that while in police custody she had been beaten, given electric shocks to her fingers, sexual organs and nipples, and that she had been raped with a truncheon adapted to give electric shocks. Medical certificates were issued describing injuries to her right arm and sexual organs. Her complaint against five police officers was referred to the local administrative council, a non-judicial body.
Fourteen people died in custody allegedly as a result of torture and ill-treatment. In January Birtan Altunba§, a
TURKEY
medical student, was detained at the Political Branch of Ankara Police Headquarters. He died seven days later after being transferred to hospital. An autopsy was performed but the results had not been disclosed to his family or lawyers by the end of the year. A fellow detainee reported that for four days and nights he heard Bir-tan Altunba§'s cries and saw him being made to run naked, supported between two policemen, up and dovra the corridor outside the cells, a method of diminishing the traces left by falaka. The government stated that Birtan Altunba§ died of "heart disease caused by malnutrition", although he had been on hunger-strike for only seven days before his death. In July Osman Ekinci, a Kurdish shepherd, was detained and severely beaten by gendarmes near Goren-doruk security post in southeast Turkey, according to an eye-witness. Apparently as a result of this ill-treatment, Osman Ekinci died. At the end of the year, no prosecution had been opened.
There were also allegations of ill-treat-ment in prison, Prisoners who were transferred in November to Eski§ehir Prison, the first special prison set up under the Anti-Terror Law, were severely beaten. Independent medical examination revealed that 119 of the 198 prisoners bore injuries and traces of ill-treatment. On the orders of the newly appointed Justice Minister later in November, all the prisoners were moved out of the prison, which was then closed.
There were a number of alleged extrajudicial executions and "disappearances", particularly in the southeast of the country. In June and July members of the unofficial Human Rights Association were injured by bombs planted by unidentified assailants. At the same time a number of local politicians were murdered in suspicious circumstances giving rise to allegations that they had been extrajudicially executed. On 8 July Vedat Aydin (see Amnesty International Report 1991] was taken from his house in Diyarbakir by several armed men who said they were plainclothes police officers. Vedat Aydin was a member of the Human Rights Association and President of the Diyarbakir branch of the Halkin Emek Partisi (hep), People's Laboiu- Party - a party perceived as representing the interests of Turkey's large Kurdish minority. Three days later his body was found at a roadside bearing signs of torture and eight gunshot wounds. The body was buried
under police supervision within hours of being found and without a full autopsy.
In the Midyat/Nusaybin area of Mardin province, 13 Kurdish villagers were killed and one "disappeared". All were from villages that had refused to enrol in the government-organized corps of village guards. On 3 October Mehmet Selim Asian, Siileyman Asian, and Abdul Aziz Giiglu were killed at the village of Bah?eba§i near Nusaybin. Witnesses saw the five people responsible for the killings drive towards the local commando post about one kilometre away and stop there, apparently to change a tyre. However, soldiers at the commando post subsequently denied seeing the vehicle. Hiiseyin Toraman, a political activist wanted by the police, "disappeared" following his detention in Istanbul on 27 October. He was seen being detained outside his home, apparently by members of the Anti-Terror Branch of Istanbul Police Headquarters. The police subsequently denied all knowledge of his whereabouts. In December three members of the Parliamentary Human Rights Commission were appointed to investigate his "disappearance".
The Anti-Terror Law commuted all death sentences imposed for crimes committed before 8 April 1991, including those of more than 300 prisoners under sentence of death who had exhausted all legal appeals.
Following the crushing of an uprising in northern Iraq in March and April, over 650,000 Iraqi Kiu'ds, Assjrrians and others fled into Turkey or to the Turkish border. On 3 April the Turkish Government announced that it had closed its borders with Iraq, in violation of international standards for the protection of refugees. It threatened to use force to prevent refugees from entering the country.
On 4 April Amnesty International appealed to the government to allow Iraqi refugees to enter Turkey and to the international community to assist the Turkish Government so that all those at risk would be protected. In a number of cases during the year. Amnesty International also called on the Turkish Government not to return Iranians forcibly to Iran, where they risked imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, tortiue or execution.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to call for the release of prisoners of conscience, for fair and
TURKEYAJGANDA
prompt trials for all political prisoners, for an end to tortme, extrajudicial executions and the death penalty, and for investigations into the whereabouts of the "disappeared".
In June an Amnesty International delegate observed a hearing in the trial of six members of the independent Human Rights Association who had been arrested and allegedly tortured in March. The trial had not concluded by the end of the year.
The authorities responded to the majority of cases of alleged extrajudicial execution and torture raised by Amnesty International. Some government replies gave information about the status of investigations or court actions. Others claimed that detainees had not asked to see a lawyer, or that no signs of torture had been found.
In April the organization submitted information about its concerns in Turkey for United Nations (un) review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. In October Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns regarding torture in Tmkey to the un Committee against Torture, pursuant to Article 20 of the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
