SRI LANKA
Himdreds of people were extrajudicially executed and several hundred "disappeared". Torture of detainees was common. Thousands of people were detained without trial under emergency regulations and the Prevention of Terrorism Act (pta). The government took steps to protect those currently in detention, but failed to account for thousands who "disappeared" in previous years.
The armed conflict between government forces and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (ltte) continued in the northeast. In Amparai, Batticaloa and Trincomalee, government forces retained control of towns and main roads, but there was sporadic fighting in the countryside and tension between the Tamil, Muslim and Sinhalese communities of the area remained high. Fighting in Vavuniya and elsewhere resulted in heavy casualties on both sides. Jaffna peninsula, controlled by the ltte, was intermittently bombed and shelled by government forces, leading many civilians to flee. The government and the ltte both made offers to negotiate but no negotiations took place. Under the state of emergency, which remained in force throughout the year, the security forces were empowered to arrest and detain people without charge or trial,
President Ranasinghe Premedasa prorogued parliament in September after some members of parliament sought to impeach him for alleged abuse of power, corruption and failure to protect human rights.
The ltte was responsible for gross human rights abuses, including torture and killing of prisoners. It was believed to be
holding about 2,000 prisoners and to have publicly executed more than 30. It was also responsible for widespread killings, of Muslim and Sinhalese civilians amongst others.
The government took several steps to improve human rights protection. A Presidential Commission of Inquiry into the Involuntary Removal of Persons was established in January to investigate "disappearances" occurring between 11 January 1991 and 11 January 1992. A Human Rights Task Force (hrtf) was established in July to maintain a central register of all those held imder the pta and Emergency Regulations, and to monitor their fundamental rights. At the government's invitation the United Nations (un) Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances visited Sri Lanka in October.
The military, police and Special Task Force (stf) police commando unit were responsible for scores of extrajudicial executions in the northeast. The victims included a railway worker who was detained and shot dead for no apparent reason by an army patrol at Siththandikud-dy. Batticaloa district, in June. Other civilians were killed in apparent reprisals for ltte attacks on the security forces. In June, for instance, at least 67 civilians, including women and children, were killed when local army personnel rampaged through the villages of Mahiladithivu and Mutha-laikuda after two soldiers had been killed in a landmine explosion nearby. The President initiated a commission of inquiry into the incident but it had not reported by the end of the year.
The victims of extrajudicial executions included people who reported violations by government forces. In April Mang-aleswary Kanthasamy, a teacher at Tam-palakamam, Trincomalee district, was shot dead at her home by soldiers together with her two-year-old son and elderly parents. Five days earlier she had complained to the police about harassment by soldiers, who had then been punished. She was apparently killed in retaliation. The soldiers involved were reportedly arrested.
In the east of the coxmtry suspected ltte members were seized, abducted and killed by men in plain clothes who were believed to be connected with the security forces. Victims' bodies were left in public places, often in a mutilated state. In April a number of headless bodies were foimd in
SRI LANKA
Batticaloa: at least one was accompanied by a notice claiming responsibility signed by the "Black Cobras". In Trincomalee town dozens of abductions were carried out by unidentified men believed to be associated with the army.
Extrajudicial executions were also reported from the south, although on a lesser scale than in previous years. The victims included three yoimg men from Dikkapitiya, Welimada, in Badulla district, two of whom had been released from detention a few months earlier. They were reportedly taken from their homes in October by men who identified themselves as police officers. Their bodies were later found biuning in a culvert.
Hundreds of people in the east reportedly "disappeared" after being detained by government forces. Many were feared to have been killed in custody; others were believed to be held in incommunicado detention. In Batticaloa town alone, over 400 people reportedly "disappeared" between early January and the end of November.
At least 32 prisoners reportedly "disappeared" in police custody in the south. Some were said by police to have escaped or to have been released - despite official directives that prisoners should only be released to relatives or responsible members of the commimity. Nanayakkarage Don Mahinda Abeywickrama Gunaratne of Yatiyana, Matara district, was seized on 15 February in Colombo by armed men reportedly connected with a ruling party politician, then taken to Gandara police station in Matara district. His relatives were not permitted to see him and he "disappeared". Police said he was released on 2 April, but others reported seeing him in police custody after that date.
Muslim Home Guards and armed members of Tamil groups opposed to the ltte who operated alongside government forces were also held responsible for "disappearances" and other violations. Subramaniam Ketheeswaran "disappeared" after he was taken from a refugee camp at Bambalapi-tiya, Colombo, in September by members of the Eelam People's Democratic Party. About 10 days later he was taken to an army camp in Batticaloa and questioned about his involvement with the ltte. He reappeared when he was released uncharged in November. The authorities failed to clarify the fate of Kumaraguru
Kugamoorthy, a Tamil radio producer and human rights activist who had "disappeared" in 1990 after being abducted by an armed group believed to be connected with the seciuity forces (see Amnesty Intema-tional Report 1991).
Detainees in the northeast were systematically tortured. Victims were beaten, stabbed, burned and scalded, partially buried or had nails driven through the soles of their feet. Dozens of people reportedly died as a result, particularly in the east. In Colombo a prisoner awaiting trial at New Magazine prison died in January after being beaten with iron rods by prison staff. Several inquiries into his death were announced but their outcome was not revealed. In June a Janatha Vimukthi Pera-muna (jvp). People's Liberation Front, suspect died after being beaten with wire, rubber belts and clubs at Bulathsinhala police station. Four police officers and a Home Guard were subsequently arrested and charged with causing his death.
Three police officers accused of murdering Wijedasa Liyanarachchi in September
1988	(see Amnesty International Reports
1989	and 1991) were convicted in March after the charges against them were reduced to illegal detention and conspiracy to detain illegally. They received suspended sentences and were fined. Little progress was reported in other cases involving hiunan rights violations by government forces. In February a proposal for an independent inquiry into the killing of Richard de Zoysa (see Amnesty International Report 1991) was defeated in parliament. In November one of the police officers facing trial on charges of murdering 12 prisoners in Nittambuwa, Gampaha district, in February 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) was killed inside the courtroom by an unidentified gunman. The trial was subsequently discontinued.
More than 1,200 fundamental rights applications were filed in the Supreme Court by prisoners alleging illegal detention or tortme. The court awarded compensation and ordered the release of 42 untried detainees whose complaints it upheld. In May a lawyer representing untried political detainees held at Boosa detention camp informed the Supreme Court that six of them had "disappeared" since starting their legal action. Lawyers expressed concern that dozens of other suspected government opponents remained in detention for
SRI LANKA
months without charge or trial despite Supreme Court orders for their release.
In late September the government announced that 5,294 people were being detained without trial in the south under the Emergency Regulations or the pta and a further 1,080 in the northeast. Those figures did not include hundreds of ltte and jvp suspects taken into custody at army barracks or police stations. Many of the prisoners held in the south since between 1988 and 1990 continued to be detained for "rehabilitation" under Emergency Regulations 18a and lOC, as a result of administrative decisions against which there is no right of appeal,
The ltte was responsible for gross human rights abuses. Members or sympathizers of rival Tamil groups and people suspected of providing information to government forces were held captive, particularly in the Jaffna area. An estimated 2,000 prisoners were held by the ltte, including about 50 reportedly detained solely for their "dissenting" views. There were increasing reports from the east of people being detained for ransom by the ltte. Thirty-two Muslim businessmen similarly detained in 1990 in Jaffiia continued to be held. Prisoners were held incommunicado and relatives received no information about their whereabouts. Some of those held by the ltte were reportedly tortured.
The ltte also attacked Sinhalese and Muslim civilians living in or near the northeast. In June, for example, at least 11 passengers were deliberately shot dead by ltte forces after their bus was halted by a mine explosion at Hulanuge, Amparai district. Their bodies were then put into the bus and bimied. In late August and early September the decomposed bodies of police officers, reportedly among several himdred taken prisoner by the lite in June 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991), were found in mass graves in Bat-ticaloa district. In October unofficial sources reported that the ltte had publicly executed at least 32 prisoners in Jaffna peninsula. Reportedly bound and blindfolded, the prisoners were made to confess to a "crime" and then shot. Death threats were reportedly made against inhabitants of Muslim villages in the east. Tens of thousands of members of the Muslim community fled the northeast during 1990 following similar threats by the ltte (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
The ltte was also widely suspected of responsibility for killings outside the northeast, including the assassination in May of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India, in Tamil Nadu, India. The ltte denied responsibility for his death.
In January Amnesty International commented on proposed amendments to the fundamental rights chapter of the Constitution. It monitored the work of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into the Involuntary Removal of Persons, which started public hearings in August. It repeatedly called on the government to extend the commission's mandate to include the thousands of "disappearances" that occurred before 11 January 1991, and made other recommendations to strengthen its work and that of the hrtf. Concern was expressed that people in the northeast and in rxual areas had insufficient access to these institutions.
Amnesty International requested information from the Minister of Justice about investigations into the death of a prisoner at New Magazine prison, Colombo, in January. No reply was received.
Amnesty International also issued direct appeals to the ltte: in January for the humane treatment of police officers held at luiknown places in the Jaffiia peninsula; in February to reiterate appeals for an immediate halt to killings of civilians and prisoners; in August to urge that all ltte cadres be instructed to desist from torturing or killing defenceless people and to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross regular access to prisoners; and in November for a halt to execution-style killings and for steps to be taken to protect prisoners from tortiu'e.
In March Amnesty International delegates were permitted access to Sri Lanka for the first time since 1982 to attend a himian rights conference in Colombo. The delegates met government officials to discuss future access and steps being taken by the government to improve human rights. An Amnesty International delegation visited Sri Lanka in June to discuss human rights with government officials, local human rights activists and others.
In September Amnesty International published a major report, Sri Lanka - The Northeast. Human rights violations in a context of armed conflict, documenting its concerns since June 1990. In December the government announced that it would bring
SRI LANKA/SUDAN
into effect 30 of the 32 recommendations made in the report, including initiating independent investigations into human rights violations and guaranteeing prompt access to lawyers and relatives to all detainees. The two recommendations not included were the extension of the mandate of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into the Involuntary Removal of Persons to include "disappearances" that occurred prior to 11 January 1991, and the repeal of the Indemnity (Amendment) Act (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In November the ltte wrote to Anmesty International but did not respond to any of the allegations of human rights abuses by the lite documented in the report.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International expressed grave concern about continued "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions and the high degree of impunity with which the security forces were able to operate.
