IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT
Thousands of government opponents were detained without charge or trial during the year. They induded prisoners of conscience, as did the thousands of government opponents arrested in previous years who remained in detention. Those held included Kuwaitis imprisoned after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, and members of Iraq's Kurdish and Shi'a Muslim communities arrested in the aftermath
of a mass uprising in Iraq in March. There were numerous reports of torture, hundreds of prisoners "disappeared" and many extrajudicial executions were carried out by government forces.
On 26 February Iraqi forces withdrew from Kuwait following their defeat by United States (us). United Kingdom (uk) and other allied military forces. Thousands of Iraqi soldiers and civilians were killed in the fighting and aerial bombardment of Baghdad and other cities. Thousands of further deaths occurred when government forces crushed a mass uprising by Kurds in the north and Shi'a Arabs in the south, which began on 1 March. An estimated two million people, mostly Kurds and Shi'a Arabs, fled from the fighting to Iran and Turkey and areas bordering Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
The United Nations (un) Security Council passed a cease-fire resolution on 3 April providing, among other things, for continued economic sanctions against Iraq. By May a 1,440-member un Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (unikom) was deployed to patrol a demilitarized zone along the Iraq-Kuwait border. On 5 April the un Seciuity Coimcil passed Resolution 688, calling on Iraq to end "the repression of the Iraqi civilian population" and to grant "immediate access by international humanitarian organisations to all those in need in all parts of Iraq". By mid-April us, uk and other forces had been deployed in northern Iraq to establish "safe havens" for the Kurdish population. On 18 April Iraq signed a un-sponsored Memorandum of Understanding, establishing humanitarian centres providing relief and assistance to civilians and displaced persons, and involving the deployment of a 500-member un Guards Contingent throughout Iraq.
On 5 April the government declared an amnesty for Kinds accused of crimes committed during the March uprising. The amnesty was extended to all Kurds, except those accused of premeditated murder or rape, on 29 April. It was further extended in May to all Iraqis. The government said in October that 477,611 people had benefited fi'om the amnesties, but this could not be independently confirmed. However, it was clear by the end of 1991 that a majority of those who had fled the country in March and April had returned, and that about 141,000 others remained in refugee camps in Iran, Turkey and Saudi
IRAQ AND OCCURED KUWAIT
Arabia. Some of those who returned were reported to have "disappeared" or to have been executed.
In May the government and Kurdish political groups representing the Kurdistan Front began negotiations about greater autonomy for the Kurdish population in Iraq, but no agreement had been signed by the end of 1991. In May Iraq's ruling Revolutionary Command Council (rcc), headed by President Saddam Hussain, abolished the Revolutionary Court. A special court set up in 1968, its proceedings had consistently fallen short of international standards for fair trial. In September the rcc passed a law introducing a multi-party political system, but no elections had been held by the end of the year. Plans to hold a national referendum on a new draft constitution had also not been implemented.
Hundreds of Kuwaiti civilians were arrested in January and February and taken to Iraq as Iraqi forces retreated fi'om Kuwait. Most were released within several weeks as a result of prisoner exchanges in which over 5,000 Kuwaitis and about 76,000 Iraqi soldiers captiu-ed dxu-ing the conflict were released. The Kuwaiti Government said that 2,101 Kuwaitis, including children, were still being held in Iraqi custody at the end of the year. This could not be confirmed and was denied by the Iraqi authorities, who said that almost 4,000 people from Kuwait were in Iraq, at liberty, and were being denied entry to Kuwait by its government.
In March, 45 us, uk and other allied prisoners of war were released, as were 40 foreign journalists who had been captured by government forces near Basra and held for five days. By early November about 4,700 Iraqi military personnel who had been captured by Kurdish forces in the previous two months had been released.
In March government forces lost control of major cities and towns in northern and southern Iraq as opponents of the government rose in revolt and broke into government buildings, prisons and detention centres. An uiiknown number of detainees were freed as a result, including hundreds of political prisoners, some of whom had been held in secret detention centres without charge or trial for over 12 years. Among them were scores of women and children. Between March and May. as government forces succeeded in crushing the revolt, thousands of Kurds, Shi'a Arabs, Turcomans
IRAN/IFWQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT
and others were arrested on suspicion of having participated in anti-govemment activities. Many were later summarily executed.
Among those arrested in al-Najaf in March was 95-year-old Grand Ayatollah Abu al-Qassem al-Kho'i, Shi'a Islam's most senior cleric, together with several of his relatives and aides. He was placed under house arrest after three days' detention, but the fate and whereabouts of those arrested with him, as well as of at least 106 other Shi'a religious scholars and students who were arrested in al-Najaf, were unknown, Scores of arrests were also reported in Kar-bala' and other southern cities.
In northern Iraq, government forces detained an estimated 5,000 Kurdish men and boys from the Kirkuk area in March, apparently to deter further attacks on the city by Kurdish forces. They were held in Tobzawa and B6ji garrisons in the north and later in Ramadi Camp south of Baghdad. Most were released by mid-April, but at least 28 were reportedly executed.
New information was received about many government opponents and others who had been arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience. Among them were over 1,300 political prisoners, including Arabs and Kurds, who were held in two communal cells in Abu Ghraib Prison near Baghdad. Many had been held for over 10 years following unfair trials before the Revolutionary Court, and were alleged to have been tortiu-ed and in some cases to have been held incommunicado since their arrest. In March two political prisoners escaped from Abu Ghraib Prison: Dr Hussain al-Shahristani, a nuclear physicist arrested in 1979 whom the government had previously said was released in 1983, and Sayyid Ja'far al-Hakim, whose detention since 1983 the government had repeatedly denied (see Amnesty International Reports 1981 and 1984).
There were many new reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Scores of Kuwaitis and other foreign nationals released from Iraqi custody after 26 February bore marks on their bodies consistent with methods of torture alleged by former detainees in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). us and uk prisoners of war alleged that they had been tortured during interrogation. David Waddington, a British airman, said he was repeatedly beaten with a truncheon until he lost
consciousness. Jefft'ey Rice, a major in the us forces, said he had been subjected to electric shocks by Iraqi interrogators. Douglas Brand, a British engineer arrested in September 1990 as he tried to leave Iraq, also said he had been tortured: after a five-day trial in May he was sentenced to life imprisonment on charges of espionage, but was released in June.
Many of those arrested following the March uprising were also tortmed. Eyewitnesses alleged that detainees had been mutilated prior to execution by having their eyes gouged out, their limbs severed or by being doused with petrol and set alight. The body of Falah Bilal, a Shi'a Arab, was found outside al-Najaf on 21 March: his tongue, ears and left hand had apparently been severed before he was executed. Two Kurdish children were said by eye-witnesses to have been mutilated before they were executed in the village of Qara Hanjir, near Kirkuk, in March: one had had both eyes gouged out, and the other's arm was severed. A former soldier who was imprisoned for 26 days in Abu al-Khasib, near Basra, said after his release in April that he had been subjected to electric shocks and had suffered a broken wrist as a result of beatings. He said that detainees had been deprived of food and water, and had been forced to drink urine to survive, and that he had witnessed over 100 executions at the prison.
Hundreds, possibly thousands, of people "disappeared" in the custody of the Iraqi authorities, including Kurds and Shi'a Arabs detained at the time of the uprising and families who returned to Iraq from Iran in May under the officially declared amnesties. Many Kuwaitis taken prisoner after the Iraqi invasion were also said to have "disappeared" and the fate of about 400 people, mostly Iraqis, forcibly expelled ft'om Kuwait in April and May, was unknown. New information was received about the "disappearance" in previous years of over 6,000 Kurds, including whole families, who were among tens of thousands of Kurds who "disappeared" after being detained'in a wave of arrests in 1988 known as the "Anfal operations". In some cases the victims had been detained after surrendering to the authorities in order to benefit from officially declared amnesties.
Hundreds of people were extrajudicially executed by government forces in the wake of the March uprising. They included
IRAN/IFWQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT
Kurdish civihans, among them women and children, who were shot from helicopter gunships as they fled towards Iraq's borders. At least 11 Kurds, including children, were extrajudicially executed in Qara Hanjir in March. At least 28 of the 5,000 Kurds arrested in Kirkuk in March were also said to have been extrajudicially executed: they included Ibrahim Qader Taha, who was shot by Republican Guards on 18 March. Twenty other Kurds shot in Arbil and Sulaimaniya in April reportedly included several doctors accused of treating wounded Pesh Merga (armed Kurdish units) fighters. In 'Arbat village, near Sulaimaniya, 40 civilians were reportedly burned to death by government forces in April.
In southern Iraq, many Shi'a Arabs were reportedly executed by firing-squad in al-Hilla, al-Samawa, al-Najaf, Karbala', Basra and other places in March and April. They included around 150 men and boys shot at al-Mahawil Garrison, near al-Hilla, on 16 March. Others were reportedly thrown to their death from the top floor of al-Hilla Hospital on 9 March, or pushed into the Tigris River and Shatt al-'Arab waterway while alive and with weights tied to their feet. Victims' bodies were said to have been dragged through the" streets or left hanging from electricity pylons to terrorize the local population. Women and children were'widely reported to have been used by govenmient forces as "human shields" as they sought to quell the uprising, and to have been killed in cross-fire. Kurdish forces opposed to the Iraqi Government also committed hiunan rights abuses, including summarily executing about 60 unarmed fraqi soldiers in Sulaimaniya in October following attacks on residential areas by Iraqi government forces.
Amnesty International made renewed calls to the government for an end to human rights violations by Iraqi forces in Kuwait prior to their withdrawal. Similar appeals were sent to the government in April and May as himdreds of thousands of people fled Iraq in the aftermath of the uprising and widespread violations were committed against Kurdish and Arab civilians.
In July Amnesty International published a report, Iraq: Human Rights Violations Since the Uprising. Based on over 500 interviews with fraqi refugees and others during fact-finding visits to fran and
Turkey, the report detailed widespread tor-tiu^e and extrajudicial executions of suspected government opponents in the wake of the abortive March uprising. At the same time, Anmesty International appealed publicly to the un to establish on-site hiunan rights monitoring in fraq with the authority to investigate alleged violations, protect victims and ensure adherence to international human rights standards in cooperation with the government.
In April the government invited Amnesty International to visit northern fraq "to assess the situation for itself, but did not respond when the organization indicated the conditions which would need to be met before the visit could go ahead. In May fraq's Ambassador to the un in New York wrote to say that he doubted the accuracy of "most of the allegations" made by Amnesty International but acknowledged that, "given the prevailing circumstances", some violations "could have actually, perhaps inevitably, taken place".
Amnesty International appealed to neighbouring governments to shelter refugees fleeing from fraq in the wake of the March uprising. It also expressed concern to the Kurdistan Front in October over the killing by Pesh Merga forces of some 60 fraqi soldiers who had been captured and disarmed, and called for an investigation into the killings.
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in fraq. The Commission adopted a resolution appointing a Special Rapporteur to study fraq's human rights record. In August, in an oral statement to the un Sub-Conunission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International called for further action by the un in the light of widespread human rights violations following the March uprising.
