MOZAMBIQUE
Hundreds of people arrested in 1991 and previous years were detained without trial on suspicion of committing crimes on behalf of the armed opposition Resistencia Nacional Mogambicana (renamo), Mozambique National Resistance; others were tried. At least 20 people were detained, of whom 15 were charged with plotting to overthrow the government; they had not been tried by the end of 1991. The security forces were accused of responsibility for numerous assaults and other human rights violations; some were prosecuted as a result.
Negotiations about a settlement to Mozambique's 15-year-long internal conflict continued throughout 1991. In October and November representatives of the government of President Joaquim Chissano and of renamo signed preliminary agreements designed to lead to further negotiations for a cease-fire and to allow renamo to compete for power in elections. However, fighting between the two sides continued both before and after the agreement, adding hundreds of deaths to the pre-1991 total of nearly a million people killed and five million displaced during the conflict.
As in previous years, renamo forces
MOZAMBIQUE
were reported to have carried out violent attacks on villages and road convoys and to have abducted or killed hundreds of civilians. However, some attacks on food stocks were attributed to government soldiers and to criminals wearing military uniforms. New cases of mutilations of prisoners held by renamo were reported. In July renamo forces who captured the town of Lalaua in Nampula province were said to have killed dozens of people and to have displayed portions of severed human remains on shop shelves. In other incidents, people captured by renamo were said to have been decapitated, or to have had their genitals, noses, ears, or lips hacked off. The victims reportedly included children and the elderly.
The government passed new laws to implement provisions of the 1990 Constitution (see Amnesty International Report 1991], including those allowing the formation of political parties and demonstrations. Several new political parties were formed but official permission to hold demonstrations remained difficult to obtain and one was forcibly dispersed.
A new law on crimes against the security of the state was adopted in July, replacing a previous 1979 law. It reduced the range of offences and prescribed less draco-nian punishments. The following month, the Servigo Nacional de Seguranga Popular (snasp), People's National Security Service, was replaced by the Servigo de Infor-magdes e Seguranga do Estado (sise). State Intelligence and Security Service, which, unlike snasp, has no powers of arrest or detention without trial.
Few details were available about the number of prisoners detained on suspicion of committing crimes on behalf of renamo. Militeiry sources announced that they had captured over 400 in 1991, including combatants and other renamo supporters, but did not say how many were released. Others were believed to be still held following their arrest or captiu-e in previous years. Some were reported to have been tried during the year but few details were available about these trials.
More than 20 people were arrested between June and August in connection with an alleged plot to overthrow the government. Fifteen, including Colonel-Gener-al Sebastiao Mabote, a former army chief of staff, Colonel Manuel Antonio, the Interior Minister, and three brothers of former
President Samora Machel, were charged in September, while the others were released. The 15 were charged under the 1979 law on security offences which was in force at the time of their arrest but which was repealed in July. However, in accordance with a constitutional provision, if convicted, their punishments cannot exceed those provided in the new law on security offences. They had not been tried by the end of the year.
Seven members of new political parties were arrested in Maputo in October and prosecuted for preparing to hold a demonstration, although they were not actually imprisoned. Six of them were members of the Frente de Acgâo Patriótica (fap). Patriotic Action Front, and the seventh belonged to the Congresso Independente Mogambicano, Mozambican Independent Congress. They were arrested shortly before the demonstration was to be held, on the grounds that they had given the authorities only two days' notice instead of the four days required by law. In late October the fap members received suspended sentences of two months' imprisonment and the seventh defendant was fined. Appeals to the Supreme Court against the sentences were lodged but not heard before the end of the year.
There were numerous reports of assaults on prisoners by soldiers, police and prison staff. In most cases it was not clear whether any official action had been taken against the perpetrators. In February Fernando Fumo was reportedly beaten and then shot dead by soldiers who stopped his car near Maputo, but no action was reported to have been taken against those responsible. However, several members of the militia were arrested after they reportedly tied and beat a suspected black marketeer, who died in hospital in Nampula province in October, and an inquiry was launched after guards in Maputo's Civil Prison opened fire on protesting prisoners in November, wounding at least one.
Earlier, two Maputo police officers were each jailed for 16 years in May for illegally arresting and ill-treating market traders. In July a soldier was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in Cabo Delgado for ill-treating prisoners in December 1990.
There was no further news of dozens of people who "disappeared" after their arrest in the mid-1970s (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
MOZAMBIQUE/MYANMAR
Amnesty International urged the government to ensure that those accused of plotting its overthrov^f should receive a fair trial and be guaranteed immediate access to legal counsel. It urged the authorities to undertake thorough investigations into reports that the security forces had ill-treated civilians.
