MALAWI
Eighty-eight untried political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, were released in the first half of the year - the largest number of releases of political prisoners since 1977. However, more than 20 political opponents of the govemment were left in detention or serving sentences after unfair trials, some of them prisoners of conscience. A 72-year-old prisoner of conscience was chained by his arms and legs as a punishment for sending letters out of prison. Torture and ill-treatment of
criminal prisoners continued. Executions of prisoners under sentence of death resumed in February.
Malawi's human rights record was the subject of extensive intemational criticism in 1990 and 1991. This probably contributed to the govemment's decision to release some political detainees, although the legal framework for administrative detention was left intact. Malawi remained a one-party state headed by Life-President Dr H. Kamuzu Banda.
George Mtafu, a neurosurgeon and prisoner of conscience held since 1989, was one of four administrative detainees released without charge in January. Also freed were Margaret Marango Banda, an official of the national women's organization, and Blaise Machira, a former university lecturer, both prisoners of conscience held since 1988. In Febmary a further 83 political detainees were released, including medical instmctor Ishmael Mazimda and sugar company official Thoza Konje, both prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In May Jack Mapanje, the country's best-known poet, who had been a prisoner of conscience since his arrest in 1987, was also released without charge. No explanation was given for his detention, which appeared to be because his writings had offended the authorities.
The govemment stated that these releases followed a review of detainees' cases and that henceforth this process would be repeated every six months, as required by the 1965 Public Security Regulations. These provide the legal basis for indefinite administrative detention without charge. However, the review fell short of intemational norms, since it was carried out by
MALAWI
the detaining authority, not by an independent body. Fiuthermore, detainees had no opportunity to hear the allegations against them or to make representations to the review body. No more detainees were freed between Jack Mapanje's release and the end of the year.
Nineteen long-term political detainees remained in Mikuyu Prison, near Zomba, among them Machipisa Munthali, who had been imprisoned since 1965. They also included Laurenti Phiri, a tinsmith who was one of three men arrested in 1989 for buying tobacco from tenant farmers on land owned by the Press Group, a company controlled by Life-President Banda. The three were charged and fined for breaking the Press Group monopoly, then immediately rearrested and detained without charge under the Public Security Regulations. One of the three, named Msungama, died in Mikuyu Prison in 1990. apparently as a result of an asthma attack, He had not been allowed to keep his inhaler in his cell. The other. Brown Chabwera, was among the 83 prisoners released in February, Laurenti Phiri was one of a number of prisoners apparently detained because their actions conflicted with the economic interests of senior officials.
Possibly dozens of political prisoners were held without charge or trial in other places of detention. They included Mary Sikwese, who was arrested in 1989 after she had alleged that police were responsible for the death in detention of her brother, Fred Sikwese, a senior Foreign Ministry official (see Amnesty International Report 1990). She was apparently promised that she would be released in February if she retracted her allegations against the police, but she refused to do so.
The case of Goodluck Mhango, a veterinary surgeon detained since 1987, was apparently reviewed but he was not released. He was the brother of Mkwapatira Mhango, an exiled joiunalist who died after a fire-bomb attack on his home in Zambia in 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). The Malawian authorities denied repeated allegations from the Malawian exile community that they were responsible for the killing, but refused to establish an inquiry into the incident.
There were frequent reports of short-term detention of alleged government critics. For example, in April a woman was briefly detained because she owned a shop
which sold culottes: Malawian law forbids women to wear trousers. Shortly afterwards a imiversity law lecturer was detained for a few days for writing an article criticizing the arrest and the use of the law to lay down standards of dress.
Two warders at Zomba Central Prison, known only as Kiunwenda and Chigwen-embe, were arrested in May and accused of smuggling letters out of the prison from political prisoners Orton Chirwa and Gwanda Chakuamba. Political prisoners in Malawi are often denied the right to send or receive letters. Chigwenembe was believed to be held at Chichiri Prison, BlantjTe. Kumwenda was reported to be held incommunicado in an underground cell at Kanengo police station, Lilongwe. He was reportedly held with two supporters of Orton Chirwa who had also been accused of smuggling his letters - Christopher Mwenelupembe and John Nyenga.
Orton Chirwa, the leader of the exiled Malawi Freedom Movement, was imprisoned in 1981 with his wife, Vera Chirwa, a lawyer. They were both sentenced to death in 1983, after a grossly unfair trial, but the sentence was commuted to one of life imprisoiunent in 1984 after widespread international appeals. Orton and Vera Chirwa, both prisoners of conscience, were kept in separate sections of Zomba Central Prison. In May, after his letters ft'om prison had been intercepted, Orton Chirwa, then aged 72, was subjected to two days of "cell punishment". He was confined to his cell and forced to squat on the floor with his arms and legs in irons chained to a metal rod behind his knees. At the end of the year he was reported still to be suffering ill health as a result of this punishment.
There were continuing reports of the use of the "hard-core" regime for persistent criminal offenders (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Such prisoners were reported to be chained naked to the floor of a cell and denied food for long periods. Criminal prisoners were also reported to have been severely beaten with hammers and clubs by warders. There were no inquests into the deaths of prisoners and reportedly their bodies were usually buried within the prisons, rather than being released to their families. Frequent reports that prisoners had died as a result of these punishments were consequently difficult to verify.
Executions of prisoners under sentence
MALAWI/MALAYSIA
of death resumed in February when an unknown number were hanged at Zomba Central Prison. A further six men and two women were executed there in August. Executions had not taken place for some months, apparently because of a financial dispute between the authorities and the executioner, who visits periodically from South Africa. The death penalty is mandatory for murder and treason and may also be imposed for rape, robbery with violence, house-breaking or burglary. Although details were not published, the death penalty was believed to be frequently imposed, often after unfair trials in so-called "traditional courts".
Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience early in the year and continued to call for the release of those still held. It also called for the release of all other political detainees unless their cases were to be promptly reviewed by a judicial authority. The organization called for the prison authorities to conform to the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. For the first time in many years, Amnesty International representatives held meetings with Malawian diplomats abroad. The organization asked in June and July to send a delegation to Malawi to discuss its concerns further with the govermnent, but no response had been received by the end of the year.
