TUNISIA
of suspected Hizb al-Nahda supporters were arrested after the government said it had discovered a plot to overthrow the state. Many of them were sentenced to up to three years' imprisonment for belonging to an unauthorized organization, holding unauthorized meetings, participating in illegal demonstrations and distributing leaflets. They included possible prisoners of conscience. Some were arrested violently at their homes by police officers who failed to produce arrest warrants. In other cases, wives and other relatives of those being sought by the authorities were detained to pressure them into giving themselves up. In September Hayya Khardani, the 17-year-old sister of Mohammed ben Ali Khardani, who was being sought by the police, was detained for four days at Bardo police station to pressure her brother to surrender. She was released on 1 October, when her brother gave himself up.
The legal rights of defendants in political trials were often not respected and in some cases detainees were not informed of their right to legal representation. Defence lawyers raised allegations of prolonged garde à vue detention and torture of defendants at a number of trials, but these were ignored by the courts. During Moncef Triki's trial his defence lawyer told the court that his client had been tortm-ed during incorrununicado detention but the judge ignored the complaint.
Torture of political detainees held incommunicado in garde à vue detention, often illegally prolonged by the police, was routine. Most victims were suspected members of Hizb al-Nahda who were tortured when being interrogated about the organization and its members. Methods included the "poulet rôti" (roast chicken), where detainees are suspended upside-down with an iron bar behind the knees and the hands and feet tied together; beating on the soles of the feet; burning with cigarettes; electric shocks; and sexual abuse with sticks and bottles. Fatima Gui-touni was held for 29 days in garde à vue detention at Nabil police station in May and reportedly severely beaten on the sole of her foot. A subsequent medical examination and the testimony of other detainees supported her allegation. She was sentenced in June to one month's imprisonment for providing a room for illegal meetings.
No investigations were known to have been undertaken into the allegations of torture of Hedi Ben Allala Bejaoui, Raouf Mthlouthi and Abdellatif Thli in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). However, several members of Hedi Ben Allala Bejaoui's family were detained briefly and reportedly ill-treated when he went into hiding in late 1990. Raouf Mthlouthi's father, who had complained about his son's ill-treatment, was fined for slandering the police.
At least seven people were reported to have died in custody as a result of torture. Among them were Abdel Raouf Laaribi and his brother-in-law, Fathi Khiari, who died in custody in May and August respectively. Faisal Barakat, a well-known member of Hizb al-Nahda and of the banned student union, Union générale tunisienne des étudiants (ugte), General Union of Tunisian Students, died in custody in October, allegedly as a result of tortiu^e. At the beginning of October his brother Jamal Barakat was arrested by the police, apparently in an attempt to press Faisal, who was then in hiding, to give himself up. Jamal Barakat was still detained without charge at the end of 1991. No public inquiries were held into any of these deaths in custody,
Five people were executed by hanging in October immediately after the President refused appeals for clemency. Three had been convicted of murder and arson in an attack on the office of the ruling Rassemblement constitutionnel démocratique (rcd). Constitutional Democratic Rally, in Bab Souika in February. They had initially been sentenced by the Criminal Court to between 20 years' and life imprisonment but the Court of Appeal increased their sentences to the death penalty. This was upheld by the Court of Cassation, The other two men executed had been convicted of rape and murder in 1988 and 1989.
At the same time as the five executions were carried out, five other death sentences were commuted, including that on Lamari Dali (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Amnesty International continued to express concern to the government about the prolonged incommunicado detention and alleged torture of Islamists and other political detainees and called for urgent official action to end such abuses. In February the Foreign Affairs Ministry responded
TUNISIA/TURKEY
to a report published by Amnesty International in September 1990. The Ministry denied that detainees had been held in prolonged garde a vue detention or tortured and expressed willingness to cooperate with the organization.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Tunisia in May and in meetings with the Prime Minister and other government officials reiterated the organization's concern about an increasing pattern of human rights violations in Tunisia. The delegation sought information about 70 cases of political detainees reported to be held incommunicado. The authorities asserted that they were keen to cooperate, while denying any widespread violations of human rights, but did not provide the detailed information sought by Amnesty International. Following this visit. Amnesty International publicly appealed to the government in June to halt the continuing and widespread abuse of garde a vue detention provisions and to take action to prevent torture. In October Amnesty International published a report, Tunisia: Deaths in custody during garde o vue detention, which detailed five recent cases of deaths in detention allegedly as a result of torture.
