GUINEA-BISSAU
Several supporters of opposition political parties were briefly detained, apparently as prisoners of conscience, and several were harassed. Four political prisoners who had officially been released under an amnesty in January 1990 did not leave the island where they had been confined until September 1991.
The Constitution was partially amended in May to introduce a multi-party political system and increase protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. Laws permitting greater press freedom and the formation of political parties and independent trades unions were passed. At least five political parties were formed.
Despite these changes, critics and opponents of the government faced official obstruction and harassment when exercising these newly recognized rights, and in some cases were arrested. Advocates of reform within the ruling Partido Africano de Independéncia da Guiñé e Cabo Verde (paigc), African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, alleged that they were threatened with unspecified punishment by senior officials.
GUINEA-BISSAU/GUYANA
Those detained for short periods included Joao Guilherme Furtado. He was detained until late January following his arrest in December 1990 when he collected a package of documents from the Resistencia da Guiné-Bissau-Movimento Bafatá (rgb-mb), Guinea-Bissau Resistance-Bafata Movement, an opposition group based abroad. No charges were brought but he was required to report regularly to the police station for a short period after his release.
Several people seeking to register new political parties were also briefly detained. Among them were two rgb-mb members. They were arrested in July while collecting signatures to comply with legislation requiring new political parties to produce at least 2,000 supporters' signatures to obtain official registration. Gaetano Mendes Pereira was reportedly beaten at the time of his arrest. He and José Carlos Baldé were both held for several days before being released.
Others detained included supporters of the Frente Democrática (fd). Democratic Front. Three were held for a few days in May and four others briefly in September, in both cases after reportedly peaceful demonstrations. Four other fd members were arrested in November. They were beaten and detained for a short period for trying to recruit workers in the ñshing industry.
Four political prisoners sentenced after an unfair trial in 1986 (see /Imnesiy in/er-national Report 1987) remained on Enu, the island where they had served their sentences, until September: the government had announced their release in an amnesty in January 1990. Apparently the authorities did not provide them with transport and they had no other means of returning to the mainland. They had initially been sentenced to death but their sentences were later commuted to prison terms. Colonel Buota Nam Batcha, who had been sentenced at the same trial and was subsequently rumoured to have died, also returned to Bissau from the island where he had been held. However, those released confirmed that another prisoner, Nfono Tchuda Nalagna, had died in custody in 1987 apparently as a result of poor conditions (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Other information received in 1991 confirmed that lafai Camara, the head of
the armed forces, had been released uncharged in November 1990 shortly after being put under house arrest for allegedly supplying arms to separatist rebels in the Casamance area of neighbouring Senegal (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In July Amnesty International published a report, Guinea-Bissau: Human Rights Guarantees in the New Constitution. This contained the text of a memorandum which the organization had submitted to the government in May. It recommended additional human rights safeguards for incorporation into the amended Constitution, and called for the abolition of the death penalty. The government did not respond to either the memorandum or the report, nor to most of Amnesty International's inquiries about arrests of opposition party supporters.
