GERMANY
(FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF)
At least one prisoner detained under anti-terrorist legislation continued to be held in virtual isolation.
In March the former East German leader Erich Honecker was moved by the Soviet
military from a hospital near Berlin to Moscow where, according to the Soviet authorities, he was to undergo medical treatment. The German Government repeatedly requested his return from the Soviet Union to face manslaughter charges arising from orders issued to East German border guards to shoot people fleeing to the West.
In September the first trial of former border guards began in Berlin. Four men were charged with manslaughter for shooting Chris Gueffroy in February 1989 during his attempt to escape into West Berlin. Defence lawyers for the four former sentries argued that they were merely following orders fi'om the military and political leadership. The four defendants admitted firing at the defector, but denied intent to kill. At the end of the year the trial was continuing.
The judiciary was criticized for its slowness in bringing charges against former East German state prosecutors, judges, security force members, commxmist officials and government officials in connection with human rights violations. The authorities attributed delays to the huge backlog of cases awaiting investigation and lack of staff.
At least one prisoner detained under anti-terrorist legislation continued to be held in virtual isolation. Prolonged isolation may have serious physical and psychological effects on prisoners and may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Barbara Perau-Hofineier had been in investigative detention since
August 1986. Reportedly, her contact with other prisoners in Essen prison was limited to one hour of exercise a day, taken with prisoners who were only in the prison for a few days before being transferred. A
GERMANY/GHANA
decision of the Düsseldorf Higher Regional Court of 16 May 1988 had stated that the window of her cell should be covered by a screen to prevent her contacting other prisoners through the window. The decision also prohibited her from participation in church services or any other communal activities apart from exercise.
During the year it was established that Andrea Sievering (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991) had been moved from Stuttgart (sometimes known as Stammheim) prison in September 1990. The German authorities had in the past described Stuttgart prison as unsuitable for the long-term detention of women prisoners.
An Amnesty International delegation comprising a psychiatrist, a forensic neuropathologist and a staff member of Amnesty International's International Secretariat visited Straubing prison in Bavaria in late February and early March. For several years the organization had received allegations that prisoners held at Haus III, the psychiatric imit attached to the prison, had been subjected to involimtary medication (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The delegation was unable to draw firm conclusions about specific allegations of forcible treatment. It noted, however, that transfer to Haus III was reported by many of those interviewed to represent a form of threat used by prison personnel to ensure compliance with prison discipline. The delegation expressed concern that the close link between the prison and the psychiatric facility tended to result in prison objectives being put before patients' needs.
Amnesty International wrote to the Federal Ministry of Justice in August about the alleged virtual isolation of prisoners held under anti-terrorist legislation. The organization asked whether the restrictions on Barbara Perau-Hofmeier remained in force and whether a review of them was planned. No reply to this letter had been received by the end of the year.
