COMOROS
Five Supreme Court judges arrested in August appeared to be prisoners of con-science. Four other people arrested in 1990 in connection with an alleged coup attempt were held without trial throughout the year, but about 20 others arrested with them were released. There were reports that political detainees were held incommunicado and ill-treated.
Opposition leaders held a series of meetings advocating a national conference to determine the country's political future. Politicians from Moheli island called for equitable power-sharing, claiming their island was inadequately represented in government. President Said Mohamed Djohar said that political reforms would take place but their precise nature and the timetable remained unclear.
Five Supreme Court judges led by the Supreme Court President, Ibrahim Ahmed Halidi, announced in August that they had deposed President Djohar as head of state. The judges declared that the President, himself a former Supreme Coiul President, was imfit to rule and invoked provisions of
COMOROS/CONGO
the Constitution to replace him with the serving Supreme Comt President. However, President Djohar did not step down: he imposed a state of siege and the five judges were detained and placed under house arrest. The attempt to depose President Djohar was followed by violent clashes in the capital, Moroni, between supporters and opponents of the government in which at least four anti-govemment demonstrators were reportedly shot and wounded by the police. Demonstrations were reportedly then barmed for one month. The state of siege was lifted in September.
The five judges, who appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were released in early December. It was unclear whether they had been charged. An independent radio journalist, Cheick Ali Bacar Kassim, who was detained in August because his radio station broadcast news about the judges' action, was released in December.
Six supporters of the opposition Union naijona^e pour la democratie aux Comores (undc), National Union for Democracy in the Comoros, who had been among at least 24 people arrested in August 1990 in connection with an alleged coup attempt (see Amnesty International Report 1991), were released in January. About 14 others were freed in September after they had reportedly sought their provisional release on the advice of the judicial authorities. Four others, however, including Ali Soihili, a journalist, and Abdou Bakar Boina, a former acting secretary general of the undo, continued to be held throughout 1991 without trial and without being given an opportunity to challenge their detention. All four reportedly refused to request provisional release on the grounds that they wanted a public trial.
They and other political detainees were denied visits and were not permitted to send or receive letters while in prison. In January some of the political detainees went on hunger-strike to protest against these conditions and to demand a date for their trial. Some required hospital treatment as a result. Ali Soihili and Abdou Bakar Boina were both said to be in poor health at the end of the year.
Amnesty International pressed for fair trial or release of those arrested in 1990 in connection with the alleged coup attempt, and for an independent and impartial investigation into their alleged torture in 1991. The government did not respond.'
