SINGAPORE
A long-term prisoner of conscience remained under restriction orders confining him at night to an off-shore island. Restrictions on freedom of association and expression continued to be imposed on five former prisoners of conscience. Criminal offenders were sentenced to caning. At least three people were sentenced to death and three were executed.
Following elections which returned the People's Action Party (pap) to power with a reduced majority, Prime Minister Gob Chok Tong announced that the Internal Security Act (isa), which allows for indefinite detention without charge or trial, would remain on the statute books.
Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament detained without charge or trial under the isa from 1966 to 1989, continued to be regarded as a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1991). On release from prison in 1989 he was exiled to an offshore island, and throughout 1991 he remained under a restriction order requiring him to be confined there at night.
Restriction orders on five former political detainees released from detention without charge or trial in 1989 lapsed during
the year and were not renewed by the authorities. The former prisoners included Kevin Desmond De Souza and Wong Souk Yee. However, restriction orders limiting freedom of expression and association remained in force against Vincent Cheng, Teo Sob Lung and three other former prisoners of conscience. They were among 22 people who had been detained under the isa in 1987 and 1988 and held for up to three years without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Caning remained a mandatory punishment for some 30 crimes, including attempted murder, armed robbery, rape, illegal inunigration and drug-trafficking. In March Qwek Kee Chong, a convicted prisoner, brought a court action against the government claiming damages for "grievous injury" suffered as a result of caning. He had been convicted of armed robbery in 1987 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and 48 strokes of the cane -twice the maximum number permitted by law. He required hospital treatment as a result of the caning. In June M. Kanagasun-tharam, an unemployed man, was sentenced to 24 strokes of the cane in addition to 22 years' imprisonment after his conviction on rape charges.
At least three people were sentenced to death. They included Lim Ah Poh, who was sentenced to death by the Singapore High Court in May for a drugs offence; and Wong Kim Poh, whose death sentence for murder was upheld by the Appellate Court in August. Three other people were reported to have been executed, all for drugs offences.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of Chia Thye Poh and the lifting of restrictions on the five former prisoners of conscience. It also called for the elimination of caning, which constitutes a form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and for the commutation of all death sentences.
