CHILE
At least 20 cases of torture and ill-treatment by the security forces were reported. Scores of prisoners arrested during the former military government for politically motivated offences were released, but dozens remained in prison. One journalist was detained, and several others continued to face charges, for criticizing the role of the military in past human rights violations. Military courts continued to close investigations into human rights violations on the basis of the 1978 Amnesty Law. Most cases of human rights abuses not covered by the Amnesty Law remained unresolved. One political prisoner remained under a recommended death sentence.
In March President Patricio Aylwin announced the publication of the report of the Comisión Nacional de Verdad y Reconciliación (CNvyR), National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Out of a total of 2,115 extensively documented cases -some involving multiple victims - the Commission found that at least 2,025 people had suffered serious human rights violations, including 957 "disappearances",
CHILE
carried out by state agents, and that a further 90 had been killed by civilians on political pretexts. The Commission also found that 164 people had been victims of "political violence", including illegal executions. The Commission could not reach conclusions on 641 additional cases and recommended further investigations.
The 2,000-page report criticized the judiciary for failing to grant adequate protection against human rights abuses and for creating an atmosphere in which the military and the police believed they could act with impunity. The report included a number of recommendations for compensating victims' families and for measures to prevent future abuses, including investigations into past abuses and bringing those responsible to justice. President Aylwin noted that the Commission had passed information about its findings to the courts, and called on the judiciary to carry out full investigations, particularly into the whereabouts of the "disappeared". He said the 1978 Amnesty Law should not be an obstacle to such investigations.
Proposals for legal reforms relevant to human rights issues, including the abolition of the death penalty, suffered substantial modifications in Congress before their enactment in January and February. The death penalty, for example, was retained for more than 20 offences.
In April Senator Jaime Guzmán of the Unión Democrática Independiente (udì). Independent Democratic Unity, who was a close supporter of General Pinochet, was killed in Santiago by armed civilians. His murder remained unresolved. Other incidents of political violence included armed attacks by the Movimiento Juvenil Lautaro, Lautaro Youth Movement, which in March reportedly killed police chief Hector Sarmiento in Concepción. The Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez Autónomo, Autonomous Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front, was blamed by the authorities for the killing in March of Carlos Pérez Castro, a retired army doctor, and his wife Ana Schlager in Rancagua.
In April the homes of two local leaders of Partido para la Democracia, Party for Democracy, in Parral were targets of shooting attacks. One of the leaders, human rights lawyer Guillermo Ceroni, had been involved in the Colonia Dignidad judicial proceedings. The leaders of Colonia Dignidad. a closed German community, had
been repeatedly accused of fostering gross human rights violations during the military rule. The attackers, members of the group Amigos de Colonia Dignidad, Friends of Colonia Dignidad, were briefly detained but were released on bail pending trial.
At least 20 complaints of torture were presented to the courts, despite repeated announcements by the government that torture would not be tolerated, and the enactment of legal reforms in February which limit incommunicado detention and provide for the medical examination of detainees. None of those responsible for the torture was brought to justice. In May, for instance, Galia Gimpel Martinez was arrested in Santiago. While in police custody she was reportedly beaten, sexually molested, and deprived of food and sleep for several days before being transferred to prison and charged with politically motivated offences. In October Ricardo Parra Flores died as a result of injuries allegedly sustained under torture, which included beatings on the head, while he was in police custody in the southern town of Lebu in July. He underwent surgery in a local clinic but failed to recover. No progress was reported into the investigation announced into his death.
Scores of political prisoners were released, including Juan Diaz Olea and Cristián Vargas Barahona (see Amnesty /níernaíjona/ Report 1991). More than 50 others remained in prison at the end of the year; many of them had been convicted during the military government in trials marked by serious irregularities, and continued to be held despite recent legislative reforms aimed at resolving their cases. In October six political prisoners in Santiago went on a hunger-strike which lasted 44 days, demanding the release of those still imprisoned. During the year at least 30 people were arrested and charged with politically motivated offences, including terrorism.
In September Manuel Cabieses, director of Punto Final magazine, was briefly detained on the orders of a civilian court on charges of "offending the armed forces". He had published an allegedly offensive cartoon of General Augusto Pinochet. He was released on bail but was briefly rearrested in October on the orders of a military court. He was again released on bail and was awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Twenty-nine cases filed against journalists in 1990 were transferred to civilian courts in February, but Andrés Lagos and Guillermo Torres continued to face charges before military courts. More than 20 journalists whose cases were transferred to civilian jurisdiction, including Alfonso Stephens, were acquitted (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
The military courts continued to claim jiu-isdiction over human rights cases in civilian courts, and to close those cases covered by the 1978 Amnesty Law. The Supreme Court upheld most of these claims. In January the Supreme Court suspended an Appeals Court judge for two months on half salary for refusing to close an investigation into 13 "disappearances" in 1976. The judge had argued against the applicability of the Amnesty Law. based on an interpretation of national law and international human rights standards.
In March investigations into illegal executions and clandestine burials by the military in Pisagua in 1973, for which no one had ever been brought to justice, were closed by a military court on the basis of the Amnesty Law. In June the Supreme Court upheld a military court decision, based on the Amnesty Law, to close the investigation into 26 illegal executions and clandestine burials by the military in the northern town of Calama in 1973. Human remains had been recovered and one victim identified in a preliminary investigation by a lower civilian court.
In September, 127 unidentified bodies, reportedly of victims of illegal executions, were exhumed by forensic experts from a sector of the Santiago cemetery, as part of an investigation into their illegal burials conducted by a civilian court, The results of the investigation had not been made public at the end of the year.
In September General Manuel Contreras and Colonel Pedro Espinoza, director and chief of operations respectively of the disbanded Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional (dina). Directorate of National Intelligence, an agency responsible for most of the "disappearances" and other gross human rights violations committed between 1974 and 1977, were arrested on charges of planning the murder of Orlando Letelier in 1976. They were released on bail in December, pending trial. A prominent critic of the military government, Orlando Letelier was killed in a bomb attack with his assistant
CHILE
Ronnie Moffitt in Washington dc. The case, which was exempted fi'om the 1978 Amnesty Law, had lain dormant until it was transferred to the civilian courts following legal reforms enacted in February.
Little progress was reported in cases of himian rights violations not covered by the 1978 Amnesty Law, most of which remained unresolved. In May the Supreme Court upheld a decision by a lower court to acquit a former member of the disbanded Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNi), the state security police, who had been accused, based on the testimonies of several witnesses, of the 1986 abduction and killing of journalist José Carrasco (see Amnesty International Report 1987].
A death sentence recommended by the prosecution continued to stand against Hugo Gómez Peña, a political prisoner charged with killing a police officer during an attack on a shop in 1986. Eight political prisoners had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment.
In an April meeting with the Foreign Minister, Amnesty International welcomed measures adopted by the government, including the publication of the CNVyR's report, but expressed concern about continuing reports of torture and the failiu:e to bring those responsible to justice. The minister informed Amnesty International that investigations would be opened into any case brought to the authorities' attention. In May Amnesty International wrote to the Interior Minister expressing concern about several cases of torture reported since March 1990, and calling for foil investigations and for those responsible to be brought to justice.
In September Amnesty International published Chile: Reports of Torture since March 1990, which documented more than 40 cases of torture and urged that effective measures to stop such practices be implemented. In November the organization wrote to the President and senior government officials urging a solution to the serious delays in the judicial proceedings against political prisoners.
