CAMBODIA
Hundreds of political prisoners, including at least six prisoners of conscience, were released in early October, but hundreds of others were still believed to be held by the State of Cambodia (soc) Government at the end of the year. An international peace agreement signed in October by the various parties to the Cambodian conflict provided for releases of prisoners by all sides. However, further political arrests were reported and it appeared that several people shot or beaten to death by government forces during riots in Phnom Penh in December may have been victims of extrajudicial executions.
An international agreement to bring peace to Cambodia was signed in October. It was signed by the soc Government headed by Hun Sen, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, and three armed opposition groups - the Partie of Democratic Kampuchea (pdk or "Khmer Rouge"): the National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia (funcinpec); and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (kpnlf). The agreement was also signed by 18 other countries, including the five permanent members of the United Nations (un) Security Council. It followed a cease-fire earlier in the year and the formation of a Supreme National Council (snc), chaired by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, to enshrine Cambodia's sovereignty and to represent the country internationally during a transition period leading to multi-party elections.
The agreement provided for the establishment of a un Transitional Authority in Cambodia (untac) to supervise and control
those Cambodian agencies that could influence elections for a new government. untac was authorized to supervise law enforcement and judicial processes to ensure the protection of human rights. untac was also directed to provide for the investigation of hiunan rights complaints and for corrective action. The agreement committed Cambodia to ensure respect for human rights and required all parties to the conflict to release all prisoners of war and political prisoners as soon as possible. The signatories to the agreement undertook to take "special measures" to ensure that the human rights policies and practices of the past would not recur. However, the agreement did not provide for those responsible for the massive human rights violations of the past to be brought to justice. By the end of the year, untag had not yet been deployed.
Six prisoners of conscience who had been held since May 1990 for attempting to form an opposition political party were released by the soc Government shortly before the peace agreement was concluded. The six were Ung Phan, Kan Man, Thun Saray, Nou Saing Khan, On Sum and Khay Matury (see Amnesty International Report 1991}. Also shortly before the agreement, soc officials were reported to have acknowledged holding some 1,200 "security case" political prisoners and 800 prisoners of war. These included political prisoners held without charge or trial or after unfair political trials for alleged involvement in the activities of the pdk, funcinpec or kpnlf. Among them were a nimiber whose arrests — but not names — had been announced in the official soc news media between 1979 and October 1991. At the end of October, soc officials announced that just before the peace agreement the government had released 487 political prisoners and 483 prisoners of war.
In December the soc authorities said they were still holding 1,260 political prisoners and prisoners of war. The authorities undertook to release all except those who had committed serious crimes of a non-political nature. Among those whom the authorities indicated they would not release were Kang Tong Heang and Kuch Siek, both of whom were arrested in early October. They were accused of involvement in an alleged conspiracy to kill Hun Sen and other soc leaders. At the end of
CAMBODIA/CAMEROON
the year, they were still held without charge or trial.
After the agreement, the soc Minister of Justice said that legislation outlawing "treason against the revolution" and permitting the detention without charge or trial of political suspects had been suspended. However, Hun Sen indicated that despite the agreement, soc secmity forces would continue to arrest people who sought to undermine the soc's authority by establishing local snc bodies in the countryside. At least a dozen pdk, kpnlf and funcinpec activists were arrested in November and December for their political activities. The soc authorities also warned in October that opponents of the administration who tried "to take advantage of the agreements to incite political disorder" in towns would be arrested. In December about 40 students, workers and others were arrested during rioting which broke out following demonstrations protesting against alleged official corruption and human rights violations. It appeared at the end of 1991 that all had been released.
During the December unrest, at least eight people were shot or beaten to death in Phnom Penh by police and soldiers. It appeared that some of those killed may have been victims of extrajudicial executions.
The pdk was also responsible for abuses of hmnan rights. In September some of the leaders of Site 8, a camp in Thailand for refugees from Cambodia, were reportedly detained by pdk forces and held inside Cambodia. They were apparently suspected of opposing the pdk's plans for repatriating Site 8 residents. The site leaders were later reported to have been released. pdk forces also reportedly seized and executed local soc officials both before and after the October peace agreement in areas in which they were active. For example, in November they allegedly seized and then shot dead a sub-district chief in Kampung Speu province.
In March Amnesty International published the names of more than 230 political prisoners believed still to be held by the soc, either without charge or trial or after imfair trials. They had been arrested between 1979 and 1990. In September the organization wrote to Prince Sihanouk and other members of the snc welcoming the requirement under the peace agreement for the release of political prisoners. An
Amnesty International delegation visited Cambodia for the first time in December and met Prince Sihanouk, soc officials and funcinpec, kpnlf and pdk representatives. Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners, but expressed concern about the continued detention of political prisoners without charge or trial or after imfair trials. Amnesty International sought information about people arrested for political reasons since the peace agreement.
Earlier, Amnesty International wrote to the pdk in October about the reported detention of the Site 8 leaders and called for all possible steps to be taken to ensure their safety.
