PERU
Over 300 people "disappeared" and at least 60 were extrajudicially executed by the security forces or by paramilitary groups allegedly operating with their support. Dozens of cases of torture and ill-treatment were reported. Two prisoners of conscience were believed to remain in prison. The government failed to clarify thousands of human rights violations documented since 1983.
The security forces violated human rights throughout Peru in the context of continuing fighting with and atrocities by the armed opposition groups the Partido Comunista del Perú "Sendero Luminoso", Communist Party of Peru "Shining Path" and the Movimiento Revolucionario Túpac Amaru (mkta), Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement.
In response to international criticism, President Alberto Fujimori and members of his administration acknowledged that human rights violations had been committed by the security forces, but defined these as occasional excesses. In statements published in May and September the government referred to the need to eliminate "disappearances", extrajudicial killings and torture. On both occasions the government announced that it would be setting up a high-level commission on human rights to conduct preliminary investigations into alleged violations. However, by the end of the year such a commission -initially proposed by President Fujimori in July 1990 - had not been established.
In July a secret military document dated June 1991 which was leaked to the news media appeared to encourage extrajudicial executions. The document contained
PERU
orders permitting troops to "carry out killings without trace" and not to take prisoners. The Ministry of Defence admitted that the document existed but claimed that it had not been approved by the Armed Forces Joint Command. Also in July, the Minister of Defence announced that during the preceding 12 months 48 military personnel had been disciplined for human rights violations but gave no details of any charges or punishment faced by the accused. In the face of thousands of cases of "disappearance", summary killings and torture documented since 1983, the armed forces continued to enjoy almost total impunity, despite overwhelming evidence of their responsibility for such violations.
In September the government authorized Public Ministry prosecutors to enter military and police installations throughout Peru to investigate alleged "disappearances" and the condition of detainees. Also in September the International Committee of the Red Cross was granted access to military bases and police detention centres in the emergency zones.
In a document entitled "Presidential directive on respect for human rights" published in September, the government stated that "... 5,000 'disappeared' persons have been reported since 1981". The document also stated that President Fujimori, as Commander-in-Chief of the security forces, had reiterated that members of the forces would be severely punished for violating human rights.
Under powers delegated to it by Congress, in mid-November the executive issued a series of legislative decrees aimed at strengthening the government's counter-insurgency strategy. The measures included a new National Defence System and National Intelligence System, and a Law of National Mobilization designed to mobilize the population to combat the armed opposition. Peruvian human rights organizations and some members of parliament warned that the measures could lead to an increase in human rights violations. By mid-December the measures had come into effect, while an attempt by Congress to modify or repeal the decrees was held over until January 1992.
In March Peru ratified the Inter-Ameri-can Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
As in previous years, large areas of Peru were subject to emergency regulations and
direct rule by political-military commands.
Sendero Luminoso committed widespread atrocities, threatening and killing both government officials and civilians. Among those killed, sometimes after mock trials, were peasants accused of collaborating with the authorities, members of religious orders, welfare and development workers and municipal mayors.
On 23 May Paul Loblet Lind, independent mayor for the district of Pachacamac, Lima department, was stopped on the road, reportedly by four members of Sendero Luminoso. His wife and children were ordered out of the car. Paul Loblet was then shot dead and his body blown up with dynamite. On 23 July an official vehicle carrying a medical team in the province of Apurimac was reportedly ambushed by members of Sendero Luminoso. A doctor, three health workers and four other civilians. including a 10-year-old child, were all killed. During August Polish priests Zbigniew Strzalowski and Michal Tomaszek and Italian priest Alessandro Dordi Negroni were killed in Santa province, Ancash department. El Diario Internacional, believed to be a Sendero Luminoso newspaper, claimed that "Maoist forces executed [the] three priests".
On the basis of information obtained mainly ft'om the security forces and the press, a report by the Senate Special Commission on Violence stated that 1,314 people were killed by Sendero Luminoso and a further 139 by the mrta during 1991.
Amnesty International documented the cases of 306 people who "disappeared" during 1991 after being detained by the security forces. Of these, 23 were subsequently found dead and 40 were eventually released or transferred to the police; 243 remained unaccounted for. Most of the victims were ft'om rural areas, although students, trade unionists, teachers and workers ft'om urban centres also "disappeared". Of the unresolved "disappearances", 200 were perpetrated during the first seven months of the year. From August onwards, following international criticism and the government's efforts to improve its human rights record, "disappearances" fell markedly.
Among the "disappeared" were three officials from the town of Chuschi, Ayacu-cho department - Manuel Pacotaype Chaupin, Martin Cayllahua Galindo and Marcelo Cabana Tucno - and a community
PERU
member, Isaías Huamán Vilca. On 14 March all four were detained by the police and transferred to the custody of soldiers who took them to the Pampa Cangallo military base. Five days later a delegation led by the Cangallo prosecutor unsuccessfully inquired at the barracks as to their whereabouts. The military authorities denied their detention and threatened the delegation. In July the Attorney General announced that Ayacucho's chief public prosecutor would investigate the "disappearances" and threats.
Between August and December Amnesty International documented 12 "disappearances" and nine extrajudicial executions attributed to soldiers stationed at the military base in the riverside town of Aucayacu, Huánuco department. Among them was Camilo Alarcón Espinoza, who "disappeared" on 8 August after being detained in Aucayacu. Sara Luz Mozambite Quiñones, detained with him, was killed; her severed head was later found on a river bank. In February the Supreme Court annulled a habeas corpus writ previously issued by a lower court and upheld by a higher court in favour of "disappeared" student Ernesto Castillo Páez (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991). The Supreme Court ruled that there were procedural irregularities in the lower court judge's investigations. The annulment was strongly criticized by Peruvian human rights defenders on the grounds that it was unconstitutional to overrule a habeas corpus petition upheld by two courts.
Extrajudicial executions by the military and the police continued to be reported. On 4 July, 15 people from the community of Santa Bárbara, Huancavelica department, were abducted by a combined military and civil defence patrol and killed. Several days later their bodies, including that of a six-year-old boy, were found in a mine shaft. In an apparent attempt to conceal the evidence, the bodies were subsequently blown up by the military. However, a delegation headed by a judge retrieved used explosives, human remains and clothing for forensic analysis. In October the Ministry of Defence announced that six soldiers had been charged with the murder of 14 of the 15 victims. The case was to be heard by a military tribunal, which normally conducts its proceedings in secret.
Following their arrest on 21 June, broth-
ers Rafael Samuel Gómez Paquiyauri and Emilio Moisés Gomez Paquiyauri, aged 17 and 14, and student Freddy Carlos Rodriguez Pighi were apparently killed by the police. A journalist recorded their detention on video. A few hours later their bodies were discovered in a morgue in Callao, the port area of Lima, the capital, Initially the police claimed the victims had died in an armed confrontation. Following a television broadcast of the video and a public outcry, five police officers were arrested pending investigations. Proceedings were opened by both the civilian and military justice systems but the Supreme Court ruled that the case came under civilian jurisdiction.
Other victims included human rights defenders, critics of the government, journalists and suspected members of armed opposition groups. They were threatened, attacked or killed, sometimes by paramilitary death squads said to be operating with the support of the security forces. On 15 March Dr Augusto Zúñiga Paz, a lawyer working for the independent Comisión de Derechos Humanos, Commission for Human Rights, was the victim of a letter-bomb attack which severed his left forearm. Dr Ztiñiga had received several death threats during his work on the "disappearance" of student Ernesto Castillo Páez (see above). In October a Senate Commission of Inquiry initiated an investigation into the attack on Dr Zúñiga.
Luis Antonio Morales Ortega, a journalist based in the city of Ayacucho well known for his reports on human rights violations, was shot dead on 13 July. Earlier in the month a paramilitary group calling itself the Comando de Liberación Anti-terrorista (cat), Anti-terrorist Liberation Command, had threatened his life. The cat, which first emerged in June, also issued death threats in August against Ayacucho journalists Magno Sosa and Necias Taquiri.
On 3 November, 12 men, three women and one child were shot dead at a social gathering in Lima, in circumstances which suggested they were extrajudicially executed by the security forces or a death squad acting with security force cooperation. The victims, suspected sympathizers of Sendero Luminoso, were in a building near two police establishments and had apparently been under surveillance by the intelligence services. Witnesses stated that the
PERU/PHILIPPINES
assailants, who arrived in two government vehicles which the authorities claimed had been stolen, entered the building and shot them with guns with silencers.
Torture and ill-treatment by the security forces were frequently reported. Juan Salomé Adauto claimed to have been tortured at the military barracks in Huancayo, Jum'n department. He escaped on 10 June, after six weeks' detention. The political-military command in Hucuicayo published a communique claiming that Juan Salomé had never been detained and that his allegations of torture were part of a campaign to discredit the armed forces. In his testimony to a provincial prosecutor Juan Salomé described being suspended by his feet and lowered into a washtub until he lost consciousness. He said he had been beaten and given electric shocks. Independent judicial investigations were not known to have been conducted into this or other cases of torture.
In June the Supreme Council of Military Justice absolved two army officers of any responsibility for the killing of journalist Hugo Bustios in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In May a Senate commission of inquiry concluded that soldiers and members of a civil defence patrol were responsible for the summary killing of 17 peasants in the district of San Pedro de Cachi, Ayacucho department in 1990, but by the end of the year no one had been convicted of the killings (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Two prisoners of conscience were believed to remain in prison. Another, Noè Pastor Romo, was conditionally released in July and obliged to report to prison officials once a month (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Two prisoners of conscience were freed.
Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on numerous occasions to investigate thoroughly and impartially cases of "disappearance", extrajudicial execution and torture and to bring the perpetrators to justice.
The authorities replied on several cases but failed to clarify the fate of the victims. The organization also appealed for the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience and continued to investigate the cases of 12 possible prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International representatives held talks with President Fujimori and
other government officials and members of the security forces in July. The authorities stated that allegations of human rights violations were investigated and expressed a willingness to maintain a dialogue with the organization.
Amnesty International wrote to President Fujimori in October and November expressing its grave concern that he had publicly accused human rights organizations in Peru of colluding with the armed opposition. The organization urged the President to reconsider his statements and to protect human rights defenders.
In November Amnesty International published a report, Peru: Human Rights in a Climate of Terror. It drew attention to the pattern of gross human rights violations perpetrated by the security forces and to widespread atrocities by the armed opposition. The report concluded with a comprehensive set of recommendations aimed at stopping human rights violations.
In oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Peru.
