KOREA
(REPUBLIC OF)
More than 50 prisoners of conscience and at least 35 possible prisoners of conscience were imprisoned; most of them were arrested and imprisoned during the year, the others were serving lengthy sentences on national security grounds. Some prisoners were reportedly ill-treated. One person died as a result of beatings by riot police. Nine people were executed.
In May the government of President Roh Tae-woo amended the National Security Law (nsl). The amendments permit contact with communist organizations, except those allegedly linked to North Korea, and make "praising, encouraging or showing sympathy" to North Korea pimishable only when committed "with the knowledge that it will endanger national security and siuvival of the free and democratic basic order".
Talks continued between the governments of North and South Korea. In December the prime ministers of the two countries signed an Agreement on Reconciliation, Non-aggression and Exchanges and Cooperation. Contacts between citizens of the two countries also increased, mainly through sports and academic exchanges. However, unauthorized contact with North Koreans continued to be punished by imprisonment.
Hundreds of people were reportedly arrested throughout the year on charges related to their political activities. Many were arrested under the nsl which covers offences such as contacting North Korea without government permission, allegedly pro-communist activities, or benefiting North Korea. Others were detained for
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
organizing or participating in demonstrations without prior poHce permission, for violence during demonstrations or for third-party intervention in labour disputes. Many of those arrested were believed still held at the end of the year.
Ten members of Pomminnyon, the Pan-National Alliance for the Reunification of Korea, were sentenced to prison terms for attempting to establish a Pomminnyon chapter in South Korea or for meeting North Korean Pomminnyon members without government permission. Sentences ranged fi'om 18 months to two and a half years, in some cases suspended. Those still imprisoned at the end of the year, all of them prisoners of conscience, included Cho Song-woo, Lee Hae-hak, Lee Chang-bok and the Reverend Hong Keim-soo. The Reverend Moon Ik-hwan, also a leading Pomminnyon activist, was rearrested in June on the grounds that he had violated his parole by again becoming involved in political activities, and sent back to prison to serve the remainder of a seven-year sentence imposed in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Trade unionists were imprisoned for supporting strikes: under the Labour Dispute Mediation Act, third parties - people not directly connected with the workplace - are prohibited fi?om intervening in industrial disputes. Seven officials of Yondae-hoeui, the Association of Large Factory Trade Unions, were arrested in February after a meeting in support of striking shipyard workers. Lee Eun-ku and two others, all prisoners of conscience, were sentenced to 18 months' imprisorunent. A fourth, Park Chang-su, died in May in a fall from a prison hospital roof. He had been receiving hospital treatment for injuries sustained in custody. He was officially found to have committed suicide although trade imion and human rights groups disputed this.
Several members of Somiryon, Seoul Regional Alliance of National People's Fine Arts Movement, were arrested and charged under the nsl with praising North Korea. They included three people arrested in March and sentenced to prison terms of between 18 months and two years in July after being convicted of possessing books and documents on socialism and North Korea, promoting socialist realism, praising North Korean art and inciting opposition to the government. The three, all prisoners of conscience, were still serving their sen-
tences at the end of 1991.
Park In-bae, the director of Seoul Laboiu:ers' Cultural Federation, was arrested in April for distributing tape recordings of labour movement songs without submitting an advance copy to the authorities. He was released in October on a suspended two-year sentence.
Other prisoners of conscience included six students at the Seoul Social Science Research Institute who were arrested in June for possessing and publishing books and articles "praising North Korea - in fact mostly academic publications and university theses - which the authorities said contained "provocative and threatening ideas", Two were released but four others were convicted under the nsl for allegedly praising North Korea, given suspended sentences and released.
Further arrests occurred in June and July following protests about the death of a student, Kang Kyung-dae, as a result of a beating by riot police during a demonstration in April. Hyon Ju-ok, the acting Chairman of Chonnohyop, National Council of Labour Unions, was arrested together with four leaders of Chonkyojo, Korean Teachers' and Educational' Workers Union. Others belonging to Chonminnyon, National Democratic Alliance of Korea, were also arrested, as was Choi Jong-jin of the Chon-nong, National Farmers' Union. They were charged with organizing illegal protest demonstrations. One of them, Sub Jun-shik, the Director of the Human Rights Committee of Chonminnyon, was released in December with a suspended sentence.
Dozens of members of Sanomaeng, the Socialist Workers League, were also arrested and charged under the nsl with plotting to overthrow the government. By December aroxmd 50 had been sentenced to prison terms ranging from 18 months to life. They were alleged to have planned to use violence but it was not clear what evidence existed to support this accusation or whether some might be prisoners of conscience.
In September the Ministry of Defence announced that 34 military conscripts had been arrested between January and August. Most were charged with distributing "left-wing material" and attempting to "indoctrinate fellow draftees with communist ideology". In one case Sub Jae-ho, Chong Ki-ho and Kang Sang-min, all soldiers based in Pusan, were sentenced to between eight
KOREA (REPUBLIC OFl/KUWAIT
months and three years' imprisonment for distributing a pamphlet said to call for withdrawal of United States forces from Korea. They were prisoners of conscience.
Among the prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years were nine prisoners who met North Korean officials or alleged North Korean agents in third countries or illegally visited North Korea. Kim Song-man and Hwang Tae-kwon, who were arrested on such charges in 1985, continued to serve sentences of life and 20 years' imprisonment respectively. Five of the others had been arrested in 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990).
Hong Song-dam, a dissident artist arrested in 1989 for sending one of his paintings to North Korea (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991), had his seven-year sentence reduced to three years on appeal in 1991.
Another prisoner of conscience. Park Ki-rae, who had been imprisoned since 1974 (see Amnesty International Report 1991), was released in an amnesty in February together with other prisoners sentenced to long terms of imprisonment after unfair trials for alleged espionage for North Korea. In May, 74 prisoners who had been convicted imder the nsl were released following the law's amendment and over 180 others either had their sentences reduced or charges suspended. Other prisoners who were not released had been convicted of alleged espionage in the late 1970s and 1980s despite allegations that they had been tortured to make false confessions.
Some prisoners were reportedly beaten or ill-treated, including by being subjected to sleep deprivation. Park Deuk-joon, who was arrested in March under the nsl, alleged that his interrogators had beaten him and threatened to kill him to force him to make a false statement admitting that he listened to North Korean broadcasts.
In April Kang Kyung-dae, a student, was killed in an assault by riot police during a demonstration in Seoul. Five police officers were convicted in August of causing his death. Four were imprisoned and one received a suspended sentence. In May Kwon Chang-su was severely injured by riot police while taking part in a demonstration in Kwanju. In this case too, five police officers were arrested and charged. In October two police officers were dismissed after an investigation found that they had tied three prisoners to cell doors with their hands handcuffed above their
heads and their feet barely touching the floor for nine hours.
Nine people convicted of murder were executed. The Supreme Coml released statistics in October shovdng that the number of death sentences imposed by the comts had risen from 17 in 1989 to 36 in 1990. The rise was said to have resulted from an anti-crime campaign launched by the government in late 1989. No statistics about death sentences imposed in 1991 were published, but 30 prisoners convicted of murder were reported to be imder finalized death sentences at the end of the year.
Amnesty International welcomed those amendments to the nsl which limited the scope of provisions which had previously led to the imprisonment of some prisoners of conscience but expressed concern to the government that the provisions could still allow the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience and for a review of the cases of those prisoners sentenced for espionage who were believed to have been convicted after unfair trials, The authorities responded to some Amnesty International inquiries about specific prisoners, providing information about the charges against them and asserting that their arrests were necessitated by considerations of national security,
In September Amnesty International delegates visited South Korea and discussed human rights concerns with National Police Agency and Ministry of Justice officials.
