LIBERIA
There were renewed extrajudicial executions of civilians and opponents by the different groups involved in the armed conflict in 1990. Most victims were targeted because of their ethnic group. The warring factions also continued to detain and beat prisoners. Hundreds of people from other West African states who had been detained during the conflict were released.
There was continuing armed conflict. The capital, Monrovia, remained in the hands of the Interim Government of National Unity led by Dr Amos Sawyer, which had the support of a military force sent to Liberia in 1990 by the Economic Community of West African States (ecowas) (see Amnesty International Report 1991) and of two apparently autonomous armed groups. Most of the rest of the country was under the control of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (npfl), headed by Charles Taylor, which set up the National Patriotic Reconstruction Assembly (npra) administration in Gbamga to rival the Interim Government in Monrovia.
There was renewed fighting between the opposing parties but on a lesser scale than in 1990 when thousands were killed and hundreds of thousands displaced. In the east, there was fighting in Grand Gedeh County, former President Samuel Doe's home area, between troops loyal to the dead President and the npfl. On 23 March a force comprising npfl troops and opponents of the Government of Sierra Leone
LIBERIA
invaded Sierra Leone from Liberia, attacking towns and villages and killing civilians. The NPFx denied involvement but the attack was launched from part of Liberia controlled by the npfl. The attackers were met by Sierra Leone government forces, assisted by Liberian troops loyal to former President Doe belonging to various armed groups. In September these Liberian forces entered Liberia and fighting was continuing along the border at the end of 1991.
While thousands of refugees returned to Monrovia from neighboring countries, thousands of others continued to flee from areas controlled by the npfl, particularly from Grand Gedeh County into neighbouring Côte d'Ivoire. However, movement into and out of territory controlled by the npfl was hampered by npfl roadblocks.
Negotiations between the Interim Government and the npra administration resulted in an agreement in October. In preparation for national elections in 1992, the npfl agreed to disarm and hand over military control of the areas under its authority to ecowas forces. However, this process had made little progress by the end of the year.
There were renewed killings and other abuses by armed groups supporting the Interim Government. These were the Armed Forces of Liberia (afl), the remnant of the military force which had formerly supported President Doe, and the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (inpfl), led by Prince Johnson, which had split from the npfl in 1990. Both these groups had military camps in the Monrovia area and were responsible for abuses, despite orders by the Interim Government that they remain in their camps.
The inpfl, which had killed President Doe in 1990, was reported in March also to have killed Angeline Watta Allison (see Amnesty International Report 1991). She had been sentenced to life imprisonment for complicity in murder under the Doe government and had been held in Monrovia. It was also reported that her husband, Major-General Gray Dioh Allison, had been captured and executed by the npfl. A former defence minister, he had been sentenced to death for murder after an unfair trial in 1989 and had been held at Belle Yellah prison camp awaiting a presidential decision on his clemency appeal.
The inpfl was also reported to have held one woman at its camp throughout 1991,
having taken her prisoner in November 1990. and to be holding a number of children at an orphanage within the camp to deter a possible attack by ecowas forces. In February the inpfl detained and ill-treated some seven members of the Interim Legislative Assembly for three days. At the end of the year the inpfl claimed to have freed all prisoners then held, including an npfl official.
In July the inpfl executed four of its own men. One, Moses Varnfey. was said by the inpfl to have been secretly negotiating the surrender of arms by inpfl troops to the ecowas forces. Three others were said to have been sentenced for armed robbery. It was not clear whether they received any form of trial. Unconfirmed reports suggested that two other civilians were executed by the inpfl at this time.
There were further killings by the inpfl in September and October, leading the Interim Government to ask the ecowas forces to confine the inpfl to its camp. However, Prince Johnson threatened to resist with force any attempt to arrest him. He said that two inpfl soldiers executed in October had been convicted of trying to kill him by an inpfl court-martial.
The afl was also responsible for human rights abuses in Monrovia. In June and July afl soldiers reportedly attacked members of the Interim Government, the Interim Legislative Assembly and others. After this, the afl announced the establishment of a board of inquiry to consider complaints of ill-treatment. However, it was not clear if any official action was taken against soldiers alleged to have committed abuses.
npfl forces were also responsible for grave and widespread abuses in the large area of the country under their control, although not on the same scale as in 1990. In addition to killing Major-General Allison, the npfl was responsible for further killings of hundreds of members of the Krahn ethnic group and the Muslim Mandingo community in Grand Gedeh County, who were targeted for formerly supporting the Doe government. npfl troops continued to detain, torture and kill civilians in other areas under their control.
In September it was reported that a number of npfl soldiers had been extrajudicially executed after attempting to assassinate Charles Taylor. However, these reports were denied by the npra administration. It said that an npfl officer had been
LIBERIAAIBYA
executed after a special court-martial had convicted him of murdering five soldiers. There were unconfirmed reports of other executions of prisoners sentenced by coiurts established by the npra, although no details were known.
Nationals of other West African countries taken prisoner in 1990 and held in harsh conditions at npfl detention camps were also reported to have been tortmed or killed, apparently in retaliation for the role of ecowas member states in establishing the Interim Government. Himdreds of others, however, were eventually released and repatriated.
After the September incursion into western Liberia from Sierra Leone, and again in December, foreign and Liberian aid workers were detained for several days by the NPFL, assaulted and accused of spying.
Amnesty International continued to be gravely concerned about killings of prisoners and other abuses and early in the year intervened directly with the inpfl leader. Prince Johnson, about abuses committed by the inpfl, but with no response.
Five prisoners of conscience remained in prison since their arrest in 1973. At least 463 suspected government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained apparently without charge or trial. Seventeen political prisoners continued serving sentences imposed after unfair trials, and one remained in prison despite having been tried and acquitted. Scores of foreign nationals held in custody before being deported were reported to have been ill-treated: 16 of those held allegedly "disappeared" and one appeared to have been extrajudicially executed. No death sentences or executions were announced, but there were unconfirmed reports of at least five secret executions.
In September Law No. 20 on the Consolidation of Liberty was promulgated. Article
Four stipulates that the death penalty may be imposed "on those whose lives constitute a threat or cause depravity to society". Article Eight affirms every citizen's right to freedom of expression through "People's Congresses and through Jamahiri media", Also in September Law No. 21 on Mobilization was passed. It retains the death penalty for desertion fi-om the armed forces and for disclosing information to the enemy in time of war.
Five prisoners of conscience, all suspected members of the prohibited Islamic Liberation Party (ilp), continued to serve life sentences in Abu Salim Prison in Tripoli (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
New information was received about suspected government opponents arrested in previous years. At least 463 people, including possible prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained apparently without charge or trial at the end of 1991. Of these, 407 were arrested in 1989 and 1990. Among the 407 were alleged members or supporters of banned Islamic opposition groups, including Al-Da'wa al-Islamiyah, Islamic Call; Al-Jihad, Holy War; Ai-Tab-ligh, Preaching; the ilp; the Muslim Brotherhood; and followers of the Wahabiyya Islamic doctrine. However, many were said to have been arrested solely for expressing their personal religious beliefs. They included 'Abdul-Salam al-Duwadi, a secondary school teacher and a preacher in a mosque, who was arrested in Sibrata in January 1989; and Ahmad al-Busifi, a computer programmer working for Libyan Arab Airlines, who was arrested in Tripoli in January 1989.
At least 56 other suspected government opponents arrested between 1974 and 1986 also remained in detention without charge or trial. They had not benefited from the March 1988 amnesty in which 400 political prisoners were released (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Most were arrested following an armed clash in 1984 at Bab al-'Aziziya between the security forces and members of the opposition National Front for the Salvation of Libya (nfsl). They included Wanis Idris al-'Isawi, an employee of the Libyan National Oil Company arrested in al-Marj near Benghazi, and 'Umran 'Umar al-Turbi, former Director of the Benghazi Central Dental Clinic. Both were believed to be held in Abu Salim Prison.
LIBYVLITHUANIA
Confirmation was received during the year of the release in late 1990 of 'Usama al-Sanussi Shalluf, a former air force officer. He had been serving a life sentence. He had been among 18 suspected political opponents of the government sentenced after imfair trials between 1970 and 1987 on charges including plotting to overthrow the government and membership of banned opposition groups. The remaining 17 continued to be held, reportedly in Abu Salim Prison (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
'Abdullah Menina, a political prisoner held since 1984 despite being tried and acquitted in 1985, remained in detention, possibly in Abu Salim Prison (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Scores of people were reportedly beaten and ill-treated by the security forces in August and September. They were among hundreds of Nigerian and Malian workers held in custody before being deported. Nigerians held in a camp near Tripoli said they were repeatedly beaten with sticks and rifle butts. Similar allegations were made by Malians detained in camps in Sabha. Sixteen of the Malians held reportedly "disappeared": after they were taken into custody their passports were said to have been returned to their families without any explanation as to their whereabouts. Another Malian, Adama Drame, was said to have been shot dead by the security forces at a camp in Sabha, apparently the victim of an extrajudicial execution.
There were imconfirmed reports that two nsfl leaders had "disappeared" after allegedly being handed over to the Libyan authorities in 1990 by Egyptian security forces. Jaballah Hamid Mattar and 'Izzat Yussif al-Maqrif, both of whom had been living in Egypt for many years, had been questioned by Egyptian officials on several occasions in March 1990. On 13 March they were taken from their homes by State Security officials, and their fate and whereabouts have since remained unknown.
No death sentences or executions were known to have been announced during the year. However, there were unconfirmed reports of the secret execution of at least five alleged leaders of Islamic opposition groups and other political detainees arrested in 1989 and 1990.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional
release of all prisoners of conscience. It also expressed concern about the continued imprisonment of hundreds of other political prisoners without trial or after unfair trials.
In June Amnesty International published a report, Libya: Amnesty International's prisoner concerns in the light of recent legal reforms. The report detailed the continuing imprisonment of hundreds of suspected government opponents either without trial or after unfair trials despite government promises to introduce legal reforms to safeguard human rights. The organization also recorrunended several measures to bring Libya's legislation and practice into line with international human rights standards, and urged the authorities to give immediate consideration to their implementation.
In a public statement in lune, the government said that Amnesty International's report "depended on inaccurate information", but expressed willingness to discuss the organization's concerns. Amnesty International welcomed this and proposed that a delegation visit the country for this purpose. Preparations were under way for the visit to take place in 1992.
