MADAGASCAR
Four leading critics of the government, all prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial for brief periods. Peaceful pro-democracy demonstrators were shot dead by the security forces, victims of apparent extrajudicial executions.
The govemment of Admiral Didier Rat-siraka, President since 1975, faced increasing pressure from an opposition party
alliance, Hery Velona, Active Forces Committee, which mounted mass demonstrations and strikes demanding President Ratsiraka's resignation. In Jime Hery Velona named some of its leaders as members of a provisional govemment. In response. President Ratsiraka imposed a state of emergency in the capital, Antananarivo, which remained in force imtil September. The political deadlock was broken on 31 October, after the head of the armed forces called for a resolution of the crisis. The govemment and opposition reached agreement on transitional arrangements until the reintroduction of a multi-party political system and elections in 1992. President Ratsiraka remained head of state but his powers were reduced, and the Supreme Revolutionary Council and the People's National Assembly were dissolved. Their powers were transferred to a High State Authority, headed by Albert Zafy, leader of Hery Velona, and to Prime Minister Guy Razanamasy. A new government was appointed which by the end of the year included representatives of Hery Velona.
At the height of the dispute in July, four Hery Velona leaders who had been nominated as "provisional govemment ministers" were abducted by troops and detained for several days after they tried to occupy ministerial offices. They included Rahan-tavololona Andriamanjato, Hery Velona's shadow Minister of Public Works, whose husband was also an opposition leader; she was detained by a force led by the official Minister of Public Works. Jean-Jacques Rakotoniaina, designated by Hery Velona as shadow Minister of Industry and Mines, was also one of those detained. He was kept in a hut, in extreme cold and with
MADAGASCAR/MALAWI
inadequate food, for over five days before being released, blindfolded and with his hands tied, in the streets of Antananarivo.
Scores of peaceful pro-democracy demonstrators, possibly more than 100 in all, were shot dead by the security forces in the period before the end of October. On 10 August at least 30 demonstrators were killed and 200 wounded when the Presidential Guard threw grenades and fired on a crowd of some 300,000 people marching on the President's palace to call for his resignation. Some reports suggested that up to 130 people might have been killed. President Ratsiraka denied that the Presidential Guard was responsible and blamed other branches of the security forces. However, the armed forces denied any involvement and the evidence available suggested that the Presidential Guard deliberately opened fire on the crowd. The newly appointed Prime Minister, Guy Razanamasy, ordered an inquiry into the killings but by the end of the year its findings had not been made public. There were also reports that demonstrators had been killed, also on 10 August, by govemment forces in the northem town of Mahajanga.
On 23 October at least two and possibly as many as 12 people were killed and about 70 wounded by the security forces during another peaceful demonstration in Antsiranana. The armed forces reportedly threw tear-gas grenades and opened fire on Hery Velona supporters as they approached the provincial governor's residence.
Amnesty Intemational called for an inquiry into the killings of demonstrators, which appeared to constitute extrajudicial executions, and for those responsible to be brought to justice.
