NIGERIA
Former government officials and political leaders, and student leaders, were held as prisoners of conscience. At least nine relatives of people sought by the authorities after an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1990 remained in detention without charge or trial. Eight people sentenced to death after secret, unfair trials had their sentences commuted. At least 20 people were sentenced to death during 1991 and 15 were executed.
In December civilians were elected to replace military governors in Nigeria's 30 states, which had been increased from 21 in August. The military government, headed by General Ibrahim Babangida, then hfted the 1987 ban prohibiting former government officials from involvement in politics.
NIGERIA
Thirteen former government officials and political leaders were arrested on 2 December shortly before the state governorship elections. Most had held government office during the 1979 to 1983 period of civilian government. All prisoners of conscience. they were charged with unlawful involvement in politics. Two were then released on health grounds but the others were remanded in custody until 20 December, when they were released after the prohibition on their political activity was lifted.
Tam David-West, a university professor and former Minister of Petroleum Resources in the previous military government, was released in August after nine months' imprisonment apparently motivated by his non-violent criticism of the government. He had been briefly detained in October 1989 after giving an interview which apparently displeased the authorities. He was then sentenced to two concurrent 10-year prison sentences in November 1990 by the Special Military Tribunal for the Recovery of Public Property for corruption and damaging the country's economy, although no convincing evidence was produced against him. He was imprisoned in harsh conditions over 1,500 kilometres from his home. He was released after the Special Appeals Tribunal, to which he had appealed, acquitted him of the main charges for lack of evidence.
At least seven people arrested after an unsuccessful coup attempt in April 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1991] were detained without charge or trial throughout 1991. All appeared to be prisoners of conscience, held because they were relatives of alleged coup conspirators being sought by the authorities. Two more were reportedly arrested in December. They were held under the State Security (Detention of Persons) Decree No. 2 of 1984, which permits administrative detention for renewable periods of six weeks, thereby providing for indefinite detention without charge or trial. None of the seven was known to have had their cases examined by the Review Committee established in 1990 to review such detentions. The authorities thwarted or ignored High Court orders challenging their detentions. Gloria Mowarin remained in detention despite a Lagos High Court ruling in February that it was illegal and unconstitutional, and that she should be released. The High Court
ruled in June that it had no jurisdiction to order the release of two sisters, Gloria Anwuri and Rhoda Heman-Ackah, whose brother had fled the coimtry after the coup attempt. Initially held at the Directorate of Military Intelligence, they were moved in August to Kirikiri Women's Prison, where conditions were poor. A legal action seeking the release of two other detainees -Christine Osamede Oziegbe and Pat Oba-hor. wives of armed forces officers believed to have fled after the coup attempt - was dismissed in September by the High Court on the grounds that it had not been brought within 12 months of their arrest.
Three students were killed and about 200 others were arrested in late May after clashes between rival student groups and between police and students. The violence occurred during demonstrations in support of calls by the banned student body, the National Association of Nigerian Students (nans), for changes in government policy. Mahmud Aminu, the nans President, and six other student leaders among those arrested were reportedly beaten severely by security police. No charges were brought against them and they were released in August. However, they were required to sign agreements that they would not divulge publicly any information about their detention or take any action against the government over it.
Another student leader, Kayode Ogun-dahunsi, was allegedly stripped, beaten and exposed to tear-gas by police for several days after his arrest in June. He was then charged in connection with a demonstration at the University of Jos and released in October to await trial.
Nine army officers and two civilians were convicted of treason and concealment of treason in October after a third in camera trial before a Special Military Tribunal. All 11 had been charged in connection with the April 1990 coup attempt. Eight were sentenced to death but later had their sentences commuted to terms of imprisonment; the three others received life sentences. Some or all of the 11 had apparently been acquitted at two previous trials; a third was then held with different members of the military government presiding. This trial was grossly unfair: the court could not be considered independent, the earlier acquittals were ignored and the defendants had no right of appeal. Following conviction, they continued to be held incommunicado.
NIGERIA/NORWAY
At least 20 people were sentenced to death during 1991 for armed robbery and miorder. At least 15 of them were convicted by Robbery and Firearms Tribunals, special courts whose procedures do not guarantee a fair trial and against whose rulings there is no appeal. In July police and military officers were removed from these tribunals. At least five others were sentenced to death for murder by state High Courts. They had the right to appeal to a higher, federal court.
Fifteen people were executed during 1991. Eleven prisoners sentenced to death by Robbery and Firearms Tribunals in Akwa Ibom State were publicly executed by firing-squad in March. The executions were carried out on four sites in front of scores of spectators. In April two people convicted of armed robbery were executed before hundreds of people in Nguru, Bomo State. In May two Chadian nationals convicted of armed robbery were executed in public in Jos, Plateau State.
Amnesty International appealed to the government to release immediately prisoners of conscience. It urged the authorities to release the detainees held without charge or trial since the April 1990 coup attempt if they were not to be charged and tried. It expressed concern about secret, unfair trials before the Special Military Tribunal and urged the government to allow those convicted by it to appeal to a higher, independent court. The organization urged the government not to use the death penalty and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
