ITALY
Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and prisons continued. Several inquiries opened into such allegations in previous years remained unresolved. A judicial inquiry was under way into the killings of two criminal suspects by the police in disputed circumstances.
In July the Chamber of Deputies (lower house of parliament) approved a draft law which would reform the existing system of conscientious objection to compulsory military service (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1991). Its proposals included widening the grounds on which conscientious objector status might be granted and reducing the length of alternative
ITALY
civilian service from 20 to 15 months, three months longer than military service. However, it made no provision for conscientious objection developed after conscription into the armed forces. The draft law was awaiting approval by the Senate at the end of the year.
Further reports of ill-treatment in police custody and prisons were received.
On 23 January law enforcement agents evicted some 2,000 homeless immigrants, the majority of them from the Indian subcontinent and North Africa, from a disused factory in Rome. After preliminary checks on passports and residence permits, some 1,000 immigrants were taken to a carabinieri station where they were held for periods of up to 48 hours for further screening.
Members of parliament and town councillors who visited the station on 24 January stated that they had witnessed police officers striking immigrants, that many of the immigrants had visible injuries and that a number required medical treatment on release. In a public demonstration held on 25 January approximately 30 immigrants reportedly displayed bruised faces, bandaged arms and bum marks on their hands which they claimed were cigarette bums inflicted by the police. They announced their intention of lodging judicial complaints of ill-treatment.
In April inmates of Sollicciano prison alleged to the judge of surveillance attached to the prison and the Director General of Prison Services that prison guards regularly subjected prisoners to ill-treatment, including beatings. The majority of the allegations concemed prisoners of North African origin, constituting some 40 per cent of the prison's population. The
director of Sollicciano prison subsequently informed the press that the judge of surveillance was responsible for investigating the allegations. In December prison inmates claimed in a letter to the press that both male and female prisoners continued to be ill-treated.
A judicial inquiry was under way into the alleged torture and ill-treatment of inmates of Fuomi prison during a search operation apparently carried out by between 100 and 150 masked prison guards on 15 December 1990. Prisoners claimed that the guards forced them to strip and perform press-ups and repeatedly kicked and beat them with tmncheons and batons. They alleged that they were held in a common room and made to kneel, facing the wall, with their arms in the air, and were beaten if they tumed. They also alleged that some prisoners were sodomized with broom handles and that younger prisoners were forced to spit at and slap elderly prisoners.
In the days immediately following the search the prison infirmary reportedly issued around 100 medical certificates recording injuries which the medical staff estimated would require three, four or five days to heal. It was also claimed that one prisoner lost an eye, one sustained a burst ear-drum, one had the bones of one hand smashed and another had several teeth broken. Four or five prisoners were reportedly hospitalized but in January there were allegations that other injured prisoners had received inadequate medical treatment.
A judicial inquiry into allegations that prison guards ill-treated up to 20 inmates of Novara prison dining and after their dispersal fi'om the exercise yard in January 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) ended in March when the judge of preliminary investigation mled that the proceedings should be archived. She decided that the dispersal operation had conformed to legal requirements but was marked by the utmost disorganization; it had not even been possible to establish the names or number of guards participating. She stated that it had been impossible to either prove or disprove the prisoners' allegation that guards had beaten at least four of them after the dispersal operation. She concluded that there was therefore no proof that the prisoners were guilty of calumny against the guards, as had been alleged, and dismissed an allegation that
ITALY/JAMAICA
prisoners had attacked guards while being dispersed.
A judicial inquiry was under way into the fatal shooting by police officers of cousins Spaho and Sefik Halilovic, described as Romas (Gypsies) of Slav origin. They were among five occupants of a van suspected of carrying stolen goods, which was chased and stopped by two members of the highway police in November 1990. The Ministry of the Interior stated that the occupants ran off and one of the poUce officers fired a few warning shots in the air: when the fugitives fired some shots in reply, the second police officer fired the shots which killed Spaho and Sefik Halilovic.
However, reportedly no firearms were found in the vicinity of their bodies and the only spent cartridges discovered were apparently those used in standard police-issue firearms. The initial examination of the bodies reportedly found that one of them had been shot in the back, and that the other had been shot in the head three times at close range. A man described as one of the three people who had escaped from the police reportedly alleged that he had seen the police shoot Spaho Halilovic while he was lying on the ground, begging them not to fire.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about the alleged circumstances of the shootings and asked to be informed as to the progress and outcome of the judicial inquiry.
During a meeting with Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti in October, an Amnesty International representative presented a memorandum describing various cases of alleged torture and ill-treatment of detainees and prisoners between 1986 and 1991. The memorandum expressed concern about the number of such allegations and the persistent failure of the authorities to reply to the organization's requests for information on most of the cases cited in its memorandum. It also expressed concern about the apparent lack of progress in judicial inquiries opened into some of the allegations in previous years. These included an inquiry into the alleged ill-treatment of at least 47 detainees in Milan in 1988 and an investigation opened in 1986 into the alleged ill-treatment of around 30 detainees in Naples (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 to 1991). The Prime Minister gave assurances that he would ask for a
thorough examination of each case described in the memorandum and would inform Amnesty International of the results.
