SAUDI ARABIA
Over 350 Christian worshippers and Shi'a Muslims were arrested, most of whom were prisoners of conscience. At least seven were still held at the end of the year. Twenty political detainees arrested in previous years, including nine prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial throughout 1991. However, 34 political prisoners, including 19 prisoners of conscience, were released. Details emerged of unfair political trials. The torture of detainees continued to be reported, including the imposition of judicial punishments of flogging and amputation. Twenty-nine people were executed.
Plans to set up a consultative system of government, promised by King Fahd bin 'Abdul-'Aziz in November 1990. had not been implemented by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Several petitions demanding political reform were submitted to the King by religious leaders and prominent members of the business and intellectual communities.
About 265 Filipino and Korean Christian worshippers were arrested by members of the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice (cpvpv), an official body which supervises the observance of Shari'a (Islamic law as interpreted
in Saudi Arabia). In January, five Filipinos were arrested following a raid on the Pentecostal Church in Riyadh, the capital. They were held in Malaz Prison in Riyadh and reportedly subjected to 150 lashes each. All were released by May. In August between 70 and 80 other Filipinos were arrested at a private house in Riyadh. Most were released after questioning, but four were detained in Malaz prison for over one month. Three of them were reportedly released and deported, but it was not clear what had happened to the fourth by the end of the year. In October about 180 Koreans were arrested in a raid on their place of worship in a camp in Wadi Hanifa on the outskirts of Riyadh. The majority were released the same day, but 38 of them, including women and children, were held for up to four days.
In March over 100 Saudi Arabian Shi'a Muslims were arrested in al-Qatif after demonstrations protesting against the arrest in Iraq of the Grand Ayatollah al-Sayyid Abul-Qassem al-Kho'i (see Iraq entry). All were released uncharged within a few days.
Between January and July, nine suspected opponents of the government, including seven prisoners of conscience, were arrested in the Eastern Province. All were Shi'a Muslims and suspected supporters of the Organization of Islamic Revolution in the Arabian Peninsula (oirap) and HizbuHah fil Hijaz, Party of God in Hijaz. Two were released uncharged but six remained in detention, apparently without charge or trial, at the end of the year. The ninth was Zuhair al-Safwani, a student and freelance journalist, held since January at al-Mabahith al-'Amma Prison in al-Dammam. He was held incommunicado for five months, and was reportedly sentenced to four years' imprisonment and 300 lashes.
At least 20 political detainees arrested in previous years remained in detention, apparently without charge or trial. Nine were prisoners of conscience: five students from King Sa'ud University in Riyadh arrested in 1989 and four suspected oirap supporters arrested in 1990. Eleven were alleged HizbuUah fi] Hijaz supporters arrested in 1988. Four other suspected Hizballah fil Hijaz supporters continued to serve prison terms imposed after unfair trials in late 1989 or early 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 2989, 1990 and 1991).
It was not possible to obtain additional
SAUDI ARABIA
information about thousands of Yemeni nationals arrested in 1990, nor to ascertain how many remained in detention at the end of the year, although most were believed to have been deported to Yemen (see Amnesty International Report 1991].
Between January and August, 34 political detainees and sentenced prisoners arrested in previous years were released. Among them were 19 prisoners of conscience - Salih al-'Azzaz, a well-known journalist, and 18 suspected oirap supporters - and two possible prisoners of conscience, all arrested in 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991]. Nine Saudi Arabian nationals sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials in 1982 in Bahrain, who had been transferred to Saudi Arabia to serve their sentences, were released in June and August. They had been charged with participating in a coup attempt in Bahrain in 1981.
Information was received about the unfair trial of four Kuwaiti nationals sentenced in 1989 to prison terms ranging from 15 to 20 years' imprisonment, and to between 1,000 and 1,500 lashes (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991]. One said they had been forced to sign "confessions" under torture in a detention centre in Jeddah. They were denied lawyers, received no notice that they were to be tried, and appeared for less than 20 minutes before three people whom they were told were judges. They did not realize a trial had taken place and learned that they had been "tried" and sentenced only after their release in March.
The torture of detainees continued to be reported. Rosano Gopez, a Filipino national arrested by members of the cpvpv in September, was reportedly suspended from the ceiling, beaten and kicked in the stomach and forced to "confess" to being a male prostitute. He was reportedly sentenced to four months' imprisonment and 180 lashes. In October Noel Lubag, another Filipino national, was arrested in Jeddah and reportedly subjected to falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet) for several hours while suspended from the ceiling. He remained in detention without trial in Breeman Prison in Jeddah at the end of 1991.
The death in custody of Sa'id al-Farash in November 1990 was confirmed during the year. He died 10 hours after his arrest by members of the cpvpv in Mecca. Following protests by his family, a committee
composed of members of the cpvpv was set up by the Ministry of the Interior to investigate the death. The committee reportedly refused to accept the findings of several doctors that Sa'id al-Farash had died of a fractured skull caused by beatings, and concluded he had died of natural causes. The family reportedly raised the case with King Fahd bin 'Abdul-'Aziz, but the outcome was not known by the end of 1991.
In December, three judicial amputations were carried out. The three victims had their right hands severed at the wrist, after being convicted of theft.
Between May and December, 29 men were publicly executed by beheading. The executions were carried out in Riyadh, Jubail, Jeddah and other cities. The victims were Sudanese. Pakistani and Saudi Arabian nationals convicted of murder, drug-trafficking, kidnapping and sexual offences.
In October Muhammad al-Fasi, a Saudi Arabian businessman, was detained by Jordanian security forces in Amman and subsequently handed over to the Saudi Arabian authorities (see Jordan entry). His arrest was reportedly linked to statements he had made in support of Iraq during the Gulf crisis. Officials of the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Jordan denied knowledge of his forcible return. He remained in incommunicado detention at the end of the year, reportedly at a secret location in Riyadh.
During the year, Amnesty International expressed concern about the arrest of Christians and Shi'a Muslims for the peaceful expression of their religious beliefs. It reiterated its request for information on prisoners of conscience and other political detainees, including Yemeni nationals, arrested in previous years. The organization asked about the trial proceedings in the cases of four Kuwaiti nationals sentenced in 1989, and expressed concern about the torture of detainees and the continued imposition of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments: floggings, amputations and the death penalty. Amnesty International also expressed concern about the apparent unacknowledged detention of Muhammad al-Fasi. The organization reiterated its request to visit Saudi Arabia, which the government had accepted in principle in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. No response was received from the government during the year.
