EL SALVADOR
Dozens of people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by the security forces. Some 35 further killings and niunerous death threats were attributed to clandestine "death squads" believed to be linked to the armed forces. A colonel was convicted for the murder in 1989 of six Jesuit priests and two university staff, but the armed forces continued to evade accoimtability for hundreds of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in recent years. Torture was frequently used in police and military custody and legal detention procedures continued to be flouted.
Negotiations between the government
EL SALVADOR
and the opposition Frente Farabundo Marti para ¡a Liberación Nacional (fmln), Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front, cuhninated in the signing of the New York Declaration on 31 December. This set dates for a cease-fire and for the signing of a definitive peace accord. Earlier talks mediated by the United Nations (un) had produced agreements on military, judicial and socio-economic reforms.
Constitutional reforms to the judiciary, including the creation of a National Human Rights Procurator's Office, were ratified by the Legislative Assembly, although this office had not yet been established at the end of the year. Constitutional reforms concerning the police and military were awaiting ratification by the Legislative Assembly at the end of the year. These included the disbanding of certain military and security force units and the creation of a civilian controlled police force. A bill to extend the death penalty to cover certain crimes in peacetime was added by the governing Alianza Republicana Nacionalista (arena). Nationalist Republican Alliance, to the package of proposed constitutional reforms in April, but was defeated in the Legislative Assembly in October.
The government and the fmln also agreed in April to set up a Truth Commission to investigate "acts of violence of singular importance" committed by government or fmln forces since 1980. The agreement did not specify the precise criteria for selecting cases and gave the Commission no judicial powers. The three members of the Commission, which was to issue a final report after six months, were appointed by the un Secretary-General in December. The government and the fmln also agreed to a process of purging the armed forces, based on an evaluation of all their members by an Ad Hoc Commission.
In July the Human Rights Division of the un Observer Mission in El Salvador (onusal) was established. Its role was to monitor implementation of the July 1990 Agreement on Human Rights signed by the government and the fmln in San José, Costa Rica (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Reports published by onusal in September and November analysed the difficulties of verifying the Agreement before a cease-fire, summarized certain cases and presented preliminary recommendations to both sides.
Municipal and legislative elections took
place in March, amid allegations of fraud and instances of electoral violence, arena lost its absolute majority in the Legislative Assembly, while the left-wing coalition Convergencia Democrática, Democratic Convergence, won eight seats and entered the Assembly for the first time.
Despite the peace talks, the armed conflict continued to claim scores of casualties, civilian as well as military. Several execution-style killings by fmln members of military and secmity force officers and suspected collaborators were reported. In January fmln combatants shot down a United States (us) Air Force aircraft, killing one of the us military advisers on board. Two other occupants were taken prisoner and subsequently shot dead by their fmln captors. The fmln detained its members allegedly responsible, declaring that they would be tried by an fmln court attended by international observers. However, in September the fmln indicated that it would hand over the suspects to the authorities once the judiciary had been reformed and would refer the case to the Truth Commission. In July the fmln captured and subsequently executed Serafín Orlando Merino Interiano, a member of the Treasury Police, claiming he had been foimd guilty of being a "repressive tortiu-er".
Election candidates belonging to parties considered sympathetic to the fmln were among those killed in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial execution by government forces. Heriberto Robles, candidate for the Unión Democrática Nacional (udn), National Democratic Union, and his pregnant wife Vilma Palacios were shot dead on 21 February in San Salvador. Blanca Mima Benavides, a udn candidate in Santa Ana, was seriously injured on 6 March by shots fired at her ft'om a vehicle which formed part of an arena procession in San Salvador.
A week after returning to El Salvador ft'om eight years in exile in Honduras, Francisco Cruz Menjivar was shot dead on 30 March near his home in the repatriated refugee community of Nueva Trinidad. The authorities claimed he was killed in crossfire between the fmln and the AtlacatI Battalion, but local residents said there had been no confrontation there that day and alleged that he had been deliberately killed by AtlacatI Battalion troops. An autopsy requested by his family had not been carried out by the end of the year.
EL SALVADOR
On 25 September José Samuel Fuentes Marroquín was taken from his home in La Libertad by armed men in plain clothes, who identified themselves as members of various local military and police units and accused him of stashing arms for the fmln. He was found dead in a field the next day, with his nose and ear severed and his throat slit. In a rare challenge to security force impunity, a police investigation led to the arrest of two police officers, although a sergeant alleged to have given the order to kill was not detained.
Repatriated refugee communities, mostly situated in conflict zones, frequently reported that soldiers had surrounded or entered their communities firing guns, mortars or tear-gas. On 2 September nine-month-old Maira Norelvis Salazar Hernández was playing at home in San José Las Flores, Chalatenango, when soldiers fired rounds of machine-gun fire from nearby hills. She was shot in the leg and died shortly afterwards. Residents alleged there was no fmln presence in the community at the time.
Approximately 35 killings were attributed to clandestine "death squads", believed to be linked to the armed forces. Many of the victims were unidentified and their bodies mutilated. On the night of 6 October Gloria Linares de Castañeda was dragged out of her home in Santa Ana by four men in plain clothes who hacked her to death with machetes. A Salvadorian human rights organization claimed her killers suspected her of being an fmln collaborator.
In two cases attributed to "death squads" - the massacre of 15 members of a peasant family in El Zapote in January, and the murder of Martin Ayala, night-watch-man of the Consejo de Comunidades Marginales (ccm). Council of Marginal Communities, in July - the authorities subsequently arrested those allegedly responsible. Two women and three former members of the security forces were arrested in the El Zapote case, and two men and a woman in the Ayala case. Despite contradictions in the testimonies of the detainees and circumstantial evidence pointing to the involvement of the seciu-ity forces in both cases, the governmental Criminal Investigations Commission maintained that the cases were fully resolved. The Commission denied that the killings were politically motivated, attributing the El Zapote killings to a family feud, and the ccm
killing to an act of vengeance by a former employee.
Several prominent critics of the government received written death threats in the latter half of the year, signed by a group calling itself the Frente Anticomunista Salvadoreño (fas), Salvadorian Anticommu-nist Front. In September Mirtala López of the Comité Cristiano pro Desplazados de El Salvador (cripdes), the Christian Community for the Displaced of El Salvador, left the country temporarily after receiving four death threats. Similar threats were issued in December against Juan José Huezo, Secretary General of the Federación Nacional Sindical de Trabajadores Salvadoreños (fenastras), National Trade Union Federation of Salvadorian Workers, after he publicly criticized the government's failure to investigate adequately the 1989 bomb attack which killed 10 fenastras members (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Most cases of killings and death threats, like hundreds in previous years, went uninvestigated and unpunished. Only in rare cases where international pressure was brought to bear were steps taken to hold the military accountable for its actions. In September a jury foimd an army colonel guilty of miu-dering six Jesuit priests, their cook and her daughter in November 1989 (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). It was the first time that a senior ranking army officer had been convicted of hxmian rights violations. A lieutenant was also convicted of the murder of the cook's daughter. However, the jury acquitted seven lower-ranking soldiers, including those who had admitted carrying out the killings on the colonel's orders. Amnesty International, which observed the trial, remained concerned about irregularities at the investigative and trial stages of the proceedings. These effectively allowed those who carried out the killings to go unpunished and prevented further examination of the possible involvement of senior members of the military in planning or covering up the murders. By the end of the year the judge had not passed sentence, as verdicts were still pending in connected proceedings against four of the accused for acts of terrorism, and against another four members of the military for perjury and withholding evidence during the trial.
In other, less publicized trials, the outcome allowed members of the armed forces who violated human rights to evade
EL SALVADOR/EQUATORIAL GUINEA
accountability. Two weeks after the Jesuit trial, a jury in Sonsonate acquitted 13 former members of a civil defence patrol of the killing of at least seven people in Armenia, Sonsonate, between 1980 and 1982. Several of the defendants had confessed to the killings. In another case, Jorge Miranda was convicted of the killing in 1987 of human rights worker Herbert Anaya, after the Attorney General appealed against the judge's 1990 ruling that the murder charge against him should be dropped as his confession had been obtained by coercion (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1991). Relatives and fellow human rights workers maintained that Jorge Miranda, an fmln group member, had been convicted to cover up seciuity force involvement in Herbert Anaya's killing.
Few new cases of "disappearance" by government forces were reported, although the unacknowledged detention of many detainees for periods in excess of legal limits led to initial fears that they had "disappeared". With only one exception, there were no effective investigations into hundreds of "disappearances" from previous years. The bodies of two members of the San Cayetano cooperative in Ahuachapán, who "disappeared" in December 1989, were foimd in August and foin? members of a civil defence patrol were arrested in connection with their killing (see Amnesty International Report 1991). The fate of another four "disappeared" members of the same cooperative remained unknown.
The effectiveness of the Departamento de Información de Detenidos. Department of Information on Detainees, set up in 1990, was severely restricted by the frequent failure of the seciuity forces to provide lists of detainees promptly, by the department's lack of powers to apply sanctions to those who failed to comply with requests, and by the exemption of military units from providing lists of detainees.
Many detainees claimed they had been subjected to physical and psychological torture to force them to collaborate or "confess" to links with the fmln. Most reported being subjected to psychological ill-treat-ment, including death threats. Torture was facilitated by the continuing practice of holding detainees incommunicado, despite clear instructions banning incommunicado detention issued by the Army High Command in 1990. Between April and'july
scores of campesinos (peasant farmers), including minors, were arrested during operations in Morazán by soldiers from the Destacamento Militar No. 4, Military Detachment No. 4. They were held in military custody for several hours or days without access to lawyers or relatives. During interrogation many were reportedly tortured with the capucha, a lime-filled hood placed over the head, or by being hung by the feet or wrists. One detainee said he was beaten until he vomited blood. At least three detainees were held well beyond the 72-hour custody limit.
Amnesty International continued to press for full and impartial investigations into human rights violations and for those responsible to be brought to justice. It called on the government to ensure that the Truth Commission was mandated specifically to look into extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture. In April Amnesty International called on Legislative Assembly deputies not to ratify the proposed reform extending the death penalty. It repeatedly urged the government to protect those who had received death threats.
