GUATEMALA
Hundreds of people were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed by the secur-ity forces and their civilian agents. Scores of others "disappeared". The victims included indigenous people, human rights activists, trade unionists, street, children and a police officer investigating human rights abuses. Members of popular movements, journalists and others were increasingly subjected to death threats
and harassment: several were abducted and tortured by unidentified armed men believed to belong to the security forces. Police officers were reported to have tortured or ill-treated criminal suspects and street children.
President Jorge Serrano Elias took office in mid-January 1991 and pledged to ensure the protection of human rights. However, extrajudicial executions, "disappearances", abductions and death threats continued.
Talks between the government and representatives of the armed opposition coalition Unidad Revolucionaría Nacional Guatemalteca (urng), Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity, opened in April but broke down in late October over human rights issues.
Despite the United Nations (un) observed peace talks, armed conffict escalated. As in previous years, the army's counter-insur-gency tactics included aerial bombings and attacks on Comunidades de Población en Resistencia (cpr). Communities of People in Resistance, in which scores of civilians were injured. The Cprs are communities which, having fled the army's counter-insurgency campaigns in the early 1980s, do not wish to return to areas under army control. A multi-party commission, including church members, the official Human Rights Attorney and several non-govem-mental organizations, was formed in early 1991 to investigate the situation of the CPRs.
In May the Human Rights Attorney announced the creation of an Investigatory Commission on the "Disappeared", to investigate "disappearances" under previous governments. Following pressure fi^om the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo por el Aparecimiento con Vida de Nuestros Familiares (cam). Mutual Support Group for the Appearance of Our Relatives Alive, the Congressional Commission on Human Rights introduced a draft law proposing the creation of a national commission to
GUATEMALA
investigate "disappearances", which would include representatives of local human rights organizations. It had not become law by the end of 1991.
In June eight Guatemalan peasants initiated legal proceedings in the United States of America (usa) against former Minister of Defence Héctor Gramajo for the alleged extrajudicial execution by the army of 21 villagers in El Aguacate in 1988. Diana Ortiz, a us nun who had been abducted, raped and tortured in 1989, filed a further suit in the usa against General Gramajo (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Hiunan rights activists, trade imionists, students and members of popular movements were among the victims of widespread human rights violations by military personnel and their civilian agents. Other victims included indigenous villagers who refused to serve in the ostensibly voluntary civil patrols, people pressing for inquiries into past human rights violations, joiunal-ists and lawyers.
Some victims were shot dead or seized by security force personnel, either in uniform or in plain clothes in the guise of "death squads". Others were killed or seized by civil patrols, operating under military control. Some of the people seized "disappeared"; others were interrogated, ill-treated or tortured, then released.
The vast majority of human rights violations were not investigated and went unpunished, although in a number of cases the government announced arrests and criminal proceedings. In April, four policemen were convicted of the murder of 13-year-old Nahamán Carmona López (see Amnesty International Report 1991). However, the convictions were overturned on technical grounds in July and a retrial ordered. By the end of the year no retrial had taken place. Two policemen found guilty of murdering 13-year-old Marvin de la Cruz Melgar, in May 1990 were given three-year suspended sentences and released on bail pending appeal,
Cases where there is evidence of military involvement are referred to military courts. In the few cases investigated by the military courts investigations and proceedings appeared to be irregular or incomplete. In October the commander and a sergeant of the Panabaj military detachment in Santiago Atitlán were sentenced to four and 16 years' imprisonment respectively for killing 13 T'zutuhil indigenous
people and wounding about 27 others in December 1990. However, the army investigation reportedly failed to interview witnesses or conduct a prompt on-site investigation, and witnesses and survivors said that more than two soldiers had carried out the killings. The testimonies of several witnesses and survivors were not admitted in court. In other cases, such as the killing of us citizen Michael Devine in 1990 and the killing of 11 people in the department of Escuintla in August 1991, the officers accused were released on grounds of lack of evidence. The Appeal Court, however, later ordered the proceedings against those implicated in the Escuintla killings to reopen.
During 1991 abuses continued against members of the Consejo de Comunidades Etnicas "Runujel Junam" (cerj), Council of Ethnic Commimities "We are all Equal", an organization working for indigenous peoples' rights. In February two indigenous members of cerj from Chunimá, El Quiché Department - Juan Perebal Xinmi and his son Manuel Perebal Morales - were shot dead by members of a civil patrol. Diego Perebal León, another son of Juan Perebal, was seriously wounded in the attack. He and his half-brother Manuel Perebal were witnesses of the abduction in October 1990 of Sebastián Velásquez Mejía, a cerj and gam member later found dead. A warrant had been issued in January 1991 against a civil patrol chief allegedly involved in the killing of Sebastián Velásquez, but he was not arrested. The attack on Juan Perebal and his sons was reportedly carried out by the same man. Several warrants were then issued for his arrest and that of another civil patroller. However, the two men were arrested only in late July, when the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, at the request of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, asked the govenunent to take measures to ensure the safety of Diego Perebal León, cerj president Amilcar Méndez, a judge and several Chunimá villagers threatened by the Chunimá civil patrol.
At least three mor^ cerj members and the 18-year-old son of another were reportedly extrajudicially executed during the year. Another cerj sympathizer, Santos Toj Reynoso, was abducted in June by armed men believed to be linked to the security forces. He then "disappeared". cerj president Amilcar Méndez was himself the
GUATEMALA
victim of an abduction attempt in April and received repeated death threats throughout the year.
A renewed wave of human rights violations was directed at trade unionists and members of popular movements. Many were killed or abducted; others went into exile after being subjected to harassment and death threats. The choice of victim and the manner of the abuses suggested they were carried out by official security forces in the guise of "death squads". Dinora Pérez Valdez, a member of the board of the Fundación de Proyectos del Area Rural para Guatemala (fundagua), Rxual Projects Foundation for Guatemala, and member of the Movimiento Político Guatemala Unida, Political Movement for a United Guatemala, was shot dead by two armed men on a motor cycle in Guatemala City in April. fundagua offices were closed following threats to its staff, and many went into exile. Eva Gálvez, a member of the Asociación de Representantes de Venta, Association of Sales Representatives, was abducted by unidentified armed men in July, interrogated, sexually abused, then released after a few hours. She had received repeated death threats before her abduction. Other trade union leaders, including Sergio Guzmán and Byron Morales of the Unión Sindical de Trabajadores de Guatemala (unsitragua), National Union of Guatemalan Workers, received frequent death threats.
In August a member of the Sindicato de Trabajadores del Instituto Nacional de Electricidad (stinde), electrical workers' union, and two students at the University of San Carlos, members of the Asociación de Estudiantes Universitarios (aeu), University Students' Association, were shot dead in Guatemala City. Both the aeu and stinde had reported receiving repeated death threats.
Street children and those working on their behalf continued to be the victims of abuses. Very few of the perpetrators were punished, even though by the end of 1991 over 60 criminal suits were pending against National Police officers or private police agents for beatings, torture and killings of street children. At least two children were reported to have been extrajudicially executed in Guatemala City by private police agents operating under licence from the Ministry of the Interior during 1991. One, Francisco Chacón, was
shot dead in April by two private police agents who had allegedly threatened previously to kill him. In July four unidentified gunmen opened fire on a centre for street children in Guatemala City, shouting threats against staff and children. Throughout the year reports were received of street children in Guatemala City being beaten by National Police and private police agents.
In August José Miguel Mérida Escobar, head of the homicide section of the Departamento de Investigaciones Criminológicas (dig), Department of Criminal Investigations, of the National Police, was shot dead in front of his family only metres away from the National Police Headquarters. He was in charge of the investigation into the killing of anthropologist Myma Mack Chang in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) and had reportedly uncovered evidence of army responsibility. He had reported receiving threats and being under siuveillance. The National Police later claimed that they had arrested a former police agent in connection with the killing, which they alleged was motivated by a personal vendetta.
Legal proceedings were initiated in connection with the killing of Myma Mack Chang. Former President Vinicio Cerezo, a former Minister of the Interior and a former police chief testified in court. In December the officer of the Security Division of the Presidential Military Guard named as responsible for her killing was deported to Guatemala from the usa, where he had gone a year earlier. Two judicial officials working on the case as well as two joiumal-ists covering it reportedly received death threats in December,
In Jxme a Mexican peasant was abducted by Guatemalan soldiers who entered Mexican territory (see Mexico entry). He "disappeared" and no investigation appeared to have been carried out by either government.
Successive governments failed to investigate secret mass graves containing some of the bodies of thousands of victims of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in the early 1980s. The only exhumations knovra to have been carried out during 1991 were the result of pressure by human rights activists and relatives of the dead, who were themselves subjected to death threats and harassment. In July and August an exhumation of a clandestine biuial site was carried out in the village of
GUATEMALA/GUINEA
Chontalá, El Quiché department. Relatives of those buried in the clandestine grave, as well as members of the Coordinadora Nacional de Viudas de Guatemala (conavigua), National Coordination of Guatemalan Widows, gam members and members of the exhumation team, received repeated death threats reportedly from the area civil patrol, which opposed the exhumation. By the end of the year 27 bodies had been recovered from that site, conavigua and gam members reported many other death threats throughout the year.
Judges and lawyers were among the victims of reported human rights violations. Former judge Roberto Lemus Garza, who worked as a lawyer on human rights cases, reported receiving repeated anonymous death threats, as did other judicial officers and lawyers in various parts of the country.
Journalists were also the target of death threats and harassment. In February Hugo Arce, a prominent critic of the government, was arrested by the National Police. He was released several days later, but continued to receive death threats. In July, three journalists reported receiving threatening telephone calls warning them not to report on several cases of human rights violations, and in August a bomb was found in a building housing several foreign news agencies in Guatemala City. At least four other foreign journalists left the country after reportedly receiving death threats.
Torture was reportedly used by members of the National Police against criminal suspects. Three men accused in August of the murder of nine people, including the two aeu students and the stinde trade unionist killed in July, claimed they had been tortured and intimidated. They appeared scarred and bruised in photographs published in the national press. In October the head of the National Police resigned over the issue.
Throughout the year Amnesty International repeatedly called on the government to investigate the many reported incidents of human rights violations and to bring those responsible to justice.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Guatemala. The organization also submitted a written statement summarizing its concerns about human rights violations and the government's failure to end the abuses.
