CANADA
Two fugitives were extradited to the United States of America (usa) where they faced the death penalty. Allegations of ill-treatment by several Mohawk Indians arrested during a land dispute in 1990 remained unresolved. At least one case, however, was under investigation by a police complaints body.
On 26 September Charles Ng and Joseph Kindler were extradited to the usa. Charles Ng was due to be tried on capital murder
CANADA/CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
charges in California and Joseph Kindler was already under a death sentence in Pennsylvania. The Canadian Government did not request assurances from the US Government that the death penalty would not be imposed or carried out in these cases, despite a provision allowing for this in the extradition treaty between the two countries. (Canada abolished the death penalty for all peacetime offences in 1976.)
The two men were extradited hours after the Canadian Supreme Court had ruled, by four votes to three, that their extradition to a country where they could face the death penalty would not violate provisions under the Canadian Charter of Freedoms barring cruel and unusual punishment and guaranteeing the right to "fundamental justice".
In December the Canadian Government sought assurances from the us Government that the death penalty would not be imposed in the case of Lee Robert O'Bom-sawin, an Abenaki Indian and a Canadian citizen, as a condition of its extraditing him to Florida where he faced trial for murder (see Amnesty International Report 1991). A response from the us Government was pending at the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed to the Canadian Government not to extradite Charles Ng and Joseph Kindler to the usa without assurances that the death penalty would not be imposed or carried out. In an amicus curiae brief to the Canadian Supreme Court, Amnesty International submitted that the death penalty was a violation of human rights both in general and as regards its application in the usa.
Amnesty International wrote to the Quebec Minister of Justice in February about allegations that six Mohawk Indians had been tortured or otherwise ill-treated by members of the Quebec police following their arrest during a land dispute at Oka, Quebec, in 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991]. One of the six, Angus Jacobs, alleged that in August 1990 two members of the Sûreté du Québec (sq) in plain clothes arrested him and took him to a farm where they kicked and beat him and squeezed his genitals. He alleged that later the same day Montreal Urban Community police beat him at St Eustache police station. Two other Mohawks were also allegedly ill-treated at St Eustache station on another occasion in August 1990.
Another of the six, Ronald Cross,
alleged that he was kicked and hit by members of the sq in September 1990, after he had surrendered to the Canadian army. Medical reports and a photograph showed signs consistent with his allegations, The Commissaire à ¡a déontologie policière, a police ethics commissioner, was reportedly investigating these latter allegations and a hearing was pending at the end of the year. It was not known whether the board had investigated the other cases of alleged ill-treatment of Mohawk Indians.
Amnesty International wrote to the government urging that a full, independent inquiry be undertaken into the allegations that Mohawk Indians had been ill-treated, and that the results be made public. No reply was received by the end of the year.
