MAUYSIA
Eight possible prisoners of conscience were detained without charge or trial: one was released in March but the others were still held at the end of the year. Over 130
other people were also reported to be detained without charge or trial for political reasons under the Internal Security Act (isa). There were allegations of torture and ill-treatment of 15 people sentenced to death for drug offences, five of whom were executed. Caning continued to be used as a punishment for criminal offences. At least 67 death sentences were imposed and eight people were known to have been executed. At least 200 Acehnese asylum-seekers were in danger of forcible repatriation to Indonesia, where they risked torture and extrajudicial execution.
There was continuing tension between the federal government, which is dominated by the United Malays National Organization (uMNo) of the ruling National Front coalition, and the state government of Sabah, which is dominated by the Parti Bersatu Sabah (pbs). United Sabah Party. In August Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad announced that a referendum to allow the people of Sabah to decide whether the state should secede from Malaysia would be unconstitutional.
At the end of the year seven people suspected of advocating the secession of Sabah state from Malaysia remained in detention without charge or trial and were possible prisoners of conscience. They were held under the isa, which permits detention without charge or trial for up to two years, renewable indefinitely. Four of the detainees, including Albinus Yudah and Benedict Topin, had been arrested in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report Î99Î): they were held without charge or trial throughout 1991. Three others - Vincent Chung, Jeffrey Kitingan and Arifiin Haji Hamid - were arrested in May and July and still detained under the isa at the end of 1991. The eighth possible prisoner of conscience, Maximus Ongkili, was arrested in January and detained under the isa until March, when he was released. All eight, who were said to be close to the pbs, were publicly accused by the police of involvement in a conspiracy to teie Sabah out of Malaysia. The Chief Minister of Sabah, Joseph Pairin Kitingan, brother of detainee Jeffrey Kitingan, was also arrested in January on corruption charges but was later released on bail.
The Deputy Home Minister told Parliament in January that a total of 150 people were then in detention without charge or trial under the isa. Their identities were
MAU\YSIA/MALDIVES
not disclosed by the government but most were believed to be communists who had voluntarily renoimced their involvement in armed opposition and surrendered to the authorities in December 1989. Among other isa detainees were eight people accused of falsifying government documents, seven people accused of espionage and five Islamic religious activists.
Thirteen Filipinos and two Pakistanis who were sentenced to death for drugs offences were reportedly tortured and ill-treated in custody. They were also forced to sign statements written in Bahasa Malaysia, a language which they were unable to read or understand, and denied contact with their respective embassies.
Caning remained a supplementary punishment to imprisonment for dozens of crimes including drugs offences, rape and attempted rape, kidnapping, firearm offences, theft, child abuse, attempted murder and robbery. Caning constitutes a cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. Roslan Latib, an Indonesian, was sentenced to life imprisonment and six strokes of the cane by a court in Kuala Lumpur in April for an offence under the Firearms Act. Another man, Abdul Razak bin Hariffin, a former manager of an engineering firm, was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment and 10 strokes of the cane in August for possessing illegal drugs.
At least 67 people received death sentences for criminal offences - 63 for drugs offences, two for murder and two for firearms offences. The Supreme Court confirmed the death sentences on 20 people. Their last recourse was an appeal to the Pardons Board of the state where the offence was committed. At least eight executions were carried out. One person was hanged for murder and seven people were hanged for drugs offences, including five of the 13 Filipino prisoners reportedly tortured in custody.
At least 200 Acehnese asylum-seekers were in danger of being forcibly returned to Indonesia, where many or all of them would be at risk of torture or extrajudicial execution. Malaysia's Foreign Minister said in October that his country's primary concern was to maintain good relations with Indonesia and that Malaysia would return all the Acehnese asylum-seekers through persuasion, not force.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the detentions of political prisoners
under the isa and called for them to be brought to trial on recognizably criminal charges, or released. It called for an inquiry into the alleged torture or ill-treatment of prisoners sentenced to death and urged the commutation of all death sentences. Amnesty International pressed the government not to return the Acehnese asylum-seekers to Indonesia against their will, and to provide all of them with a full and fair examination of their reasons for fearing to return to Indonesia, as required by international standards for the protection of refugees.
