BURKINA FASO
All political prisoners arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, were released by early May: they included 19 untried detainees held since December 1989 and 14 students detained without charge or trial since May 1990. Detainees arrested in December were reported to have been ill-treated. There was still no
BURKINA FASO
official investigation into the circum* stances of the deaths of two political prisoners in 1990.
A new constitution was adopted in a national referendum in June. Although the Constitution contains provisions for the protection of fundamental rights, in some areas it falls short of the human rights guarantees provided in international standards. For example, although it prohibits arbitrary arrest or detention, unfair trial, and torture or ill-treatment, the Constitution does not include adequate safeguards to prevent such abuses from taking place. The new constitution allows for a multi-party political system and more than 30 parties were formed during the year.
Following the referendimi, the ruling Popular Front was dissolved. A new transitional government was appointed which included members of opposition parties. However, most subsequently resigned in September because of the government's refusal to hold a national conference to discuss the country's political future. For the same reason, opposition candidates boycotted the presidential elections in December in which the head of state, Blaise Compaoré, was elected imopposed. Over 100 people were arrested in Bobo Dioulas-so following violent incidents at the time of the elections. On 9 December a prominent opposition leader. Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo, was killed by a grenade and another was shot and injured in a separate incident. The government promised an inquiry to establish responsibility for these attacks. Elections to a new Assembly of People's Deputies, scheduled to take place in December, were postponed until 1992.
Several months after all pofitical detainees had been released, the govern-
ment announced an amnesty in July for all political offences committed since independence in 1960 which led to prosecution or conviction.
In April the government passed a law granting an amnesty to untried prisoners detained since December 1989 in connection with an alleged conspiracy against the government (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Thirty-one people had been arrested; four were alleged to have escaped and eight had been released, four of them provisionally, during 1990. Some of the remaining 19 prisoners may also have been released on a provisional basis before the amnesty. Although all but two of those still in detention had been charged in 1990, they were not tried. Raymond Train Poda, a former Minister of Justice, and Moumouni Traore, an economist, were held without charge until their release. It appeared that the two uncharged detainees were prisoners of conscience and that some of the others arrested with them were probably prisoners of conscience. One of those arrested with them, university lecturer Guillaume Sessouma, died as a result of torture in December 1989. The government, however, continued to maintain that he had escaped and had still not acknowledged his death at the end of 1991.
All remaining political prisoners arrested in previous years were released by early May when students held for a year without charge or trial were freed. Others appeared to have been released earlier in the year. Some 40 students had been arrested in May 1990 following demonstrations at the University of Ouagadougou (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Fourteen of them remained as prisoners of conscience at the beginning of 1991: six were in detention and eight had been forcibly conscripted into the armed forces. Despite the releases, there was still no official announcement about the circumstances of the death in custody in May 1990 of one student, Boukary Dabo (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Over 100 people were arrested in Bobo Dioulasso in December at the time of the presidential elections. They were reported to have been ill-treated while held in a military camp before being transferred to police custody. Most were reported to have been released without charge by the end of the year.
No death sentences or executions were
BURKINA FASO/BURUNDI
reported during the year. Although the new Constitution guaranteed the right to life, it did not expressly prohibit the death penalty.
Amnesty International called for the release of all prisoners of conscience before the releases in April and May. It urged the government to review detention procedures to ensiue that no one would again be imprisoned on account of their non-violent political opinions. The organization continued to call for impartial investigations into the deaths in detention of Guillaume Sessomna and Boukary Dabo, but received no response.
In April Amnesty International called for stronger human rights safeguards to be incorporated into the Constitution. The hiunan rights provisions were, however, adopted unamended.
