BANGLADESH
Most of those detained under the Special Powers Act (spa) by the previous government in late 1990 were released; among the hundreds freed were possible prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners. However, new arrests were made. An amnesty in January benefited thousands of prisoners. An unknown number of people convicted by martial law courts between 1982 and 1986 continue to be
held. Several prisoners died in custody allegedly as a result of torture, and at least seven were killed by security forces during jail riots. Torture and extrajudicial executions were reported from the Chittagong Hill Tracts. At least 17 people were sentenced to death but no executions were reported.
Parliamentary elections held on 27 February under the interim government of Acting President Shahabuddin Ahmed were won by the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (bnp) led by Begum Khaleda Zia. She was sworn in as Prime Minister on 20 March. A constitutional amendment restoring the parliamentary system was unanimously adopted by Parliament on 6 August and confirmed by a national referendum on 15 September. Abdur Rahman Biswas became President in October.
The government continued to face armed opposition in the Chittagong Hill Tracts from the Shanti Bahini, Peace Force, a group seeking autonomy for the area. The Shanti Bahini were accused by the authorities of human rights abuses, including killing unarmed civilians.
In January, following riots in various prisons, the interim goverment announced a general amnesty under which more than 3,500 prisoners were released and the sentences of thousands of others were reduced.
Most of those detained under the spa by the previous government (see Amnesty International Report 1991) were reported to have been released by April. However, new arrests were made under the spa. The spa empowers the authorities to detain without charge or trial anyone suspected of committing a "prejudicial act" likely or intended "to endanger public safety or the maintenance of public order". Such detention orders may be renewed indefinitely. Those detained were former ministers and officials of the government of President Hossain Mohammad Ershad, which resigned in 1990. Some had been detained in December 1990; others were detained in the first few months of 1991. The majority of those held were charged, most of them with corruption. Some, however, including former Prime Minister M. Rahman Chowd-hiuy, were released when the High Court ruled their detention illegal. Former President Ershad was tried, convicted and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for illegal possession of arms; 12 other charges
BANGLADESH/BARBADOS
against him were still pending at the end of the year.
It was not clear how many political prisoners sentenced after imfair trials by martial law comis between 1982 and 1986 remained in prison (see Amnesty International Reports 1983 to 1987).
Several deaths in custody allegedly as a result of torture were reported. Fakir Mohammed Mondol, a prisoner under trial, died suddenly on 13 August in Chuadanga Sub-Jail, allegedly as a result of torture. A post-mortem report found that he had died of natural causes, but cell-mates and family visitors said he had been in good health shortly before his death.
In April rioting broke out at Dhaka Central Jail. At least seven prisoners were said to have been killed after security forces were called in to quell the rioting by force. Eye-witnesses said the security forces sprayed prisoners in their cells with tear-gas and hot water, causing hundreds to suffer severe bums. Prisoners were also beaten and many reportedly sustained broken limbs as a result. The government denied that prisoners had been beaten or that any had been killed as a result of excessive use of force by the security forces. An inquiry was initiated but its findings were not made public.
Tribal people in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, where Shanti Bahini fighters were active, continued to be subjected to human rights violations by government forces. In one case, soldiers were reportedly disciplined for the rape of 14 yoimg tribal women at gunpoint. This was the first time to AmJiesty International's knowledge that any action had been taken by the authorities in a case of rape allegedly committed by security personnel. It was not clear, however, if criminal proceedings were initiated against the perpetrators.
Several tribal people were reportedly held in unacknowledged detention: one, Anil Bikash Chakma, may have been transferred to military custody after his reported arrest on 3 July but his family had not been able to trace him by the end of the year.
Several deaths of tribal people in military custody were reported: Tusher Kanti Chakma, who died in June, was alleged to have been severely tortured at Ghilachari army camp. His body also bore bullet wounds.
At least 17 people were sentenced to death, including one in absentia. Ten of
them were convicted of murder, six of drug-smuggling and one of kidnapping. One hundred and six prisoners were reported to be on death row, including 24 in Dhaka Central Jail. No executions were reported. Prime Minister Khaleda Zia told Parliament that there had been one execution in 1990.
Amnesty International appealed to both the interim government and the government headed by Prime Minister Khaleda Zia for an urgent review of the spa to bring it fully into line with international human rights standards, and for other measures to be introduced to safeguard human rights. Amnesty International also called for Bangladesh to ratify relevant international human rights instruments and abolish the death penalty. The interim government told Amnesty International in February that it was considering "the desirability or otherwise" of the spa and of Bangladesh acceding to international human rights treaties, but no steps had been taken by the end of the year.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about the case of an asylum-seeker forcibly returned from Sweden in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991), who was tortured by security officials at Dhaka airport. The organization called for an investigation into the case, for those responsible to be brought to justice, and for urgent steps to be taken to protect all detainees from torture.
Amnesty International also urged the authorities to investigate alleged human rights violations by government forces in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and to take all possible steps to protect the population there from human rights violations. However. there was no response.
