LESOTHO
At least 15 trade unionists who were briefly detained appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Eighteen soldiers were detained without charge after an attempted coup. New evidence of torture emerged and the authorities failed to investigate past torture allegations. Police shot dead a trade unionist in an apparent extrajudicial execution. Two prisoners were sentenced to death.
In April the Chairman of the ruling Military Council, Major General Metsing Lekhanya, was deposed and replaced by Colonel Phisoana Ramaema. The new government stated its commitment to existing plans to transfer power to an elected civilian government in 1992 and in May lifted a five-year-old ban on political activity. A constituent assembly chafted a constitution
incorporating a judicially enforceable bill of rights and in October a constitutional commission was created to solicit popular views on the draft.
In May communal riots erupted in the capital, Maseru, and other towns after Asian shopkeepers beat to death an African woman they suspected of theft. Police shot dead one rioter and the government imposed a curfew which remained in force for two months. Strikes and other industrial action continued throughout the year, particularly involving bank employees, teachers and construction workers at the Lesotho Highlands Water ftoject.
A number of trade unionists were arrested, including 214 building workers detained for a few hours at a May Day rally. In July three officials of the Lesotho Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union (lactwu), including General Secretary Hofnie Lebone, were arrested in Maputsoe. They were held for two days in solitary confinement in the waterlogged lavatories of Maputsoe police station and refused access to a lawyer. On their release they were charged under the Internal Security Act with holding an illegal meeting - a gathering of workers at a local clothing factory. Under the Act public meetings can only be held with prior police permission. If convicted the three men face prison sentences of up to one year and would be prisoners of conscience. In September nine officials of the Lesotho Union of Bank Employees (lube), who had been on strike since July, were arrested and charged under the same law for holding a union meeting. Three other lube officials were detained without charge for several weeks.
In June, 18 soldiers were arrested after an unsuccessful attempt to restore General Lekhanya to power. They were detained for some weeks under a 1990 law giving the government the power to detain military personnel for up to one year without charge. From August to September General Lekhanya was held under house arrest by administrative order.
Twenty-three prisoners, all thought to be military persormel, were believed still held in military custody; they had been arrested in 1986 for opposing the coup which brought General Lekhanya to power. Their trial by a court martial in 1986 reportedly did not conform to internationally accepted standards for fair trial.
New evidence emerged of fi'equent
LESOTHO/LIBERIA
police torture of both political prisoners and criminal suspects. In September Mofo-keng Makakole. a criminal suspect, died in police custody, apparently as a result of torture which included severe beatings and electric shocks. The officers responsible had not been identified or brought to justice by the end of the year.
In August a warder shot and wounded inmate John Ralengana during a disturbance at Maseru Central Prison. Reports indicated that the prisoner was not taking part in the disturbance when he was shot. He and five other injured prisoners were denied medical attention, stripped naked and kept in flooded cells for nearly two weeks after the incident.
A civil suit for damages suffered during alleged police torture, filed in 1990 by Michael Sefali, had not been heard by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In an apparent extrajudicial execution in September, police shot dead Ngaka Sula, an official of the Construction and Allied Workers Union of Lesotho (cawule), at the Lesotho Highlands Water Project. Another cawule official alleged that the police told him that they had killed Ngaka Sula because of his hostile attitude towards the police.
In March two soldiers, one of them a former government minister, were convicted of the murder of former government ministers Desmond Sixishe and Vincent Makhele and their wives in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). However, there was no official investigation of other alleged extrajudicial executions in previous years, such as the police killings of two youths during anti-government protests in August 1990.
One of the soldiers convicted of the 1986 murder of government ministers was sentenced to death and another prisoner received the death sentence for murder in September. One other prisoner was believed to be under sentence of death. No executions were reported.
In August Amnesty International submitted to the government details of a number of cases of apparent extrajudicial execution or torture dating back to 1986 in which there had been no official investigation. It called for an impartial inquiry and for those responsible to be brought to justice. No reply had been received by the end of the year. The organization appealed for
the release of imprisoned trade unionists and the withdrawal of charges against them under the Internal Security Act.
