ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
About 18,000 Palestinians, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested in the context of the intifada (uprising) in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Around 2,000 were administratively detained without charge or triaL The others were released without charge or brought to trial before military courts. Some 11,000 security prisoners and detainees were held at the end of the year, including about 350 administrative detainees. Scores of Israelis, mostly Druze and Jewish conscientious objectors to military service, were imprisoned as prisoners of conscience. Palestinians under interrogation were systematically tortured or ill-treated. About 90 Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli forces, often in circumstances which seemed unjustifiable. Investigations into torture or ill-treatment and killings of civilians appeared to be inadequate. One person remained under sentence of death.
The intifdda in the West Bank and Gaza Strip continued, although with less intensity than in previous years (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1991). Palestinian protests against the Israeli occupation included strikes and demonstrations, as well as attacks on Israeli soldiers and civilians using stones, petrol bombs, knives and, occasionally, firearms. At least one Israeli soldier and six civilians were killed in these attacks. About 170 Palestinians were killed apparently by other Palestinians, some after having been tortured: most were suspected of collaborating with the Israeli authorities.
The Israeli authorities used firearms extensively, as well as widespread arrests, restrictions of movement and closures of educational institutions. Eight Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip were deported to Lebanon, a practice which had not been used since August 1989. The authorities also demolished or sealed about 90 Palestinian homes as punishment. During the Gulf conflict, in the course of which Iraq launched missile attacks on Israel, a prolonged curfew was maintained throughout the Occupied Territories and gas-mask
IRELAND/ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
protection for Palestinian residents was late and inadequate.
In October Israel ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Pimishment.
Administrative detention, without charge or trial and for renewable periods of up to one year - reduced by the authorities to six months at the end of 1991 - was imposed on about 2,000 Palestinians. A two-step judicial review of detention orders was available, but appeals by detainees took place weeks or months after arrest. Crucial evidence about the reasons for detention was almost invariably withheld from detainees and their lawyers, thereby rendering existing legal safeguards largely meaningless. Almost all administrative detainees were held in the Ketziot detention camp in the Negev desert in Israel. In October family visits took place for the first time since the camp was opened in March 1988.
Prisoners of conscience held in administrative detention included Salah lyad, a trade unionist released in September after seven months in detention, and Dr Sari Nusseibeh, a university professor and prominent political activist held for three months between January and April. Wafiq Abu Siddu, Radwan Abu 'Ayyash, Ziyad Abu Zayyad and Dr Ahmad Yazji (see Amnesty International Report 1991) were all released by July. The detention orders against some of these detainees were reduced on appeal. Other administrative detainees held during the year included Sami Abu Samhadanah, whose one-year detention order was renewed for a further year in May. He had been held in adminis-
trative detention almost continuously since September 1985.
Israeli prisoners of conscience included Abie Nathan. He began an 18-month prison sentence in October after a second conviction under a law forbidding imauthorized contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). Also in October, David Ish Shalom was sentenced to nine months' actual imprisonment under the same law. Trial proceedings on similar charges against 11 other Israelis remained pending.
Palestinian prisoners of conscience serving sentences imposed after trial included 'Izzat Chazzawi. a university teacher who was released in May after completing a sentence of 27 months' actual imprisonment. He had been found guilty in 1990 of drafting non-violent sections of leaflets issued by the clandestine Unified National Leadership of the Intifada. Dr Mamdouh al-'Aker, a surgeon and prominent political activist, was held and interrogated for 40 days in connection with leaflets distributed duiing the Gulf conflict. He was released in April without charge.
Dozens of Israeli Druze were imprisoned for refusing to perform military service, mostly for political or conscientious reasons. 'Adi Naffa' was sentenced to one month's imprisonment for refusing to serve on political grounds. Others received longer sentences. In October about 20 Druze objectors were reportedly released and discharged from further military service. At least 25 Israeli Jews served one or more periods of imprisonment of up to 35 days for refusing to perform certain types of military service such as duties in the Occupied Territories. Eli Gozansky was released in September after one month in prison, his fifth prison term for selective refusal.
Over 30 Lebanese and other foreign nationals were held under deportation or administrative detention orders after the expiry of their prison sentences. They had been apprehended between 1985 and 1987, mostly in South Lebanon, and tried in Israel for security offences. Four others, including Shi'a leader Shaikh 'Abd al-Karim 'Ubayd, were reportedly still held in administrative detention in Israel since their abduction in Lebanon in 1989.
Thousands of Palestinians were tried by miUtary courts on charges including
IRELAND/ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
membership of illegal organizations and throwing stones or petrol bombs. They were usually held in prolonged incommunicado detention, not brought before judges during the first 18 days after arrest and denied visits by lawyers or families for longer periods. Confessions allegedly extracted under duress were often the primary evidence against them. Many pleaded guilty apparently in order to avoid the pretrial detention period lasting longer than a likely sentence. The much heavier sentences imposed on those convicted after trial also deterred many from contesting charges against them.
Palestinian detainees were systematically tortured or ill-treated during interrogation. Methods included beatings all over the body, often concentrated on sensitive areas such as the genitals; hooding with dirty sacks; sleep deprivation; shackling in painful positions; and confinement in small, dark cells called "closets" or, when kept cold, "refrigerators". At least some such methods may have been consistent with secret official guidelines issued in 1987 by the Landau Commission of Inquiry into the investigation methods of the General Security Service (gss). The Commission endorsed the use of "non-violent psychological presssiu-e" as well as "the exertion of a moderate measixre of physical pressure" during interrogation.
In March Wa'el 'Afanah was allegedly punched and kicked, forced to count aloud while on his knees, and had his head repeatedly hit and banged against a wall while held in the Beach detention camp in the Gaza Strip. Twelve days after his arrest he was transferred to a hospital suffering from severe psychological trauma,
Other Palestinians were victims of brutality while in the hands of Israeli forces. In April Kadhem Dahabrah was reportedly beaten and kicked in the testicles at a road block near Jerusalem by soldiers who thought he had forged the date on a travel permit. He required surgery for a ruptured testicle.
Mordechai Vanunu, a former nuclear technician, petitioned the Israeli judiciary unsuccessfully to be taken out of solitary confinement (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1991). Amnesty International believed that his isolation, since October 1986, constituted a form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
About 90 Palestinians, including children
and yoimg people, were shot dead by Israeli forces using high velocity and special types of plastic and other bullets, Many were killed in the context of violent demonstrations; others were shot dead by Israeli undercover units apparently while trying to escape arrest. The use of firearms often appeared inconsistent with the internationally recognized principles of necessity and proportionality in the use of force. As a result, some killings were possibly smnmary executions or otherwise appeared to be unjustifiable. In March 'Adli al-Barghuti, a high school student, was shot dead by a soldier in Deir Ghassana apparently while running away in a school yard. The soldier is said to have opened fire without any warning and when no disturbance was taking place.
A judicial inquest conducted by judge Ezra Kama into the killings of 17 Palestinians by border police at the Haram al-Sharif (Temple Mount) in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) ended in July. It concluded that police officers were initially endangered by demonstrators and retreated, but in a second phase of police action, which aimed to regain control of the area and during which most of the fatalities occurred, police officers used firearms without justification. Judge Kama recommended no prosecutions on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence linking specific victims to specific police officers.
In May Major-General (reserve) Rafael Vardi was appointed to investigate allegations of violence against detainees by soldiers. In his report in August he recommended that responsibility for interrogating residents of the Occupied Territories be transferred to non-military authorities and that orders prohibiting soldiers form using violence or threats against detainees be strengthened. However, apparently because of the opposition of other agencies, it was later announced that the armed forces would maintain responsibility for interrogating suspects through the Military Police. Major-General Vardi also reconunended that eight of 16 specific complaints of violence by soldiers diuing interrogation be further investigated by the military authorities.
Three other official investigations into allegations of torture or ill-treatment were annoimced in May, involving the ess and the Ministry of Justice, after the publication
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRiïORIES/ITALY
in March of a report on the issue by the Israeli human rights organization B'Tselem.
A number of soldiers and security personnel were convicted or disciplined in connection with the killing or torture of Palestinians. In January an army colonel was given a suspended sentence of six months' imprisonment and a reprimand for opening fire with plastic bullets and killing Mahmud al-Sarraj, aged 15, in the Gaza Strip in July 1989. The colonel was then deputy commander of the Gaza Strip. In April another army colonel was demoted to private after a court-martial found him guilty of ordering punitive beatings of Palestinians in January 1988. In September the Supreme Court upheld prison sentences of six months each passed on two Gss interrogators convicted of causing death by negligence in connection with the torture and death of Khaled Shaikh 'Ali in December 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
It was announced in July that the Ministry of Justice was taking over responsibility from the police for internal investigations of police misconduct. There had been complaints about widespread police brutality against criminal suspects, aimed mostly at obtaining confessions.
The appeal before the Supreme Court in the case of John Demjanjuk continued. He remained under sentence of death after having been convicted in 1988 of offences including crimes against humanity (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1989 to 1991).
Amnesty International urged the release of prisoners of conscience, including administrative detainees and convicted prisoners. In July it published a report, Israel and the Occupied Territories: The mihtary justice system in the Occupied Territories: detention, interrogation and trial procedures. The report focused on concerns including prolonged incommunicado detention, use of confessions allegedly extracted under duress and undue pressures to plead guilty. It also illustrated a pattern of torture or ill-treatment and assessed the recommendations of the Landau Commission Report. Amnesty International called for relevant safeguards - including publishing and reviewing the secret guidelines on interrogation - to be urgently introduced.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights
in January. Amnesty International included reference to its concerns relating to administrative detention, the use of firearms and tear-gas, and the treatment and trial of prisoners in the Israeli Occupied Territories.
Amnesty International delegates visited Israel and the Occupied Territories in May, July and August to gather information and meet officials.
The Israeli authorities provided information on a number of individual cases and commented in detail on the Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991. They criticized in particular Amnesty International's methodology and perceived partiality. Amnesty International publicized these comments and its response in October. The Israeli authorities also said that Amnesty International's oral statement to the un was of a "tendentious nature", for example with regard to the allegations of deaths after misuse of tear-gas. In July the Israeli authorities said that Amnesty International's report on the military justice system belittled the seriousness of the secmity situation and Israel's "continuous eff^orts to protect the human rights of detainees", stating that "false allegations of maltreatment are common". They reiterated their condemnation of "all use of torture" but said that it would be "naïve" to expect them to make public the "existing guidelines relating to the use of pressme diu-ing interrogation". They added that "no government would reveal to the public ... the precise methods that are used to outwit its adversary".
