JAPAN
The Supreme Court upheld four death sentences but for the second consecutive year there were no executions.
About 90 prisoners convicted of murder were believed to be under sentence of
JAPAN/JORDAN
death. The Supreme Court confirmed four of these sentences in 1991, bringing the total of finalized sentences to 50. No executions took place. Shortly after his appointment in November, the Minister of Justice told journalists that there "would probably be no executions for some time".
In August the Sendai District Court rejected a claim for damages for mental suffering filed by a former death row prisoner. Yukio Saito had spent 29 years in prison, most of it imder sentence of death, before being acquitted and released in 1984 (see Amnesty International Beport 1985).
In April the Tokyo High Court found that Ono Tetsuo had made a confession to police under duress and acquitted him of the criminal charges on which he had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1984. Ono Tetsuo had confessed after being held in solitary confinement by police for 70 days.
In August Lin Guizhen, a Chinese student who said that she had fled China to avoid arrest for her participation in the 1989 pro-democracy movement, was forcibly returned to the People's Republic of China by the Japanese authorities. This occurred before her appeal against the refusal of her asylum request had been beard and despite fears that she might become a prisoner of conscience. Lin Guizhen was subsequently 'sentenced to two years' imprisonment, but the exact charges were not known.
In January Amnesty International published a report, Japan: The death penahy and the need for more safeguards against ill-treatment of detainees, based on a memorandum it had submitted to the Japanese authorities in April 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In August the organization wrote to the National Police Agency requesting further information on measures in place to prevent the ill-treat-ment of detainees. There was no response by the end of the year. In its January report Amnesty International had recommended separating personnel in charge of custody from those responsible for interrogation, and had expressed concern about the procedures for investigating complaints of ill-treatment.
In August Amnesty International called for a review of asylum procedures following the forcible return to China of Lin Guizhen.
In September Amnesty International
representatives met Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu and other ministers, and urged them to abolish the death penalty and introduce full safeguards against possible ill-treat-ment of detainees. Amnesty International also called on Japan to accede to international human rights treaties, in particular the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the optional protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
