MAURITANIA
Evidence emerged that more than 300 political detainees had died in police and army custody between November 1990 and March 1991 as a result of torture or extrajudicial execution. More than 1,000 other political prisoners, all black Mauri-tanians detained apparently because of their ethnic origin, were released by April. Many had been tortured and subjected to particularly harsh prison conditions. Later, seven opposition party leaders were placed under house arrest for seven weeks: they were prisoners of conscience. There were renewed reports of extrajudicial executions of members of the black Halpulaar ethnic group in the south of the country.
Black Mauritanians, in particular members of the Halpulaar ethnic group (also known as Fulani) in the south of the country, continued to face arbitrary arrest and detention, torture and extrajudicial execution at the hands of government forces in the early part of the year. Since April 1989 the government, which is dominated by Moors, had forcibly expelled thousands of black Mauritanians to neighbouring countries, especially Senegal (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991).
However, following growing criticism of its human rights record, the government of President Maaouiya Ould Taya took a number of steps in April to reform the political system. The President announced that all political prisoners would be released, that a new draft constitution providing for free elections would be put to a national referendum in July, and that for the first time since the government took power in 1984, political parties would be authorized.
MAURITANIA
Following the April announcement, new political parties and national himian rights organizations were formed.
In July the draft constitution was endorsed by over 95 per cent of voters, according to official figmes. It provides for the establishment of a bicameral parliament, the election of a President of the Republic by universal suffrage in 1992, and the establishment of separate executive and legislative powers and an independent judiciary. It was unclear to what extent these political changes would result in greater participation in government by black Mauritanians.
Evidence emerged that at least 339 political prisoners, and possibly as many as 500, had died in police and army custody between November 1990 and March 1991. Some were executed without trial; others were tortured to death. The victims had been among about 3,000 black Mauritanians arrested in November and December 1990 in the capital, Nouakchott, and in Nouadhibou. Most of those detained were members of the armed forces or civil servants belonging to the Halpulaar ethnic group from the south, but others belonged to the Sonink6 or other black ethnic groups (see Amnesty International Report 1991). About 1,500 were still held incommunicado at the beginning of 1991. Eyewitnesses said that 142 of the 339 had been tortured to death or executed without trial, including 33 soldiers who were hanged at Inal barracks north of Nouadhibou on the night of 27 November 1990. Information about the 197 others was less certain: they were imaccounted for when the government armounced in April that no political prisoners remained in prison and were feared to have died as a result of torture or ill-treatment.
The mass arrests of late 1990 occurred after the authorities said they had discovered a plot to overthrow the government, but no evidence of such a plot emerged and it appeared that most had been detained because of their ethnic origin.
Civilians as well as soldiers were held without trial in military barracks in or near Nouakchott and Nouadhibou. Some 50 detainees still held at J'Reida barracks, near Nouakchott, at the end of February were said to be kept permanently chained in small cells with no toilet facilities. Some were kept in cells which were underground or unlit.
Many detainees were tortured in military barracks or police stations. Methods included the "jaguar", where victims are hung upside-down and beaten on the soles of their feet; electric shocks; and being burned on the body with hot coals. An army officer, who survived his detention at Inal barracks, said that he had been stripped, boimd hand and foot and urinated on, tortured in a room containing corpses and then chained up and beaten in a large room. Another officer was blinded in one eye by having a lighted cigarette pressed into it. On several consecutive days in late November 1990 detainees had been hanged. In the south, 60 soldiers reportedly died after being tortured, first at a barracks in Aleg and then at Akjoujt, where some were buried up to the neck in sand and left to die.
Some detainees were released in March but at the end of that month the government said that 64 of those still held were to be tried in camera by a military tribunal on state security charges. However, the trial did not take place: it was postponed and the 64 were released in April together with others who had survived. In mid-April President Ould Taya annoimced that all political prisoners were being freed. In July a further amnesty permitted the release of all prisoners either convicted or awaiting trial on state security or press offences. In August those convicted in absentia were pardoned. It was not known how many people benefited firom these measmes.
The failure of the authorities to release or account for several hundred detainees led to protests in April by relatives and others demanding to know what had happened to them. The protesters demonstrated publicly, demanding that the government open an independent inquiry into the fate of their missing relatives. Some were briefly detained and a number of gatherings, which were mostly peaceful, were forcibly dispersed by the security forces. On 12 August about 40 out of some 150 protesters were injured by seciu-ity forces.
Despite the government's promise to permit political parties, seven opposition leaders were arrested on 5 Jime, after the formation of an opposition coalition, the Front démocratique uni des forces du changement, United Democratic Front of the Forces for Change. Those held, all of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, included Moustapha Ould
MAURITANIA/MAURITIUS
Bedredine, leader of the Mouvement national démocratique (mnd), National Democratic Movement, and Ladji Traoré, a former prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1991). No charges were brought but they were placed under house arrest in remote areas of the country until late July, when they were released under a presidential amnesty.
Trade imionists were also arrested and held for short periods. Sidi Ould Mohamed Vail and three other leaders of the Union des travailleurs Mauritaniens (utm), Union of Mauritanian Workers, were detained briefly in June after a strike which resulted in violent demonstrations in Nouadhibou.
New extrajudicial executions of black Mauritanians in villages and towns along the Senegal river border were reported, but on a lesser scale than in 1989 and 1990. There was a reduced military presence in the area and an end to expulsions of black Mamitanians. In July, four people who had previously been expelled to Senegal were killed, reportedly by government soldiers, at Diiriol village in Mbagne Department when they returned to Mauritania. The victims included a one-year-old child, Amina-ta Hamady Sow, and a pregnant woman, Aïssata Souleymane Sow.
From January onwards, Amnesty International called on the government to investigate the reports of political prisoners' deaths in custody, but received no response. However, the authorities apparently did order a secret inquiry which was conducted entirely by military personnel, some of whom were alleged to have been directly involved in the interrogation of detainees in late 1990. No details of the inquiry or its findings were disclosed and none of those responsible for killing prisoners was known to have been brought to justice. Reiterating its call for an independent and impartial inquiry whose findings and methods of investigation should be made public. Amnesty International published in August the names and other details of the 339 detainees believed to have died or been killed in custody. It also urged investigation of other extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in previous years. Amnesty International called for the release of the seven political leaders arrested in June.
In oral statements to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about unlawful detentions, torture of prisoners and extrajudicial executions in Mauritania.
