GREECE
Some 400 prisoners of conscience, all con-scientious objectors to military service, were held. There were numerous allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody, in one case reportedly resulting in death, and several from prisons.
Greece ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in August.
There is no alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors to military service and conscientious objectors were imprisoned in their himdreds. All but four known imprisoned conscientious objectors were Jehovah's Witnesses. The majority were serving four-year sentences which they could reduce to about three years in prison by working. By the end of the year some 45 other conscientious objectors who were not Jehovah's Witnesses had publicly declared their opposition to military service but were not imprisoned.
In January Jehovah's Witness minister Daniel Kokkalis was released from prison. He had served his entire sentence (taking into account usual reductions), despite the Council of State's ruling that he was a minister of a recognized religion and should therefore be exempted from military service (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). In April the Coimcil of State delivered a similar ruling in favour of Jehovah's Witness ministers Timothy Kouloubas and Dimitris Tsirlis. They were released from prison in May after acquittal at their appeal hearings (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
There were numerous reports of torture or ill-treatment in police custody and several from prisons. In some cases these allegations appeared to be inadequately investigated. Some alleged victims said that they did not make complaints because they feared that their trials might be affected adversely.
Siileyman Akyar, a criminal suspect, died in hospital in Athens in January,
GREECE/GRENADA
allegedly after being tortured by members of the Drugs Squad. A post-mortem found multiple injuries all over his body caused by beating. An administrative inquiry reportedly concluded that the police had acted in self-defence. A suit filed by a group of lawyers did not result in a judicial investigation.
Seventeen-year-old Artan Malaj, who was held for two days without access to a lawyer at the General Security building in Athens in May, told the examining magistrate that he had been intimidated and hit by police. However, no medical examination was carried out and no investigation initiated.
In April police in Thebes allegedly punched, beat, kicked and threatened to kill three criminal suspects - Vasilis Makrinitsas, Vasilis Makripoulias and Argyris Kavatas. Vasilis Makrinitsas allegedly lost consciousness after he was beaten vdth a truncheon on his knee where he had recently had an operation. The three men lodged a complaint against the police. After a local member of parliament complained about the alleged torture the Minister of Public Order ordered an investigation.
There were also allegations of torture or ill-treatment from people detained in connection with violeiît demonstrations. For example, 17-year-old Stella Evgenikou formally complained that she had been thrown to the ground, beaten with truncheons and kicked all over her body during her arrest by some 10 police officers in July. In the ensuing days she suffered memory loss and nausea and had difficulty breathing and walking. A medical report recorded two fractured ribs. By the end of the year her case was waiting to be heard by the Coimcil of the Criminal Court which would decide whether charges should be brought against the police.
An investigation into Dimitris Voglis' torture allegations (see Amnesty International Report 1990) concluded and his case was waiting to be heard by the Council of the Criminal Court.
Seventeen prisoners who were transferred from Larisa Prison to other prisons throughout Greece during February, following a hunger-strike, alleged Jhat they were beaten by guards wearing hoods and armed vnth chains and truncheons. The public prosecutor initiated an investigation into the allegations but its outcome was
not known by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed repeatedly for the release of all imprisoned conscientious objectors and urged the government to introduce alternative civilian service of non-punitive length. It expressed concern about allegations of torture and ill-treatment and called on the authorities to investigate them promptly, thoroughly and impartially and to bring those responsible to justice.
The government informed Amnesty International that it was considering introducing alternative civilian service twice as long as ordinary military service, but by the end of the year it had not taken any steps towards doing so. The authorities responded to only one of Amnesty International's inquiries about alleged torture or ill-treatment. A reply sent in November stated that the Public Prosecutor of Thebes was investigating tortiue allegations made by Vasilis Makrinitsas, Vasilis Makripoulias and Argyris Kavatas.
