ZAMBIA
A newly elected government lifted the state of emergency which had allowed indefinite detention without trial. More than 200 prisoners remained under sentence of death, although no executions were reported.
In October the government of President Kenneth Kaunda and the United National Independence Party (unp) was defeated in the country's first multi-party elections for 23 years. President Kaunda had held power since Zambia's independence in 1964, The new President, Frederick Chiluba, leader of the Movement for Multi-Party Democracy (mmd), had been briefly detained without charge in 1981 and 1990 while a trade union official. One of the new government's first reforms was to lift the state of emergency which had been continuously in force since 1964. This nullified the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, which had allowed indefinite detention without trial, although these powers had been only infrequently used since an official amnesty for political prisoners in August 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
ZAMBIA/ZIMBABWE
A South African national, Katiza Cebekhulu, was detained in April, after arriving in Zambia in February. He had been accused of murder and kidnapping in the trial of Winnie Mandela and others in South Africa. He reportedly claimed that he had been taken from South Africa by members of the African National Congress of South Africa (anc) to prevent him from testifying. The Zambian authorities refused to make any public statement about the legal basis for Katiza Cebekhulu's detention at Lusaka Central Prison. A witness in the same South African trial, Gabriel Megkwe. was reportedly being held as a prisoner by the anc in Zambia, with the apparent acquiescence of the Zambian Government, after having been abducted from South Africa.
More than 200 prisoners were believed to be under sentence of death at Kabwe Maximum Security Prison but no executions were reported in 1991. Those sentenced to death in 1991 included Kambarage Kaunda, son of President Kaun-da, who was convicted of murder. In May a prisoner under sentence of death, Peter Lloyd Mwape, petitioned the President for clemency. He had been arrested in 1980 and charged with aggravated (armed) robbery. The judge decided that he was mentally unfit to plead and referred him to a psychiatric hospital. When he left hospital he was rearrested on the same charge and in 1987 sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment. On appeal the Supreme Court substituted the death penalty - despite his mental illness and the fact that the gun used in the robbery was faulty and could not be fired.
Amnesty International welcomed the lifting of the state of emergency and the lapsing of powers of indefinite administrative detention. The organization sought clarification of the legal basis and grounds for the detention of Katiza Cebekhulu and appealed for the sentences on Peter Lloyd Mwape and other prisoners facing the death penalty to be commuted,
