MAURITIUS
Two journalists continued to face charges which could result in them becoming prisoners of conscience. A prisoner in police custody was reported to have been beaten. One person was sentenced to death but there were no executions.
Two journalists were charged with publishing or giving out false news information in connection with an article they had published in 1990. The article wrongly suggested that the government had dropped charges against a sea captain accused of illegal fishing in Mauritian waters. Sydney Selvon, Vice-President of the Mauritius Union of Journalists and editor of Le Mauricien (The Mauritian), and Harish Chundunsing, a Le Mauricien journalist, were expected to stand trial in early 1992. If convicted, they could become prisoners of conscience.
Two other people. Harish Boodhoo, leader of the Parti socialiste mauricien (psm), Mauritian Socialist Party, and Vedi Ballah. editor of the psm newspaper. Le Socialiste (The Socialist), were prosecuted on similar charges, convicted and fined in September. They had been charged in 1989 after calling for an inquiry into the alleged involvement of government ministers in the sale of Mauritian passports (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991).
Rajesh Boojawon, a criminal suspect, was admitted to hospital in September
MAURITIUS/MEXICO
suffering from face injiuies reportedly inflicted by police officers. The police reportedly initiated an internal inquiry but its outcome was not known at the end of the year.
A Kenyan national was sentenced to death by the High Coiul in June after being convicted of drug-trafficking. This brought to five the number of prisoners under sentence of death on drugs-related charges. Two other people were under sentence of death for murder, including Roger France de Boucherville. who was convicted in 1986. In July the Supreme Court refused to reopen his case despite new evidence from his alleged accomplice that Roger France de Boucherville had been wrongly convicted. No executions were carried out.
Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of all death sentences and for the abolition of the death penalty.
