ROMANIA
There were allegations that police tortured and ill-treated detainees. Police reportedly targeted and attacked journalists during demonstrations. Security force collusion was alleged in attacks by "unknown assailants" on another journalist. Further information about torture and ill-treat-ment by police under the Ceauçescu govemment came to light. The authorities failed to clarify a "disappearance" case.
In September at least four people died in violent street clashes after thousands of miners from the Jiu valley in western Romania hijacked trains and arrived in the capital, Bucharest, to protest at govemment policies. They attacked government buildings, invaded parliament and forced the resignation of Prime Minister Petre Roman and the National Salvation Front government. In October a coalition government under Prime Minister Theodor Stolojan took office. Throughout the year work continued on the drafting of a new constitution, which was adopted by the Constituent Assembly in November and was endorsed in a referendum on 8 December.
In Febmary Romania ratified the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty. In
ROMANIA
March the United Nations Commission on Human Rights extended for a further year, with the Romanian Government's agreement, the mandate of the Special Rapporteur appointed in 1989 to examine the human rights situation in Romania.
In January parliamentary commissions of inquiry set up to investigate disturbances in Tîrgu Mure§ in March 1990 and Bucharest in June 1990 published their reports (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. However, their findings appeared inconclusive. Two rival preliminary conclusions were published about the disturbances in Bucharest: one by members of parliament supporting the ruling National Salvation Front, which exonerated the authorities; the other by members of the main opposition parties, which criticized the government's role in the violent events. The report on the Tîrgu Mure§ events confirmed that those prosecuted for violence were exclusively members of the ethnic minorities - 12 Roma (Gypsies) and two ethnic Hungarians.
There were allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody. For example, in April Mircea Scarlatescu reportedly called the police after witnessing an incident in Constanta. When they arrived the police allegedly hit him on his face and head. He was then taken into custody, where he was allegedly severely beaten after asking for his lawyer. A medical certificate obtained immediately after his release reportedly stated that he needed hospital treatment for "wounds caused by blows with hard objects".
In January police apparently targeted and attacked journalists during anti-government protests in Bucharest. On 11 January five journalists fi'om opposition publications, including Andrei Dumitru and Simion Buia of Romania Libera, were themselves beaten by police when they tried to photograph them beating two young protesters. The following day police attacked another group of journalists covering the continuing demonstrations, injuring one - Andrei Iliescu of agence France-Presse - who was hospitalized as a result. The authorities admitted that excessive violence had been used against the journalists and said that five police officers had been dismissed.
Members of the police force in Bra§ov were alleged to have colluded in attacks on Marius Oprea, a journalist who had
revealed the identity of a member of the Securitate - the secret police of the previous (communist) authorities responsible for widespread human rights abuses. He reportedly recognized a former Secun'fafe officer, who had previously interrogated him, working as the chief editor of a magazine. In November 1990 he signed a declaration to this effect and was subsequently attacked in the street by three unidentified people. The police apprehended one attacker, but reportedly he was freed the following day without having been charged with any offence. Marius Oprea then reportedly received death threats because of his continuing attempts to expose past actions of the Securitate. In February he was reportedly again attacked and beaten in the street by "unknown assailants". He said he did not report this attack to the police as he believed his assailants were members of the officially disbanded Securitate with links to the current security forces.
Information became available on a number of cases of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by police in Suceava county before the overthrow of President Ceau§escu in December 1989. They had apparently not been investigated and those allegedly responsible remained in their jobs.
The whereabouts of Viorel Horia, a school pupil, remained unknown: he was reportedly arrested during the violent events in Bucharest in June 1990. Two witnesses reported seeing him in the Magurele military base until at least 16 June 1990, They also reported that he had been severely beaten by security officials who accused him of throwing stones at soldiers during the disturbances of 13 June. His mother and human rights groups in Bucharest contacted the Magurele base and other official institutions, but all denied any knowledge of him.
In March Amnesty International called for specific human rights safeguards to be included in the new Constitution.
In April the organization responded to information provided by the Procurator General in January on actions by the authorities after the Tirgu Mure§ and Bucharest events of 1990. Amnesty International welcomed the steps taken to investigate some allegations of ill-treatment, but again called on the government to initiate comprehensive investigations into the
ROMANIA/RWANDA
Tirgu Mure§ and Bucharest events.
Amnesty International also called for full and impartial investigations into allegations of abuses by the police, including the attacks on journalists and the ill-treatment of Mircea Scarlatescu. It urged the authorities to ensure the protection of Marius Oprea and to investigate the alleged links between his attackers and the Bra§ov police force. Amnesty International also called for thorough investigations into allegations of past cases of torture and ill-treatment and for those responsible to be brought to justice. It urged the authorities to undertake a full and impartial investigation into the "disappearance" of Viorel Horia and to make the findings public.
In October the authorities informed Amnesty International that an inquiry into Mircea Scarlatescu's allegations had been conducted by the Constanta Military Prosecutor, who concluded that the police had "acted in full compliance with the Romanian legal provisions in force, meeting the relevant international standards". At the end of the year Amnesty International was seeking further information about the case.
