Pakistan
Government opponents continued to face arrest and imprisonment, generally for short periods, for participating in peaceful political activities and some long-term prisoners of conscience remained in detention. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about political prisoners convicted after unfair trials before military courts, although several dozen political prisoners previously convicted were released. Reports of torture, particularly in police custody, persisted. Sentences of flogging and the death penalty continued to be regularly imposed.
Martial law, under which political parties and political activities were formally baimed, continued into its ninth year until it was lifted on 30 December. With the lifting of martial law, military courts were abolished and articles of the Constitution guaranteeing such fundamental rights as freedom from arbitrary arrest, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly were restored.
In the run-up to the lifting of martial law, national and provincial elections were held on 25 and 28 February. The elections took place on a "non-party basis" which led to their being boycotted by the coalition of major opposition parties, the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD). Large-scale arrests of prisoners of conscience ensued. During January and February several hundred people, including most MRD leaders, were arrested, not only when participating in prohibited demonstrations but also in raids on their homes. The vast majority of these prisoner were released uncharged by early April but some 20 party workers in different parts of the country were charged with offences such as "distributing pamphlets or leaflets against the elections" and "pasting posters on walls" exhorting an election boycott. They were sentenced to between three and 12 months' imprisonment.
A few dozen political activists were arrested in August when Benazir Bhutto, leader of the Pakistan People's Party, returned to Pakistan to attend the funeral of her younger brother; they were held for several weeks. Benazir Bhutto was herself placed under house arrest for some eight weeks following the funeral, accused of violating martial law regulations, and was released only on condition that she leave Pakistan to testify at a judicial investigation into her brother's death being held in France.
Hundreds of members of the Shi'a minority were detained for short
Amnesty International Report 1986	247
periods early in the year after peaceful protests against government policies.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community continued to face arrest. They had been banned from calling themselves Muslims and using Muslim practices in worship in April 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). In Tharparkar district of Sind province during April and May over 100 Ahmadis were arrested and detained for some weeks when Ahmadi youths wore badges bearing an Islamic inscription in open defiance of the restrictions on their community. A number of those arrested were reported to have been severely beaten by the police. The arrests were made under the amended sections of the penal code governing the Ahmadis' activities or for "breach of the peace". Although most of those arrested were charged, there had been no further proceedings in the majority of cases by the end of 1985. At its session in August the UN Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities expressed grave concern about the presidential ordinance of 1984 concerning the Ahmadiyya community.
Among the prisoners of conscience still held under preventive detention provisions were Rasul Bux Palejo, Secretary General of the Awami Tehrik, People's Movement, and Fazil Rahu, its President, who were arrested in October 1979 and September 1983 respectively, and Dr Hasan Zafar Arif, an Associate Professor at Karachi University arrested in October 1984 and detained for his criticism of the martial law government. A small number of other prisoners of conscience, convicted by military courts on charges such as "propagation of opinions prejudicial to the ideology of Pakistan" and possession of "subversive literature" remained in jail.
The practice of trying civilian political prisoners before military courts employing procedures contrary to international legal standards has been of concern to Amnesty International since 1977. Although military courts were abolished when martial law was lifted, prisoners previously convicted by them were left without legal redress, since under constitutional amendments introduced in 1985 no sentences passed by any martial law authority could be challenged in the courts.
Military courts fell into two categories: summary military courts, with power to impose sentences of imprisonment of up to three years; and special military courts, empowered to hand down longer terms of imprisonment and the death penalty. Summary military courts consisted of one member of the armed forces and the accused was not permitted to be represented by a lawyer. Neither category of court allowed for any judicial appeal. Approximately 100 political prisoners, mainly in Punjab province, sentenced in 1984 by summary military courts to between one and three years' imprisonment were
248	Amnesty International Report 1986
released. They had been convicted of association with Al-Zulfikar, deemed to be a terrorist organization. However, trials before summary military courts continued until the lifting of martial law, and in Sind province some students and others still faced charges under martial law provisions for anti-government activities.
In November Amnesty International published The Trial and Treatment of Political Prisoners Convicted by Special Military Courts in Pakistan. This report included a memorandum submitted to the government in June, which analysed the procedures of special military courts with particular reference to three recent trials. The report concluded that these courts failed to comply with international legal standards in three major respects: their lack of independence from the martial law authorities; their denial of the right to a fair hearing, including the acceptance in evidence of testimony reportedly extracted under duress and restrictions on defence rights; and their denial of the right to appeal to a higher tribunal. In its memorandum to the government, to which the organization received no response. Amnesty International recommended the abolition of special i^tary courts and the retrial of prisoners convicted by them before courts providing all internationally recognized safeguards for a fair trial. Among the 12 other recommendations were a call for the immediate withdrawal of President's Order No. 4 of 1982 (the Criminal Law Amendment Order, 1982) invoked in recent trials — which had permitted cases to be heard in camera, additional curtailment of defence rights and changes in the rules of evidence — and full and impartial investigations into allegations of torture of prisoners.
In three of the trials Amnesty International publicized in its report, defendants had been sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment. Five prisoners in Rawalpindi accused of criminal conspiracy to overthrow the government, apparently in connection with a visit to Libya, were sentenced to 25 years' imprisoimient. Thirteen others were acquitted. The five had t^en detained for over three years without being charged and had been held for much of the time in bar fetters. In another case, 54 prisoners in Lahore were convicted on charges of criminal conspiracy, including membership of Al-Zulfikar and sedition, and were all sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment. In a third trial 17 defendants, most of them serving military officers at the time of their arrest, were charged with "conspiracy to wage war against Pakistan", conspiracy to commit sedition and concealing such conspiracies. Five were sentenced to terms of between 10 and 25 years and the rest acquitted. During this trial, defence counsel complained in court that the accused had been tortured and argued that no evidence other than testimony extracted under duress had been produced. At least 25 other political prisoners were convicted by
Amnesty International Report 1986	249
special military courts during the year.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations that criminal suspects and, less frequently, political prisoners were tortured in police custody. In September it raised with the Chief Minister of Sind province its concern about reports that Bashir Ahmed Qureshi, a student at Tando Jam Agricultural University and Vice-President of the Jeay Sind Student Federation unit there, was tortured after his arrest on 15 January. He was reported to have been severely beaten on the legs and kept in bar fetters, necessitating treatment in hospital in Hyderabad for some weeks. News of the deaths of criminal suspects in police custody, allegedly resulting from torture, was also published regularly in the press. Addressing a police training school in mid-July, the governor and martial law administrator of Punjab province reportedly acknowledged public complaints regarding "police excesses and violence". The Inspector General of Punjab Police was also reported to have directed senior police officers to "ensure the elimination of torture practices in poUce stations".
Amnesty International recorded 57 executions and 84 death sentences, most of them imposed by special military courts. Two prisoners tried by these courts for politically motivated criminal offences were among those executed. Nasir Baluch was one of four people sentenced to death in connection with a hijacking in 1981; the other three had their clemency appeals accepted after widespread publicity was given to executive interference in the judicial process. Ayaz Samoo was found guilty of the murder of a pro-government politician. Ayaz Samoo's family had reportedly not been informed of the outcome of his clemency appeal when summoned to the jail on 25 June to visit him because of his alleged ill-health. They then learned that he was to be executed within 12 hours. Ayaz Samoo's case, together with the cases of a number of other prisoners sentenced to death by special military courts, were submitted by Amnesty International to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions.
Hundreds of people were sentenced to be flogged, mostly for criminal offences or for violation of Islamic ordinances such as that relating to adultery. A few political prisoners were also sentenced to be flogged.
Although in some prisons, particularly in Punjab province, bar fetters were removed from political prisoners, the practice of keeping some prisoners in bar fetters and shackles for long periods persisted.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Pakistan under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
250
Amnesty International Report 1986
