German Democratic Republic
As in previous years Amnesty International's main concern was the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the majority of them would-be emigrants. TTie organization was further concerned about trial procedures in political cases, in particular the regular practice of holding such trials in camera.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience those imprisoned for non-violently exercising their right to leave their country. Most were prosecuted under Article 213 of the penal code which proscribes leaving the German Democratic Republic (GDR) without permission and carries a maximum prison sentence of eight years. Permission is very difficult to obtain and those who persisted in their efforts to obtain it risked infringing a number of laws which restrict the rights to freedom of association and the right to pass on information. During 1985 the organization learned of the arrest of more than 30 would-be emigrants under these laws.
GDR law places heavy penalties on sending information abroad if it is considered "to the disadvantage of the interests" or "liable to damage the interests" of the GDR (Article 99 or Article 219, section 2, of the penal code). Neither article concerns the transmission of information classified as secret, which is proscribed separately under Article 97 of the penal code ("espionage"). A number of would-be emigrants were charged under Articles 99 and 219 after writing to organizations or individuals abroad about their difficulties in obtaining permission to emigrate, especially when this resulted in publicity for their case in foreign news media. Mere contact with such organizations or individuals on the subject of emigration led in some cases to prosecution under Article 100 of the penal code ("treasonable activity as an agent") or Article 219, section 1 ("taking up illegal contacts").
The case of Ewald Schwarzrock, an electrician from Berlin who
284	Amnesty International Report 1986
was arrested on 8 August, was typical. Before his arrest he had applied repeatedly for permission for himself and his family to emigrate. After a number of unsuccessful applications he contacted a human rights organization based in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). He was tried on 7 November by a court in Berlin and sentenced to one year six months' imprisonment under Article 100.
Would-be emigrants who persisted in their efforts to persuade government authorities to grant them exit visas were prosecuted for "impeding the activity of public bodies" under Article 214 of the penal code. Others were held to have "vilified" the GDR in stating their reasons for wishing to emigrate and prosecuted under Article 220 ("public vilification"). Those who took initiatives with other would-be emigrants were prosecuted for "Association for the pursuit of aims contrary to the law" (Article 218). All associations, including informal ones, require state recognition and one condition is that they "correspond to the principles of the socialist order of state in their character and aims".
Amnesty Intemational also worked on behalf of a number of people imprisoned for refusing on grounds of conscience to do military service. The GDR makes some provision for those who object to armed military service by allowing them to join "construction units", where conscripts work on the construction of military installations. However, there is no non-military alternative service. Amnesty International accordingly adopted as prisoners of conscience those imprisoned for conscientious objection to either form of military service. Among them was Harald Prehn, a skilled worker from Stralsund, who was arrested in May and sentenced shortly afterwards to 20 months' imprisonment.
No trials of prisoners of conscience were reported in the press. All political trials which Amnesty Intemational was able to investigate were held in camera-, in most cases the prisoner's family was also excluded. Judgments, which under both GDR and intemational law must be made public, contained information only about the sentence and legislation. The public were again excluded when the reasoning for the judgment was read out. The written text of judgments was not made available to the prisoner's family or to the public.
Amnesty Intemational attempted to send an observer into the trial of André Eichwede, which took place in Berlin on 12 Febmary. However, Amnesty Intemational's observer, a Swedish lawyer, was turned back at the border. André Eichwede was sentenced to one year 10 months' imprisonment for "illegal crossing of the border" (Article 213 of the penal code) and "impeding the activity of public bodies" (Article 214). He was released and permitted to emigrate on 28 August.
Amnesty International Report 1986	285
Amnesty International wrote to Erich Honecker, Chairman of the Council of State, expressing regret at the GDR authorities' refusal to admit the organization's observer into the country and urging him to clarify the position concerning the admittance of foreign observers to trials. The organization pointed out that the GDR delegation had not responded to a question on this subject by a member of the Human Rights Committee in Geneva, when the Committee was examining the GDR's implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in July 1984. Amnesty International further stated that it considered the holding of trials in public to be one of the most important guarantees for a fair trial and that if this condition was not met there was no basis for determining whether the trial conformed in other respects to internationally recognized standards. The organization expressed concern about the large numbers of trials held in camera and urged Erich Honecker to investigate the matter.
The restrictions on access to trials and judgments of political prisoners meant that family and friends only had minimal information about cases. If they reported cases to organizations or individuals abroad, they themselves risked prosecution for sending out of the country information deemed damaging to the interests of the GDR.
For these reasons the information received by Amnesty International about political prisoners was incomplete. During the year the organization worked on behalf of about 200 prisoners of conscience but believed the total number to be much higher.
As in previous years prisoners of conscience were released to the FRG in exchange for payment by the FRG Government. Amnesty International welcomed these releases but continued to call for the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience.
