Chad
Amnesty International was concerned about the "disappearance" of hundreds of people who were reportedly detained by government forces, many of whom were believed to have been victims of extrajudicial executions. The government denied that prisoners had been extrajudicially executed, despite eyewitness and other reports to the contrary. In some cases it alleged that the victims had been killed by armed opponents of the government. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the detention without trial of dozens of alleged opponents of the govemment, some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience. Many were held in secret detention centres, where conditions were reported to be poor, despite govemment assertions that prisoners were held only in recognized detention centres. Amnesty International also received reports of politically motivated detentions without trial by the Gouvernement d'union nationale de transition (GUNT), Transitional Govemment of National Unity, an armed opposition group which controlled territory in northem Chad and which claimed to be the legitimate govemment of the whole country.
There were continued clashes between govemment troops and armed opposition groups, particularly in southem Chad where groups known as commandos or "codos" remained active and were alleged by the govemment to receive support from both Libya and the GUNT.
Eighty-five political detainees were freed in an amnesty in March. In response to a request from Amnesty Intemational, the authorities provided their names, but did not specify the precise date or circumstances of their arrest.
In late March and early April Amnesty Intemational sent a mission to Chad to discuss human rights with the govemment of President Hissein Habré. Among others, the delegates met senior officials of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Justice and Defence, members of the presidential staff, and the head of the security police, the Direction de la documentation et de la sécurité, the Directorate of Documentation and Security.
During the mission Amnesty Intemational's delegates sought information from the authorities about people who had "disappeared", including 51 of the best-documented cases from among several hundred reported in southem Chad in September and
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
October 1984. In over 30 of the 51 cases the authorities claimed that the people named by Amnesty Intemational had in fact been killed by armed opponents of the government. Two other people named by Amnesty Intemational were said to be alive and never to have been detained. Three more were said to have been detained of whom one — Marcel Dewala, a local administrator — had died in detention. The second — Betel Ninganadji, an employee of the Cotontchad company — was said to have been released in March. The third — Wadar Moudalbaye, an administrator — was said to still be detained without trial. Unofficial sources corroborated the death in prison of Marcel Dewala and the detention of Wadar Moudalbaye.
However, in the cases of a substantial number of those and other people whom the govemment claimed had been killed by armed opponents, or about whom it claimed no knowledge. Amnesty Intemational obtained reports from eye-witnesses and other evidence which supported its belief that they had been extrajudicially executed by govemment forces. For example, Pierre Ousmane Touadé, former leader of the Parti national pour le développement du Tchad, National Party for the Development of Chad, was reported to have been detained at Moundou in August 1982 because of his opposition to the govemment. His place of detention and legal status had not been divulged. In March Amnesty Intemational's delegates were told by the authorities that they had no knowledge of him. Subsequently, however. Amnesty Intemational received information, including eye-witness reports, that he had been secretly executed in early 1983 after being held at the Brigade spéciale d'intervention rapide (BSIR), Special Rapid Intervention Brigade, in the capital, Ndjamena. Amnesty International's delegates also asked the authorities about Dr Ngoïdi Wayor Ndem, a doctor employed by the Société nationale sucrière du Tchad, Chadian National Sugar Company. Amnesty Intemational had received reports that Dr Ndem and at least 50 other suspected political opponents of the govemment had been detained in the southem town of Sahr, and then shortly afterwards executed extrajudicially on a road outside the town, in September 1984. Amnesty Intemational's delegates were told by the authorities in March that they had no knowledge of Dr Ndem's whereabouts. Subsequentiy, the authorities stated that Dr Ndem was dead but declined to give any details of how or where his death occurred.
Reports of political killings were received throughout 1985. For example, three community leaders at Bidang village in the Bmbo-koum area were reported to have been executed extrajudicially by govemment forces on 20 January. In July 40 or more people were similarly reported to have been killed at Bodo and Ngalo. Such reported killings often followed a pattem: govenmient troops would
Amnesty International Report 1966	37
enter villages in areas where groups of armed "codos" were active and would then detain or kill people apparently suspected of supporting them. On other occasions, govemment forces were reported to have killed at random, apparently in reprisal for anti-govemment activity.
The authorities impressed upon Amnesty International's mission delegates the scale and intensity of fighting between pro- and anti-govemment forces in southern Chad in late 1984. They also denied holding any political prisoners, They said those in custody were all prisoners of war, captured in the course of the conflict or detained on suspicion of collaboration with armed opponents of the govemment. They claimed that all such prisoners were held in recognized detention centres. They specifically denied holding political prisoners in Ndj amena in detention centres other than the civil prison. However, Amnesty International received reports from a variety of sources, including former prisoners, that dozens of prisoners were held in poor conditions in secret detention centres in Ndjamena. Such secret prisons were said to be located in the headquarters of the BSIR, in the Presidency itself, and elsewhere. Many detainees were reported still to be held in such places at the end of 1985. None had been formally charged or tried.
Amnesty International's delegates asked the authorities about 38 named people reportedly detained at Abéché in July 1983 on suspicion of collaborating with the GUNT, The authorities stated that six of the 38 were detained in the north, but refused to disclose where, and that some of the 32 others had never been detained and that some had been killed by the GUNT. The sbc whose detention they confirmed included Abdelkarim Annadif, former local administrator from Arada, and Abbo Saleh, a trader. They were believed to be still held at the end of 1985, apparently in the civil prison at Abéché.
Amnesty Intemational repeatedly appealed to the authorities to safeguard the well-being of detainees. In addition to reports of extrajudicial executions, there were reports of detainees being beaten and kept in poor conditions. For example. Amnesty Intemational received reports that people detained on suspicion of political opposition to the govemment were beaten in the police commissariat at Sahr in March.
Throughout the year the GUNT, supported by Libyan forces, controlled territory in the north of Chad. Amnesty Intemational believed that the GUNT held dozens of political prisoners, including both prisoners of war and others detained without trial apparently because they had criticized the policies of the GUNT or of its ally, Libya. On 12 May, the President of the GUNT, Goukouni Weddeye,
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
in response to an inquiry from Amnesty Intemational, informed the organization that Acheikh Ibn Oumar and 19 others detained by his forces were suspected of common law offences and would be tried. However, the 20 had been released untried by the end of the year.
