Sri Lanka
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of arbitrary killings of many hundreds of non-combatant Tarnils by govenmient security forces in northern and eastern Sri Lanka and of many "disappearances". Widespread torture of political detainees was reported; both Tamil political detainees and Sinhalese criminal suspects reportedly died in custody after being tortured or shot. The organization also remained concerned about long-term detention without charge or trial of many hundreds of Tamils. Several dozen were held for longer than the 18 months permitted under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA). Over 100 Sinhalese members of left-wing opposition parties were also detained under this and other special legislation.
There was intensified armed conflict between members of the Tamil community demanding a separate state in the north and east of Sri Lanka and government security personnel. Both sides were accused of killing unarmed civilians and captives. Armed Tamil groups reportedly abducted and killed security forces personnel and politicians, civilians they accused of being informers, and indiscriminately killed Sinhalese civilians in reprisal for killings of Tamils. On 14 May, for example, 146 people - mostly Sinhalese civilians - were killed in Anuradhapura, allegedly by armed Tamil separatists. Amnesty International acknowledged that such attacks had further increased the heavy burden on the security forces charged with maintaining law and order and stated that it condemned the torture and execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups.
Several hundred Tamils suspected of involvement with armed opposition groups were reportedly arrested each month by the security forces in the north and, increasingly, the east. Many were released after questioning but Amnesty International was concerned that hundreds of others were detained for long periods in police stations and army camps in the north and east and in prisons in the south. Despite official assurances that families would be informed within 48 hours, numerous people complained that they were unable to trace the whereabouts of arrested relatives for many months. Arrests were made under the PTA, permitting detainees to be held incommunicado without charge or trial for a maximum of 18 months, but Amnesty International knew of 56 detainees who were held for longer.
Amnesty International Report 1986	257
In March Amnesty International welcomed the government's announcement that 200 such detainees would be released from Boosa army camp, and requested details of the 600 people reportedly then held there. The Minister of National Security replied on 22 April but did not give the details requested. Among the detainees were a number whose release had been recommended by the Advisory Board established under the PTA to review the cases of detainees. On 17 April Amnesty International was officially informed that between 14 August 1984 and 27 February 1985, 233 applications had been heard by the Board. Amnesty International subsequently expressed concern about reports that the Board's recommendations for release were not always implemented and that detainees had difficulties in contacting relatives to arrange legal representation.
On 10 July the Minister of National Security announced the unconditional release of 643 "terrorist suspects". He said that an unspecified, smaller group of suspects would be released later, subject to a series of conditions, and another 125 suspects would be indicted under the PTA. Twenty people were officially reported released on 27 July but the release of the remaining 623 people was delayed and was not confirmed by the end of 1985.
The government rarely provided statistics of detentions under the PTA. On 3 August it put their number at 1,197, although other reports said several thousand were held. At the end of 1985 Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 167 Tamil detainees, many of whom had been detained for several years.
Members of left-wing political parties - including the Janata Vimukhti Peramuna (JVP), People's Liberation Front, and the Nava Sama Samaja Party, New Equal Society Party - were arrested for allegedly participating in "illegal meetings" or "|X)litical classes". Some detainees were released within weeks of arrest but others, including 24 members of the JVP arrested on 8 November 1984 under the PTA (see Amnesty International Report 1985), were still detained without trial at the end of 1985. In November at least 97 people were arrested on suspicion of having terrorist links. Officials named two left-wing political groups: the Samajavadi Janatha Viyaparaya, Socialist People's Movement, a legal political party advocating greater regional autonomy, and the Janata Vimukhti Peramuna Nava Pravanathayaya, JVP - New Tendency. At the end of 1985, these detainees were still held under the PTA and Emergency Regulations and had not been charged.
The trial continued of Father Aparanam Singarayar, a Roman Catholic priest arrested in 1982 and an adopted prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1985). On 12 December the trial judge of the Colombo High Court ruled that a statement to the
258	Amnesty International Report 1986
Criminal Investigation Department made by Father Singarayar while in army custody had been made voluntarily. According to the defence the statement had been signed while incommunicado under threat of further torture. Amnesty International had repeatedly asked the government to investigate reports that Father Singarayar had been tortured. It was concerned that this statement was admitted in evidence under changed rules of procedure under the PTA which shifted the burden of proving duress on to the accused.
Amnesty International also expressed concern about the detention on 22 May of Paul Nallanayagam, President of the Kalmunai Citizens Committee, shortly after he had provided information about killings of Tamils in the Batticaloa area allegedly by Special Task Force personnel who had disposed of their bodies in secret. He was charged with "making false statements and spreading rumours" and released on bail in mid-September. On 22 November the Supreme Court ruled that his fundamental rights had been violated, as he was not informed of the reasons for his arrest nor produced before a magistrate within the stipulated p>eriod. At the end of 1985 he was awaiting trial.
Throughout 1985 Amnesty International received sworn eyewitness statements alleging indiscriminate killings of unarmed Tamil civilians, often said to have been in reprisal for attacks on security forces personnel or Sinhalese civilians. A total of 412 individual statements alleging extrajudicial killings by security forces personnel were received. Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about several incidents in which extrajudicial killings were reportedly carried out by army, navy and Special Task Force personnel and, in the second half of 1985, the Homeguards, a recently established armed auxiliary force of non-Tamil civilians.
The Reverend George Jeyarajasingham, a Methodist minister, and Father Mary Bastian, a Roman Catholic priest, were allegedly killed by soldiers in the Mannar area on 13 December 1984 and 5 January respectively. On 9 May, 75 unarmed Tamils, mostly young men but also some women and children, were allegedly killed by soldiers in and around Valvettiturai in retaliation for the killing of an army major. Among them were 12 young men reportedly shot dead with their hands tied behind their backs. Apparently in retaliation for the killing of 146 mostly Sinhalese civilians the previous day, 48 Tamil men, women and children on a ferry boat from Delft to Nainativu were killed on 15 May with knives by men alleged to be navy personnel. The Minister of National Security reportedly stated "there is no evidence to show who w^ responsible", but Amnesty International provided eye-witness accounts from survivors identifying some of the killere as navy personnel from Nainativu Island naval camp.
In June and July Amnesty International urged the government to
Amnesty International Report 1986	259
halt extrajudicial killings. It noted that no effective steps had been taken to prevent such killings and that no independent investigations had been carried out. In those rare cases when the government ordered ministerial inquiries, their outcome was not made public. On 22 August Amnesty International appealed to President Jayewardene to investigate allegations that over 100 unarmed Tamil civilians had been killed by army personnel, in retaliation for an explosion at Vavuniya army camp on 16 August.
Amnesty International received a growing number of reports of "disappearances", in which families stated that their relatives had been taken away by security forces personnel and that they had been unable to trace their whereabouts, despite repeated inquiries. Officials either denied knowledge of their detention despite eyewitness accounts of their arrest or maintained that they had been released. On 16 August Amnesty International presented to the President Reports of Unacknowledged Detentions and "Disappearances" in Sri Lanka, detailing 186 cases of reported "disappearances" in the Vavuniya, Mannar, Jaffna and Batticaloa areas between 14 June 1983 and 17 May 1985. They included 23 young Tamils from Natpattimunai who were allegedly taken away by members of the Special Task Force, made to dig their own graves and shot dead. Amnesty International asked the government to establish the whereabouts or fate of the "disappeared" and submitted its report on "disappearances" simultaneously to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. On 16 December Amnesty International asked the President to investigate nine further cases.
Amnesty International continued to receive widespread allegations of torture. Most concerned Tamil detainees between the ages of 17 and 25 suspected of involvement with armed groups. Others concerned members of left-wing opposition parties, in particular the JVP and the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, and Sinhalese criminal suspects. In October Amnesty International published a summary of the allegations in its File on Torture, giving testimony from former torture victims and witnesses, together with the findings of medical examinations conducted outside the country. Prisoners were allegedly hung upside down and beaten with sticks and sand-filled plastic pipes; had chilli powder inserted in the nostrils, mouth, eyes and genitals; suffered electric shocks; and were threatened with execution. The camps in which torture was alleged to have been carried out included Vavuniya, Palaly, Panagoda, Elephant Pass, Point Pedro, Keerima-lai, Thallady and Gurunagar, as well as the Special Task Force camps at KaUadi and Kaluwanchchikudi in the Eastern Province. Torture was also reported from police stations and Boosa camp and Tangalle prison in the south.
260	Amnesty International Report 1986
Amnesty International received reports of deaths in custody following torture of Tamil detainees and of Sinhalese criminal suspects. The deaths of Sinhalese criminal suspects were usually foUowed by inquests whose findings were published, but inquests into the deaths of political detainees were rare and when held were conducted under the Emergency Regulations 55 B-G of June 1984, which curbed legal safeguards (see Amnesty International Report 1985). No police or security forces personnel were known to have been brought to justice for deaths in custody of political detainees held under the PTA. The government stated in August before the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities that 63 inquests had been held under the Emergency Regulations procedure without establishing unlawful actions by any member of the security forces. No information weis known by Amnesty International to have been made public about any of these inquiries. Among these inquests was one into the shooting of 32 Tamil detainees in Vavuniya army camp on 2 December 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). The government said that evidence had been given by police and by a medical officer but confirmed that no relatives were permitted to be present.
On 4 December the government stated that Amnesty International's File on Torture was "unfair, biased and untrue". On 24 December Amnesty International renewed its appeal to President Jayewardene to stop torture. It said that while it had to protect the anonymity of victims who feared repercussions, it was willing, with the permission of the individuals concerned, to submit the affidavits to an independent body with a mandate to investigate allegations of torture.
Throughout 1985 Amnesty International expressed its opposition to the forcible return of Tai^s to Sri Lanka by other governments. Several Tamils were detained without charge for short periods in Colombo after being forcibly returned to Sri Lanka from France and Sweden where they had sought political asylum.
In May Amnesty International submitted its concerns in Sri Lanka to the UN under its procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure"). The report was also submitted to the government.
On 18 December Emergency Regulation 12 of 1985 was promulgated, extending the death penalty to offences involving kidnapping, robbery with firearms and certain drug offences. However, since the present government came to power, no judicial executions are known to have been carried out.
Amnesty International Report 1986	261
