Philippines
Amnesty International was concerned about continuing reports of human rights violations by members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and paramilitary units operating with official authorization. These violations included extrajudicial executions, torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and "disappearances" and many of the victims were people suspected of supporting the New People's Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). Amnesty International remained concerned about the use of presidential orders under emergency legislation to arrest and detain people, including prisoners
Amnesty International Report 1986	251
of conscience, on political grounds without reference to the judiciary. It was also concerned about the continued imposition of death sentences.
During 1985 Amnesty International worked on behalf of about 60 prisoners who it had adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases it was investigating. Among the prisoners of conscience were five lawyers, all members of a national network of human rights lawyers, the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG). Romeo Astud-Ulo and Alberto Benesa, both from Abra in northern Luzon, were arrested in April on subversion charges. Marcos Risonar, Antonio Arellano and Laurente Ilagan, all from Davao, were arrested in May following a non-violent "people's strike" or welga ng bay an, which they were said to have organized. All five had been active in defending political prisoners, and all were detained under Preventive Detention Actions (PDAs) which authorize the detention of people suspected of national security offences by the executive for indefinitely renewable one-year periods.
The organization adopted as prisoners of conscience 10 people who remained in prison from among 15 workers, farmers and fishermen arrested in Bataan province on 15 February while returning home from a rally organized by the Central Luzon Farmers Alliance. They were accused of belonging to the NPA and of illegal possession of firearms, charges which they denied. All 15 were held incommunicado for three weeks after arrest and several alleged that they were beaten and burned. They were reportedly forced to sign statements admitting their guilt and denying ill-treatment by military personnel. All but three were released on bail in March, then rearrested under a PDA. Five were eventually released, but 10 were still in prison at the end of 1985. Amnesty International believed the charges against them were groundless.
During the second half of the year, appeals to halt torture were sent to selected officials of the government and to every regional and provincial military commander in the country. Amnesty International continued to receive from throughout the Philippines regular reports of torture of people suspected of supporting the NPA. Torture was reported to occur most frequently during periods of incommunicado detention following arrest, either in military camps or in special unauthorized detention centres called "safehouses".
Porifirio Giray, a farmer from the district of Yabyaban, Lao-ang, northern Samar, was arrested on 12 February by members of the 15th Infantry Battalion on suspicion of having taken part in an NPA ambush of soldiers. He was reportedly taken to the battalion headquarters where he said he was blindfolded, burned, beaten with a rifle and gagged. A medical certificate dated 28 March confirmed
252	Amnesty International Report 1986
that he had scars consistent with his testimony. He was transferred to two other military camps and eventually signed a confession, reportedly under threat of further torture.
On several occasions Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to investigate allegations of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". On 20 September, over 20 people were shot dead, reportedly while demonstrating peacefully in the town of Escalante, Negros Occidental, as part of a "people's strike". Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports that local police and members of the Civilian Home Defence Forces (CHDF), the civilian militia organized and equipped by the AFP, had fired into the crowd of unarmed demonstrators with the apparent intention of killing them. The Minister of National Defence announced an inquiry into the incident on 17 October, and on 28 December the committee of inquiry concluded with a recommendation that at least 46 military and paramilitary personnel be indicted.
Such independent investigations were, however, rare. During 1985, Amnesty Intemational appealed for investigations into 40 other cases of reported extrajudicial executions, whose victims included church workers, human rights activists, trade unionists, students, members of ethnic groups and farmers. In some cases, specifically those which drew the greatest domestic or international attention, investigations were ordered by the Acting Chief of Staff of the AFP. Two such cases were the murder of Italian priest Father Tullio Favali on 11 April in Tulunan, North Cotabato, and that of FLAG lawyer and opposition activist Romraflo Taojo in Davao del Norte. The alleged killers of Father Favali, members of the local CHDF, had been brought to trial by the end of the year, but witnesses were reportedly afraid to testify for fear of reprisals. In the case of Romraflo Taojo, alleged to have been killed by members of a paramilitary group composed of former Muslim rebels who had joined the government's counter-insurgency operations, little progress appeared to have been made by the end of 1985. Before his death, Romraflo Taojo had reportedly been about to file criminal complaints against members of the paramilitary group for alleged torture.
Most allegations of politically motivated killings which reached Amnesty Intemational during 1985 concemed not well-known activists but villagers in areas of counter-insurgency operations. In Kabankalan, Negros Occidental, Eleuterio Aningal, the lay leader of a Catholic community organization in Orignao parish, was found dead on 27 June together with four of his sons. They had been abducted the day before, reportedly by armed men who accused them of sympathizing with the NPA. Their bodies were found the
Amnesty International Report 1986	253
next morning, covered with stab wounds. The poHce and military denied any responsibility for the idllings but villagers have reportedly stated that they saw two vehicles full of soldiers arriving on the afternoon of the abduction of the Aningal family and that the Idllings were in reprisal for the deaths of three CHDF members a week earlier.
Amnesty International also noted reports of executions of civilians, including local government officials, and of non-combatant members of the armed forces by the NPA. Amnesty International condemns as a matter of principle the torture or killing of captives by anyone, including opposition groups.
Amnesty International regularly submitted reports of extrajudicial executions to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions. It also drew the attention of the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to over 40 people reported to have "disappeared" in 1985.
Some of those reported to have "disappeared" were never found. Father Rosalio "Rudy" Romano, a Redemptorist priest, "disappeared" on 11 July in Cebu City reportedly after being abducted by military personnel. Father Romano was vice-chairman of the Visayas section of Bagong Alyansang Makabayan (BAYAN), a national opposition political coalition. On 15 July, a petition for habeas corpus was submitted to the Philippines Supreme Court, in which it was stated that witnesses had identified Father Romano's captors as members of the Military Intelligence Group (MIG) attached to the Regional Unified Command headquarters in Cebu. Military authorities consistently denied ever having detained Father Romano but in November two MIG officers were charged with kidnapping before a military court martial. Although the armed forces were directed to search for Father Romano, he was still missing at the end of 1985. Other people reported to have "disappeared" reappeared later in military detention camps, often after having undergone torture.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the holding of political detainees without charge or trial under special powers retained by President Marcos after the lifting of martial law in 1981, such as PDAs. Some prisoners were detained under PDAs after being acquitted or gaining court orders for their release. Others were arrested long before a PDA authorizing the arrest was issued, or for offences that had nothing to do with the reasons outlined in the PDA. Two student leaders and opposition activists, Leandro Alejandro and J.V. Bautista, arrested in February 1985 in Manila during a student march were detained on the basis of a PDA reportedly issued on 14 December 1984. When questioned about the validity of the PDA for an offence committed in February, the police are said to have
254	Amnesty International Report 1986
responded that the PDA had been issued after a rally on 10 December during which the two urged the violent overthrow of the government. The men denied the charges, and, following the Supreme Court hearings, were released in April.
Amnesty International was also concerned about unduly lengthy trial proceedings. Four farmers from Asturias, Cebú — Gregorio Algabre, Alberto de la Cruz, Leopoldo Gonzales and Innocento Requiron — had been detained since May 1982 on suspicion of supporting the NPA. After investigation Amnesty International concluded that the accusations were unfounded and may have been made because of their membership of various rural self-help organizations. It therefore adopted them as prisoners of conscience. The first stage of this trial ran from mid-1982 until January 1983 when a new judge was appointed. She retired in 1984 and the trial was suspended for almost a year until a new judge took over in April 1985. It was then discovered that the stenographic notes from the first year of the trial had disappeared, so that all the prosecution evidence presented before the first judge had to be presented again. This process only began in May and was stiU continuing at the end of 1985.
Although judicial executions have been rare in recent years. Amnesty International believed that over 500 people were under sentence of death. According to the organization's information, the death sentences of 443 prisoners were under review, while 112 prisoners were awaiting possible execution. Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to President Marcos to commute all outstanding death sentences.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in the Philippines to the UN under its procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
Amnesty International Report 1986
255
