Cameroon
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the government and politiceli trials which did not appear to conform to intemational standards. Amnesty Intemational remained con-cemed also about the use of the death penalty and the government's failure to clarify the fate of at least 51 people sentenced to death in 1984 in connection with a coup attempt.
Amnesty International took up the cases of 11 out of more than 250 people imprisoned after the coup attempt of April 1984. It adopted as a prisoner of conscience one of the 11 — Alhaji Hassan Tanko, a former official of the Union nationale camerounaise Cameroonian National Union. He had reportedly been sentenced to two years' imprisonment by the Yaoundé military tribunal, sitting in camera, in August 1984. Amnesty International did not know the charge, but believed that the grounds for his conviction were his criticism of government policy in regard to the large-scale arrest of businessmen and officials in April 1984. Issa Tchiroua, an engineer, and Nana Mamoudou, a former government official, had both reportedly been acquitted of any offence by the Yaoundé military tribunal in August 1984 but had nevertheless been redetained. Amnesty International considered that they might be prisoners of conscience. They were held throughout 1985 at the Yoko prison de production, labour camp. Some people arrested after the April 1984 coup attempt remained in detention without trial. They included Ahmadou Bello, former managing director of Cameroon Airlines, and Bobo Hamatoucour, former director general of the Caisse de stabilisation des produits de base. Agricultural Products Intervention Board. In these and similar cases. Amnesty Intemational believed that those concemed might have been detained on account of their official positions under former President Ahmadou Ahidjo, who resigned in 1982.
Amnesty International also adopted as a prisoner of conscience André Beyegué Yakana, a security guard at the Cameroon Development Corporation in Limbe, who was detained in December 1984 with some 80 other Jehovah's Witnesses accused of having attended an unofficial religious service at his house. Amnesty Intemational considered that all were probably prisonere of conscience, but only in his case was it able to acquire sufficient information to adopt him.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
31	Japan
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the trial or release of two people held without trial since September 1979, both at Yoko labour camp. Luc Minkoulou and Max Abessolo were former soldiers who had been detained reportedly on suspicion of planning to overthrow the government of former President Ahidjo. Both were said to have been tortured after their arrest. Four other untried detainees whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty Intemational were released in May. Winston Fonyonga, Ferdinand Langsi, Vincent Nteh and Fokemba had been held since March 1983, apparently for opposing local politicians in a land dispute.
Amnesty Intemational adopted as a prisoner of conscience Fongum Gorji-Dinka, a lawyer and former president of the Bar of Cameroon. He was arrested at Bamenda on 28 May and charged with insulting the head of state, President Paul Biya. The charge was reported to arise from a series of papers written by Fongum Gorji-Dinka in which he criticized govemment policy in regard to Cameroon's English-speaking population.
Amnesty International received reports of the short-term detention of dozens of probable prisoners of conscience. Many were held apparently on suspicion of supporting an opposition party, the Union des populations du Cameroun (UPC), Union of Cameroonian Peoples. One detainee considered by Amnesty Intemational to be a prisoner of conscience, Dr Joseph Sende, was arrested in Febmary after he had brought a legal case against the government, claiming that the UPC was being denied its constitutional right to organize and contest elections. He was released untried in June. In December dozens of people were reported to have been detained on suspicion of supporting the UPC.
There were reports of death sentences imposed on two people convicted of armed robbery. Paul Mbella and Cho Buwen Martin were sentenced to death by the Buea High Court on 8 February. It was not reported whether they were executed. Amnesty Intemational also remained concerned about the authorities' failure to clarify the fate of people sentenced to death during 1984. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly urged the authorities to publish the names of over 250 people convicted by the Yaounde military tribunal in 1984 on charges arising from the attempted coup of April 1984, and in particular to clarify the fate of 51 people whom the govemment acknowledged had been sentenced to death (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Amnesty Intemational believed that all 51 had been executed. It also believed that some others had been extrajudicially executed by the security forces immediately after the coup attempt. However, by the end of 1985 the authorities had not made public any information conceming the 1984 trials other than the numl^r of people convicted.
vili
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
