Tanzania
Amnesty International was concemed about the detention without trial of alleged political opponents of the govemment, some of whom were apparently suspected of involvement in an alleged coup attempt in 1982. At a major political trial defendants charged in this connection claimed that they had been tortured by police interrogators in pretrial detention. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the death penalty.
In October President Julius Nyerere resigned as President, although he retained an influential position as chairman of the mling Chama cha Mapinduzi, Party of the Revolution. His successor as President was Ali Hassan Mwinyi, formerly Zanzibari President and
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	101	Japan
Vice-President of the United Republic.
In January the Bunge (parliament) passed the government's amended version of the Preventive Detention Act, which permits the indefinite detention without trial of any person deemed to be "dangerous to peace and good order". The new Act applied to the whole of the United Republic, including Zanzibar, whereas the previous law had only been effective on the mainland. The revised law had a number of new safeguards for detainees, including the right to challenge the legality of a detention order in the High Court. Detainees were to be informed in writing of the grounds of the detention within 15 days or released. Names of detainees were to be published in the Govemment Gazette and an advisory corrmiittee was to review detentions within three months rather than after a year. Although this legislation did provide some protection from abuses of the detention law which had been frequent in the past, Amnesty Intemational remained concemed that it still permitted the indefinite detention of political prisoners without trial.
About 15 of those detained under the Preventive Detention Act had been accused previously of involvement in a plot to overthrow the goverrmient in late 1982. In January 1983 they were among 30 people who were arrested and charged with treason for their alleged part in the plot. However, before their trial started, two of the defendants, Pius Lugangira and Hatibu Gandhi (alias Hatty McGhee), alleged ring-leaders of the conspiracy, escaped from custody and fled the country. The govemment then withdrew charges against the remaining 28 and placed them in preventive detention. In November 1983 Hatibu Gandhi and other political exiles living in Kenya were forcibly retumed to Tanzania. Charges were revived against him and four others, three of whom had been forcibly retumed from Kenya, as well as 14 more of the original 30 defendants. Fourteen of the original 30 were believed to be still uncharged in detention at the end of 1985. These apparently included a university lecturer, Thadeo Bugingo, a number of businessmen, including Robert Bayona, and some army officers.
After Pius Lugangira's escape from prison, his sister Christina, a doctor, was arrested and detained under the Preventive Detention Act in Keko Remand Prison in Dar es Salaam. In April Amnesty Intemational urged President Julius Nyerere to intervene as it appeared that she might be detained in order to coerce Pius Lugangira into returning to Tanzania. The organization also expressed concem about reports that she was in poor health and urged that she should receive all necessary medical attention. There was no response to this appeal but Christina Lugangira was released unconditionally in November by President Mwinyi.
102	Amnesty International Report 1986
The trial of Hatibu Gandhi and the other 18 people charged with treason began in January and continued until 27 December. In August four of the defendants were released after the case against them was dismissed at the completion of the prosecution case. In December the High Court found nine of the remaining 15 defendants guilty and sentenced them to life imprisonment. The prosecution had requested the death sentence. Six others, four civilians and two army officers, were acquitted and released. All nine who were found guilty announced that they would appeal. An Amnesty Intemational observer attended part of the trial in June. He said the proceedings appeared to be open and fair but criticized the Evidence Act because it permits statements made under torture or duress to be admitted as evidence in some circumstances. Several of the defendants alleged that they had been tortured into confessing after their arrest, but the judge rilled that their statements were in fact free and voluntary.
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the death penalty, which is retained in law although few prisoners are executed. Four people were sentenced to death in 1985 after being convicted of murder but no executions were reported to have taken place. During the year there was an exchange of correspondence between Amnesty Intemational and the Minister of Justice and Attomey General on the subject of the death penalty. In May the Minister stated that the authorities had concluded that the death penalty was not an effective deterrent to crime but indicated that it would be retained for the time being as public opinion in the country was still in favour of it.
