Congo
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the long-temi detention without trial of more than 20 political detainees, some of whom were considered to be prisoners of conscience. In addition, the organization was concemed about the detention of Zairian asylum-seekers and refugees and also, following a demonstration in November, about the detention of students, schoolchildren and members of unofficial religious sects. These and other political prisoners were reportedly tortured and ill-treated.
Amnesty Intemational continued throughout 1985 to work for the release of several prisoners of conscience among a group of 10 people detained in connection with two bomb explosions in Brazzaville in March and July 1982. They included Bemard Kolelas, a businessman and former official in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who had previously been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty Intemational in 1979; he had been held since May 1982, before the second explosion. They also included Claude-Emest Ndalla, a former First Secretary of the mling Parti congolais du travail, Congolese Labour Party, who was arrested in March 1984, and Jean-Pierre Thystere-Tchicaya, who was PCT Ideology Secretary until shortly before his arrest in August 1984. Amnesty Intemational believed that these three people, and possibly others detained in connection with the bomb explosions, had been arrested for their political views or for other political reasons. (See Amnesty International Report 1985.) Like all those held in connection with the 1982 bombings, they were detained in violation of the law which requires that within three days of their arrest detainees be referred to a juge d'instruction, investigating judge, who may order their detention for a maximum period of six months after which they should be charged or released. Since these detainees were held in the custody of the national security service without reference to the judiciary they apparently had no means of appealing against their imprisonment without trial.
On 31 December President Denis Sassou-Nguesso announced that those suspected of the 1982 bomb explosions were to be tried by the Revolutionary Court, a special court with jurisdiction over political cases. However, he did not indicate how many people were to be prosecuted, nor when the trial would take place.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of torture of suspected government opponents and others in the custody of the
Amnesty International Report 1966	41
national security service. In March the organization published an eight-page document describing the use of torture in the Congo over the past five years and detailing the cases of Eugène Madimba, who was arrested in May 1982 with Bernard Kolelas, and other political prisoners, including imprisoned asylum-seekers. The report was submitted to the government with recommendations for safeguards against torture which included, in particular, limiting the time for which detainees may be held incommunicado and ensuring that all prisoners held for more than a few days are referred to an independent judicial officer. After submitting the document, which had not been acknowledged by the Congolese authorities by the end of 1985, Amnesty International received reports that detainees arrested in the second half of the year and held at the headquarters of the national security service had been subjected to mock executions and repeated severe beatings. Detainees were apparently not given any kind of medical assistance and there was no provision for them to lodge complaints about their ill-treatment.
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of several Zairian asylum-seekers and recognized refugees, some of whom had been living in the Congo for many years. They included Antoine Gizenga, a former Deputy Prime Minister in Zaire, who was arrested when he arrived from Angola in April. Another Zairian arrested in July, Eke Akanga Nkoy, had been detained on a number of previous occasions and forcibly repatriated to Zaire in November 1982. By the end of 1985 Amnesty International had received no reply from the authorities to its request for information concerning the legal grounds for their imprisonment nor was it known whether they were still detained in the Congo.
Amnesty International was investigating the situation of a number of students who were reportedly arrested following a demonstration in Brazzaville in November against a government decision to reduce student grants. According to some sources, three students were killed when the security forces attempted to break up the demonstration which then became violent, but the deaths were not confirmed by the authorities. Many demonstrators, including students and members of religious sects which had not been registered officially, were arrested and apparently accused by the authorities of acting on instructions from opponents of the government. There were reports of those arrested being beaten in detention but none were known to have been brought to court and, at the end of 1985, it was unclear whether those arrested were still in custody.
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
