Malawi
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of several prisoners of conscience. It was also concemed about the long-term detention without trial of a number of other known or alleged opponents of the govemment. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports that prisoners were being subjected to torture, among them political detainees.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of Orton and Vera Chirwa, who were both serving life sentences for treason and had been adopted as prisoners of conscience. They remained in custody at the end of the year, apparently at Mikuyu prison near Zomba. Orton Chirwa, a former govemment minister, and Vera Chirwa, a law lecturer, were arrested in December 1981. In 1983 they were sentenced to death for treason after a trial in the Southem Region Traditional Court which was unfair. The subsequent appeal process before the National Traditional Court of Appeal was similarly flawed and resulted in the confirmation of the conviction and sentence imposed by the lower court. The text of the appeal court's judgment, made public by Amnesty Intemational in 1984, itself raised serious questions about the conduct of the lower court: for example, relating to the question of jurisdiction, the refusal to admit defence witnesses and evidence, the acceptance of prosecution evidence clearly inadmissible in law and the "unnecessary abuse" of the defendants. In June 1984, after intemational appeals, Life-President Dr H. Kamuzu Banda commuted the death sentences on Orton and Vera Chirwa to life imprisonment. In April 1985 Amnesty Intemational again appealed to Life-President Banda to release the couple. The organization recaUed that the decision to commute the death sentences had been a compassionate gesture but also drew attention to those sections of the appeal court judgment which had highlighted the shortcomings in their trial and argued that therefore their conviction should not be allowed to stand.
Amnesty International also adopted as prisoners of conscience three joumalists detained in March as a result of their professional activities and stiU held without charge at the end of 1985. They were Jonathan Kuntambila, chief editor of the Daily Times, the government-owned daily paper; Sandy Kuwale, a senior editor for the Malawi News Agency (MANA); and Paul Akomenji, also a MANA editor. The reason for their detention appeared to be a
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	65	Japan
report from MANA which ap{>eared in the Daily Times of 1 March, reporting a speech by the country's Official Hostess, Cecilia Tamanda Kadzamira, during a meeting on women and development. The Daily Times reported Cecilia Kadzamira as saying "Man cannot do without woman", a remark which she subsequently denied making, although the official UN transcript contained it. It appeared that the remark was deemed offensive to Life-President Banda, who is a bachelor. On the same day that the press report of the speech appeared, Jonathan Kuntambila, Sandy Kuwale and Paul Akomenji were arrested. Another journalist. Bertha Mwesu of the Malawi Broadcasting Corporation, was arrested on 3 March after she had protested about the arrests. She was released without charge after about a month.
An unknown number of people continued to be detained without trial because of alleged opposition to the govemment. In April Amnesty International sought information from the Ministry of Justice about Aleke Banda, former Secretary General of the mling Malawi Congress Party (MCP) and cabinet minister; Francis Pollock Mhango, a joumalist with a Roman Catholic publisher; and Femdo Mfipa, a former public servant attached to the district administration in Nsanje in the south of the country. All were believed to have been held as political detainees for long periods without charge or trial. Amnesty Intemational's inquiries received no response. A number of junior government officials were also reported to be in detention as a result of allegations that they were opposed to the govemment of Life-President Banda.
The organization was also concemed about reports of the arrest of individuals in Malawi's Central Region who had been accused of being supporters of the late Aaron Gadama, a govemment minister who had died with two cabinet colleagues in May 1983. The official explanation for their death was that they had been involved in a car accident, but it was widely alleged that they had been killed by the authorities. There were also reports that individuals had been imprisoned and harassed on account of their support for Dick Matenje, the Secretary General of the MCP, who had died with Aaron Gadama. At the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was investigating reports that one prisoner detained as a Matenje supp>orter had died in custody in Zomba prison.
Amnesty International also received reports about two police officers arrested in early 1984 and still detained without charge at the end of 1985. It was alleged that the reason for their detention was that they had attempted to prevent other officers from ill-treating suspects.
At the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was investigating new reports of the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly
66	Amnesty International Report 1986
political detainees, in the custody of both the police and the prison authorities. It was alleged that beatings of political detainees and criminal suspects were common and that many political prisoners were kept permanently in chains and denied exercise. In one case, that of a man arrested for possessing banned literature, it was alleged that he was severely beaten and tortured with electric shocks. In another case, it was alleged that a person arrested for his supposed political views was suspended upside down for half an hour.
