Taiwan
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of 23 prisoners of conscience arrested between 1975 and 1980 and welcomed the release of two of them on medical grounds. It continued to investigate the reasons for the detention of some 60 political prisoners and learned of the detention of some 50 others. Three military intelligence officers were convicted of involvement in the murder in October 1984 of a journalist in the USA. Six executions of criminal convicts were reported.
Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about the ill-health of several prisoners of conscience who were reportedly denied adequate medical care. It welcomed the release on bail, on medical grounds, on 28 March of Lu Hsiu-lien, a writer and publisher who was serving a sentence of 12 years' imprisonment for sedition. She had been arrested in December 1^9 with other executives of the opposition magazine Formosa. On 21 December theologian Lin Hung-hsuan, sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in the same case, was also released on medical grounds. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to ensure adequate medical care for Chen Ming-chong, a pharmacist detained since 1976, and to release him. It was also concerned about the health of several other prisoners of conscience who severely restricted their intake of food, some of them for several months, to demand the release of political prisoners. Among them was Shih Ming-teh, the general manager of Formosa, serving a life sentence; Huang Hua, former deputy editor of the Taiwan Political Review, who was serving his third prison term for his non-violent political views; Pai Ya-tsan, a candidate in the 1975 general election, who was arrested for the content of his campaign leaflets; and Yang Chin-hai, a businessman and active supporter of opposition candidates in local elections, who was arrested in 1976.
On 9 March Hsu Chao-hung, a businessman who lived in Japan, was arrested after being deported to Taiwan by the Japanese authorities. On 12 July the Taiwan Garrison Command announced his prosecution under the Statute for the Punishment of Sedition for having formed a "Taiwan Democratic Party" in Japan and having distributed literature advocating the independence of Taiwan. Amnesty International was concerned that he appeared to have been held incommunicado for four months and that his conviction on 16 September might have resulted from a confession made under duress.
262	Amnesty International Report 1986
He was sentenced to six years' imprisonment.
Lee Ya-ping, publisher of the Chinese-language International Daily News published in Los Angeles in the USA and chairperson of two private schools in Kaohsiung, was arrested on 17 September by the Taiwan Garrison Command under the Statute for the Punishment of Sedition for circulating banned copies of her newspaper in Taiwan. These contained articles said to support peace talks between China and Taiwan and an interview with the Chinese Ambassador to the USA. Amnesty International urged the authorities to release her. A military court sentenced her to two years in a reformatory but she was released on 26 September into the "protective control" of her relatives. She was allowed to return to the USA.
Amnesty International was concerned about the arrest between 2 and 4 July of four people in connection with the publication of secret minutes of a government meeting to discuss ways to curb opposition magazines and to restrict freedom of expression. Only one person was prosecuted. On 9 August Chen Pai-ling, an employee of the Government Information Office, was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment under Article 132.1 of the criminal code for disclosing secret documents. His sentence was suspended by the Taiwan High Court on 13 November.
On 23 July Amnesty International asked the authorities for information on the Anti-Hooliganism Law which had been passed by the Legislative Assembly on 10 July. It was concerned that the law could be used against non-violent political activities and that the authority to decide if a person was a "hooligan" as defined by the law rested with the executive.
Three military intelligence officers were prosecuted following an official investigation into the involvement of government officials in the murder in October 1984 in the USA of Henry Liu, an American journalist who wrote a critical biography of President Chiang Ching-kuo. On 19 April Vice Admiral Wang Hsi-ling, Director of the Defence InteUigence Bureau, was sentenced to life imprisonment for murder and two other officials were sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment for assisting in the murder. Amnesty International welcomed the statement made by Prime Minister Yu Kuo-hwa on 15 March that the intelligence agencies had been ordered to take measures to prevent any such involvement in the future.
Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about the execution of six criminal convicts. Five were civilians sentenced by a military court on charges of robbery, gun smuggling, drug trafficldng, rape, kidnap and attempted murder. Their executions took place within two months of their sentencing. The sixth had been convicted by a civilian court of rape, murder and robbery.
Amnesty International Report 1986
