Brazil
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about continued reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects and prisoners in many parts of Brazil. There was an increase in the number of politically motivated killings of mral trade union leaders, peasants and others during land disputes, allegedly carried out by gunmen hired by local landowners. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about persistent allegations that the authorities failed to investigate such killings effectively. Nevertheless, the organization welcomed official inquiries into some of the worse abuses.
In March the first civilian govemment after 21 years of military rule was inaugurated. Amnesty Intemational welcomed several measures introduced by the govemment which strengthened respect for human rights. In July the govemment legalized the Brazilian Communist Party and all other communist groups and organizations. Previously, under the National Security Law, membership of a communist party carried a penalty of up to five years' imprisonment. In the past, this legislation had been used to detain prisoners of conscience. On 23 September Brazil became the 34th state to sign the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Throughout 1985 the Brazilian press carried allegations of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects and prisoners, many of whom were minors. As a result of these reports, several state authorities set up inquiries and in some cases initiated criminal prosecutions.
Amnesty Intemational believed that conditions in police stations and remand centres in the state of Minas Gérais appeared to infringe the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and to amount to cmel, inhuman and degrading treatment. In May Amnesty Intemational sent a telegram to the Govemor of the state and to the Minister of Justice in Brasilia to express concem about a series of killings in prisons and police stations in Minas Gérais.
130	Amnesty International Report 1986
Amnesty International leamed of 15 deaths between March and the end of May after inmates had allegedly drawn lots to select victims to be killed by fellow prisoners in protest against poor prison conditions and the regular use of torture. Overcrowding in the Delegada de Furtos e Roubos, police station, in Belo Horizonte, for example, was such that there were reportedly 30 prisoners to a cell with less than one third of a square metre of space per person. Amnesty Intemational called upon the authorities to investigate publicly these killings. The Ministry of Justice replied that the worst centres in Minas Gérais were to be closed and prisoners transferred to proper state prisons. By the end of 1985, however, no closures had been reported, and protests continued.
Amnesty Intemational monitored the progress of inquiries into allegations of torture set up by a number of state authorities. In Minas Gérais state a parliamentary commission of inquiry was set up by the Legislative Assembly in September, following continuing allegations of torture in the state's prisons, detention centres and police stations. One of the cases the commission intended to investigate was the alleged torture of a 14-year-old boy, William Marques da Süva, who had been detained in August in the police station in Belo Horizonte on a charge of fraud. The boy claimed that he had been beaten on his hands and feet with pieces of mbber and given electric shocks.
Four police officers were suspended from active duty in Porto Alegre in the state of Rio Grande do Sul in September, pending a police inquiry into the alleged torture of two suspects in September 1984 in the Palacio da Policía, Central Police Station. The inquiry opened after the arrest in July of a police inspector on other criminal charges. The inspector produced taped and photographic evidence of alleged torture sessions in the Central Police Station; two of the victims were subsequentíy identified and made formal complaints of torture. Local human rights organizations claimed that the police had systematically tortured criminal suspects for a number of yeai^. The state Secretary of Public Security also called for an investigation into allegations that victims who died under torture were buried in secret cemeteries in Itapoa, Gravatai and Guaiba.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational received similar reports of the torture of criminal suspects from other parts of Brazil, in particular Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo and Recife.
Mario Eugênio de Oliveira, a joumalist, was shot dead in November 1984, allegedly by police officers belonging to a death squad in Brasilia (see Amnesty International Report 1985). In June three military police officers were placed in pretrial detention and charged with homicide, and the former Secretary of Security for the Federal District, Colonel Lauro Rieth, and two of his advisers, were
131	Amnesty International Report 1986
to be prosecuted for prevarication and obstructing the investigation into the killing.
Amnesty Intemational had been concemed for some years about the number of mral trade union leaders, lawyers, peasants, Indians and others killed in the context of land disputes. From May 1985 there was a sharp increase in the number of Idllings of rural workers and their advisere, particularly in the states of Para, Goias, Maranhào, Bahia and Minas Gérais. The organization believed that many of the victims had been killed because of their participation in mral trade unions or in other groups seeking to inform mral workers of their rights and to resolve conflicts over land tenure. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about persistent allegations that the state authorities and the police failed to conduct prompt, effective and impartial investigations into such killings, or to take action when reports were submitted to them alleging that gunmen were threatening to kill rural workers. Amnesty Intemational considers that persistent failure to prosecute the perpetrators of such abuses may be evidence of acquiescence in the crimes by the state authorities concemed, and may encourage their being repeated.
A govemment report documented 261 killings which had occurred in the course of land disputes during 1985. The victims included 188 mral workers, 14 rural trade union leaders, four lawyers, a priest, two church workers, eight Indians and 28 others described as landowners andpistoleiros (gunmen). In 1984,116 mral workers were reported to have been killed. Amnesty Intemational requested a copy of this report from the authorities. After a number of such killings Amnesty International expressed its concem to the state authorities and urged them to initiate full and impartial investigations.
For example, on 24 December Amnesty Intemational sent telegrams to the govemor of the state of Para and to the Ministers of Justice and Agrarian Reform and Development, expressing concem about the killing of Joâo Canuto de Oliveira, president of the mral trade union of the town of Rio Maria in the south of Para on 18 December. Joào Canuto de Oliveira and other advisers to peasants seeking legcil title to land in the area had reportedly received death threats from pistoleiros allegedly in the pay of local landowners. Joâo Canuto de Oliveira had repeatedly called on the authorities at local, state and federal levels to disarm gunmen menacing peasants in the area. In early December two peasants and a photographer were killed, and a number of other people wounded by gunmen in Rio Maria. On 14 December Joâo Canuto de Oliveira presented a formal complaint to the police station about continued death threats in Rio Maria and again called for the gunmen to be disarmed. He was shot dead at point blank range outside the town cemetery four days later
132	Amnesty International Report 1986
by two unidentified gunmen. Amnesty International urged a full investigation into his death and into what action the police authorities took in response to his complaint about gunmen operating with impunity in the area.
Amnesty Intemational sought information from the Ministry of Justice in August on investigations into the killing of Father Ezechiele Ramin, an Italian missionary, kiUed on 24 July on the borders of Matto Grosso and Rondônia states. In December Amnesty Intemational urged a full investigation into the killing of Julio Rodrigues Miranda, a pedant trade unionist, on 6 October in the town of Unai, Minas Gérais, and the reported continued death threats to his 22-year-old daughter, the president of the local mral trade union.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating reports that on 23 November Manoel Monteiro de Sousa, a 78-year-old peasant, was killed in the settlement of Pau Santo, municipality of Lago do Junco, Maranhao state, when a force of 80 military police fired into peasants' houses while evicting them firom the settlement. The organization was concemed about other reports that military police in the state of Maranhao arbitrarily detained and tortured a number of posseiros (squatting peasants) involved in land claims in several small settlements in the south of the state.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed for the safety of members of the Pataxo Hâ-Hâ-Hâe Indian community in the Paraguaçû-Caramaru reserve in the state of Bahia (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Amnesty Intemational again appealed to the authorities in January as it feared that the lives of the Pataxo Hâ-Hâ-Hâe were at risk because of the failure of federal police and state authorities to disarm mercenaries allegedly responsible for earlier attacks. The mercenaries were reportedly employed by ranchers who the Indians claimed had illegally settied on the reserve. While the organization takes no position on land disputes, it was concemed about reports that on 22 November during an eviction, a force of 130 military police held Indians in custody for seven hours, beat them and threatened them with summary execution. The military police were said to have been accompanied by members of the mercenary force. Twenty-nine Indians were reportedly wounded, seven of whom needed hospital treatment.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
