Mexico
Amnesty International was concemed about continuing reports of torture and the use of practices which facilitate torture, such as arrests without warrant and incommunicado detention. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about reports of killings of members of independent peasant organizations and mral trade unions in the context of land disputes. The killings were attributed to civilians said in many cases to be members of the official peasant organization, the Confederación Nacional Campesina (CNC), National Peasant Confederation. In a number of such cases Amnesty International urged the government to ensure that prompt and thorough investigations were undertaken and all those responsible brought to justice. There had been similar cases in previous years in which the authorities had failed to take effective action against those responsible, and appeared thereby to have acquiesced in the abuses.
No new cases of prisoners of conscience came to Amnesty
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	175	Japan
Intemational's attention during 1985, although it continued to work for the release of three prisoners of conscience. Irregularities and delays in trial proceedings were, however, of concem to Amnesty International in a number of cases of political prisoners which the organization was investigating.
In January an Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Mexico. The delegates had meetings in Mexico City with senior govemment officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Interior Ministry and the Federal Attomey General's office. They also met the state Attorney Generals and state Govemors of Chiapas and Oaxaca. The mission was in response to an invitation by the Mexican Govemment to Amnesty Intemational to discuss the findings of a memorandum submitted to the govemment in October 1984 focusing on human rights violations in mral areas of Oaxaca and Chiapas (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). The state Attomey Generals provided the mission delegates with extensive legal details on the cases raised in the memorandum. After analysing this and other available information, Amnesty Intemational sent its conclusions to President Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado in November. The November memorandum included a number of recommendations for making human rights guarantees more effective in mral Mexico. It urged the authorities to ensure prompt and fuU investigations into all cases of political killings and to bring those responsible to justice; it similarly c^led for prompt and impartial investigations into allegations of torture even when no formal complaint had been made through legal channels. The memorandum suggested measures to strengthen fair trial guarantees in mral areas, by ensuring that Indian prisoners were promptly informed, m their own language, of the charges against them, and of their rights of defence and appeal; by improving the legal assistance available to detainees in mral areas; and by ensuring that trials were completed within the time Umits estabhshed by the Constitution. In December the Mexican Govemment promised a detailed response to the memorandum and reiterated its wish to cooperate with Amnesty Intemational.
In July Amnesty Intemational wrote to the then Deputy Attomey General of Mexico expressing concem about several cases in which Federal District Judicial Police were alleged to have tortured detainees during criminal investigations. Cuauhtémoc Estanol Razo, Ignacio del Angel Castellanos and Eduardo Roque Rosario said they were arrested without a warrant on 15 April by officers of the Federal District Judicial Police, held incommunicado and tortured for five days. They stated that they had been beaten, bumed with cigarettes and had electric shocks applied to sensitive parts of the body. A medical examination by a court-appointed doctor is reported to have
176	Amnesty International Report 1986
found signs of torture. The three prisoners, who were subsequently transferred to a Mexico City prison on car theft charges, lodged a formal complaint against four senior police officers. One of the officers accused was reported in the press to have denied the torture charge, but to have admitted that torture is often practised by police under his authority during criminal investigations. Amnesty Intemational's letter to the Deputy Attomey General expressed concem about this and other recently reported cases of torture by Federal District Judicial Police officers in view of repeated govemment assurances that strict measures were taken to prevent torture.
Further evidence of torture was obtained in September when rescue workers found a number of bodies which reportedly showed signs of torture in the mins of the Federal District Attorney General's headquarters, which was destroyed during the 19 September earthquake. One of the victims, 19-year-old Johnny Hernández Valencia, was one of a group of Colombians detained on suspicion of committing a series of bank robberies. The detainees included his mother, Miriam Giraldo Valencia, who was rescued from the mins of the building. She reportedly told a judge on 28 September that she and her son had been tortured by the Federal District Judicial Police, by electric shocks and beatings, and that they had not been given anything to eat for five days. The Federal District Attomey General admitted that the Colombians had been detained without warrant, but an intemal inquiry carried out in November by the Federal District Attomey General's office was reported to have found no medical evidence of torture.
Also found in the ruins of the Federal District Attomey General's Office on 22 September was the body of Ismael Jiménez Pérez, a student of accountancy at the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), the National Autonomous University of Mexico. His body was reported to have been bound and gagged and visibly marked by torture. Another person, Miguel Guzmán Padilla, was reported to have been found alive in the mined building and was ostensibly taken by the Judicial Police to hospital for medical freatment. His body was later said to have been located in the morgue of San Lorenzo Tezonco, marked identity unknown. Amnesty Intemational called for a full and impartial investigation into all these cases.
In December a Senate bill explicitly making torture a criminal offence and prescribing a penalty of up to eight years' imprisonment passed the first stage of legislative approval. It included provisions that no statement obtained under torture would be admissible in court and that the authorities were obliged to register a formal complaint in all cases which came to their attention.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	177	Japan
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of politically motivated killings in several states. Conflicts over land, many of which had persisted for years, formed the background to many of these killings. In June Amnesty Intemational appealed for a full investigation into the killing of Alfredo Morales Hernández in August 1984 and Arcadio Hernández Hemández on 3 March 1985, in the state of Hidalgo. Both men had been imprisoned and accused of several criminal offences, but released under an amnesty on 12 May 1984. Both were believed to be members of an independent peasant organization. Campesinos Unidos de la Sierra Oriental (CUSO), United Peasants of the Eastem Sierra. Although the killings were said to have been perpetrated by civilians. Amnesty Intemational urged an investigation in view of previous reports that official security forces had participated alongside civilians in such attacks, and that the authorities had failed to act against those responsible (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985).
In October Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals to the Govemor of the State of Chiapas for a full investigation into the killing on 4 October of lawyer Andulio Gálvez Velásquez, an official of the Comitán branch of the Central Independiente de Obreros Agrícolas y Campesinos (CIOAC), the Independent Union of Agricultural Workers and Peasants. Andulio Gálvez was well-known locally for his legal work on behalf of peasants detained on charges stemming from land disputes. Before his death Amnesty Intemational had received reports of ass<issination attempts and threats against him and other CIOAC leaders in the Comitán region. According to reports, on 5 October two witnesses to his killing — Felipe de Jesús Santis and Eleazar Velasco, both of whom worked with Andulio Gálvez in a mral credit bank — were detained without warrant in Comitán by State Judicial Police. They were reported to have been blindfolded and tortured while under police interrogation, apparently in an attempt to incriminate them in the killing. Following public pressure they were freed after two days, and it was later reported that two of the four gunmen alleged to have participated in the killing of Andulio Gálvez had been detained. However, a third, who was alleged to have led the group, had been wanted for arrest for other attempted killings since January but no steps appeared to have been taken to detain him.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release of five prisoners of conscience. They included three leaders of the Coalición Obrero Campesina Estudiantil del Istmo (COCEI), Worker-Peasant-Student Coalition of the Isthmus, Leopoldo de Gyves Pineda, Carlos Sánchez López and Manuel Vásquez Nicolás. They were arrested in December 1983 and accused of more than 18 offences, including
178	Amnesty Intemational ñepoñ 1986
murder, arising from political disturbances in the town of Juchitán, Oaxaca, but Amnesty Intemational did not believe they had used or advocated violence and considered the criminal charges politically motivated. Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of a fourth COCEI leader, Jesús Vicente Vásquez. Another prisoner of conscience released during the year was José Manuel Hernández Martínez, a Tzotzil Indian community leader from Venustiano Carranza, Chiapas. On 1 March Gustavo Zárate Vargas was released after a successful appeal to the Supreme Court against his conviction on drugs and arms charges. Amnesty Intemational believed the charges against him to be unfounded and adopted him as a prisoner of conscience in 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985).
Amnesty Intemational also welcomed the release during the year of 13 prisoners whose cases it was investigating, in the states of Oaxaca and Guerrero.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about long delays in trial proceedings in a number of cases. One was that of Rafael Ramirez VUlaneuva, a member of the Organización Regional Campesina del Occidente (ORCO), Western Regional Peasant Organization, who was detained in the state of Jalisco on 15 September 1983 and held in unacknowledged detention for five months (see Amnesty International Report 1985). In Febmary 1984 he was transferred to Mexico City and accused, along with 10 other prisoners, who were members of another regional peasant organization, of a series of bank robberies in the state of San Luis Potosí. There were allegations that all of the prisoners had been tortured by severe beatings, having water forced up their nostrils and being threatened with the rape or torture of members of their families. In February 1984 the case was transferred to the District Court of San Luis Potosí. The prisoners themselves were not transferred to that state until December 1984, and at the end of 1985 the trial had still not been completed.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the "disappearance" of Celestino Acevedo Ortiz. He was believed to have been arrested on 20 January in Mexico City on his way home from a political meeting. He had left his village of Yozoyuxi in the San Cópala region of Oaxaca 14 years previously and had been living and working in Mexico City since then. He was a member of the Movimiento de Unificación y Lucha Triqui (MULT), Triqui Movement for Unity and Stmggle. Amnesty International had received reports over a number of years of the arrest, torture and assassination of members of this organization. Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of Celestino Acevedo but his whereabouts were stül unknown at the end of 1985. Amnesty International continued to investigate 30 other cases of people who had "disappeared" between 1974 and 1983 and
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	179	Japan
whose cases the organization did not believe had been clarified to the satisfaction of their families.
Amnesty International intervened on a number of occasions in 1985 to ask the Mexican authorities not to deport Salvadorian refugees back to their country of origin where Amnesty Intemational feared they could face human rights violations including extrajudicial execution.
On 18 March Mexico signed the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
