United States of America
Amnesty International's main concem continued to be the death penalty. Eighteen prisoners were executed during the year, bringing to 50 the number of people executed since 1977. They included the first juvenile offender to be executed since 1964, in violation of international standards prohibiting the execution of people aged under 18 at the time of the crime. Amnesty International also investigated several criminal trials and complaints of ill-treatment at a maximum security prison.
From 21 June to 1 July an Amnesty International mission visited Rorida, Georgia, Louisiana and Texas to discuss the death penalty. More than two-thirds of all executions carried out since 1977 were in these four states. The mission met the aides and counsel to the governors of Rorida and Texas; the Attorney General of Georgia; the Deputy Attorney Generals of Texas and Louisiana; the Boards of Pardons and Paroles in Georgia, Louisiana and Texas; the Chief Justice of the Rorida Supreme Court; the chiefs of police of Houston, Texas, and Atlanta, Georgia, and other officials. The mission also met lawyers representing defendants in capital cases.
The delegation raised the arbitrary and uneven imposition of the death penalty, including racial disparities. Amnesty Intemational also raised several cases in which prisoners were executed despite strong grounds for granting clemency.
Executions were carried out in the following states in 1985: Texas (six); Rorida (three); Georgia (three); Virginia (two); Louisiana (one); South Carolina (one — the first in the state since 1962); Nevada (one) and Indiana (one case in which the prisoner had dropped his legal appeals and was the fourth person to be executed "voluntarily").
A total of 1,642 prisoners were under sentence of death in the USA in December 1985.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	197	Japan
Roosevelt Green, executed in January in Georgia, was an accomplice to a murder committed by a co-defendant. According to reports, Roosevelt Green had not been present when the killing (of a kidnap victim) occurred but the court found that he had l^en negligent in leaving the victim alone with a man he knew to be dangerous. The US Supreme Court denied an application for a stay of execution by a tied vote with one of the justices absent due to illness.
John Young, executed in Georgia in March, was convicted in 1977 of the killing of three elderly people when aged 18. A week before his execution, his court-appointed trial lawyer submitted an affidavit to the appeals court, stating that he had failed to conduct an adequate defence, due to his many personal problems at the time of John Young's trial. Among other things, the lawyer had failed to raise mitigating evidence at the sentencing hearing regarding the defendant's background, including his having witnessed the murder of his mother at the age of three and his subsequent traumatic and neglected childhood. The lawyer, who had been disbarred from legal practice shortly after John Young's trial, had left Georgia and could not be found eariier. However, the appeal was denied on the technical grounds that his evidence was submitted too late.
Several executions appeared to cause prolonged suffering. In the execution of Stephen Morin by lethal injection in Texas in March, technicians are reported to have taken more than 40 minutes searching for a suitable vein in which to insert the needle.
Amnesty Intemational was additionally concemed about the imposition of death sentences on juveniles, in clear violation of intemational standards. On 11 September Charles Rumbaugh became the first juvenile offender to be executed in the USA since 1964. He had been condemned in 1980 for a murder committed during the course of a robbery when he was 17 years old. On 5 September Amnesty Intemational issued an intemational news release about juvenile offendere on death row in the USA, citing Rumbaugh's case. Amnesty Intemational pointed out that the execution of prisoners for crimes committed when they were under 18 was contrary to the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the American Convention on Human Rights and guidelines set out by the UN Economic and Social Council. The US had signed but not yet ratified the Covenant and the Convention.
In July Amnesty Intemational had written to the Governor of Texas emphasizing that intemational standards recognized that the death penalty was "wholly inappropriate" for people under 18 at the time of the crime. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemor to commute the death sentences which had been imposed on nine
389	Amnesty International Report 1986
juvenile offenders in Texas.
In September 1985 there were 35 juvenile offenders under sentence of death in 16 US states.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate a number of cases in which prisoners charged with criminal offences alleged that the real motive for the prosecution was their membership of political or ethnic groups.
In January an Amnesty Intemational observer attended an evidentiary hearing before Ae Federal District Court, Los Angeles, California, in the case of Elmer "Geronimo" Pratt, a former Black Panther Party (BPP) leader convicted of murder in 1972. Elmer Pratt alleged that he had been "framed" by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) which he claimed had improperly colluded with the state prosecuting authorities to secure his conviction. The hearing was held to examine the facts arising from new information obtained by the defence from FBI files after 1979 under the Freedom of Information Act. At the time of Ehner Pratt's arrest, there was an FBI counter-intelligence program (aimed at dismpting and neutralizing US domestic groups believed to threaten state security, including the BPP), and Elmer Pratt was personally targetted for "neutralization"; a key state prosecution witness was an FBI informant; information about a second possible suspect had been withheld; the FBI had suppressed its own surveillance evidence which might have exonerated Elmer Pratt. None of this information had been made available to the defence at the time of trial.
Amnesty International had described Elmer Pratt's case and the evidence of FBI misconduct in a report published in October 1981 : Proposal for a commission of inquiry into the effect of domestic intelligence activities on criminal trials in the USA. Although Amnesty Intemational had reached no conclusions on guilt or innocence in this report, it had called for a full inquiry into Elmer Pratt's case to determine whether he had been denied a fair trial.
The evidentiary hearing, held from 21 to 24 January, was the first full hearing of the new evidence. Elmer Pratt's earlier appeals to the California State Appeals Court had been tumed down without a hearing. Amnesty Intemational's observer was unable to establish conclusively that Elmer Pratt had been "framed" on the basis of the evidence presented to the hearing; however, the hearing had not refuted his claims. The observer noted that some documents fi^om FBI files were examined in camera by the judge. Amnesty International's observer believed that some matters might be clarified in the judge's decision, which had not been given by the end of 1985.
In May the US District Court denied a motion for a new trial in the case of Leonard Peltier, a leading member of the American Indian
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	199	Japan
Movement (AIM) who had been convicted in 1977 of the murder of two FBI agents. The ruling was based on the court's examination (at a hearing in October 1984) of alleged govemment withholding of evidence at his trial. The suppressed evidence — subsequently obtained by the defence from FBI files — included a 1975 teletype from an FBI ballistics expert stating that the gun alleged to have been Leonard Peltier's had contained a "different firing pin" to that used in the killings (see Amnesty International Report 79S5). At the October 1984 hearing, an FBI ballistics expert had testified that the teletype was only a progress report and that a bullet casing later found to match "positively" with Peltier's gun had not been tested at that time.
Amnesty Intemational stated publicly in October 1985 that it believed that the suppression of the teletype and "other related evidence" might have "seriously prejudiced the outcome of Leonard Peltier's trial". Amnesty Intemational said that it believed that the interests of justice would best be served by granting Leonard Peltier a new trial. Amnesty International sent an observer to an appeal against the District Court's mling, which was heard by the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals on 15 October. The appeals court had not given its decision by the end of 1985.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of Indians charged with violating fishing regulations whose convictions were upheld by the Federal Court of Appeals in September (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985).
Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Assistant Secretary of the Army (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) in March, appealing for clemency in the case of Keith Mather, sentenced in 1968 to 18 months' imprisonment for deserting from the army. Keith Mather had left the army because of his conscientious objection to the Vietnam war and had lived in Canada until 1980. He was arrested in December 1984 and placed in military detention. Keith Mather's sentence was reduced to 10 months and he was released in April.
Among the other cases studied by Amnesty Intemational were some in which the defendants did not deny the acts of which they were accused, but said that they were motivated by conscience. Amnesty Intemational sought to assess whether they could be considered prisoners of conscience if imprisoned. On 14 November an Amnesty International observer attended part of the trial of 11 people charged with violating Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) laws by helping undocumented Guatemalans and Salvadorians to enter and remain in the USA. They were charged jointly with up to 67 violations, each of which carried a maximum sentence of five years' imprisonment. The defendants, who belonged to various religious denominations, were members of the "sanctuary move-
200	Amnesty International Report 1986
ment". For several years the movement had offered refuge and assistance to Salvadorians and Guatemalans it believed to be refugees whose lives would be in danger if returned to their countries. The defendants claimed that they had been forced to take action on religious and humanitarian grounds because of the US Govemment's failure to grant political asylum to most Salvadorians and Guatemalans who had applied for it. The trial was still continuing at the end of 1985 and Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the case.
Amnesty Intemational investigated allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners. On 7 January an Amnesty Intemational observer attended a Federal District Court hearing held at Marion penitentiary, a federal maximum security prison in Illinois. The hearing was pcirt of a lawsuit brought by inmates of the prison, who alleged that conditions in the prison violated constitutional standards against "cmel and unusual" punishment. Since October 1983 Marion inmates had been held in continuous "lock-down" (cellular confinement) and subjected to other deprivations. The lawsuit also examined complaints that prisoners had been beaten by prison guards in November 1983 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Although the magistrate (assigned by a federal judge to hear the case and make recommendations) recommended in August that there had been no constitutional violation of the prisoners' rights, a final decision by the judge was still pending at the end of the year. On 26 June Amnesty Intemational's observer had also attended a congressional hearing into complaints about conditions at Marion prison. However, the hearing was inconclusive: it lasted for less than one day and, apart fi^om the committee's chairperson, was attended by only one member of Congress.
Amnesty Intemational submitted information on the cases of Jay Pinkerton, Charles Rumbaugh and James Terry Roach to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary and arbitrary executions.
On 20 September Amnesty Intemational submitted a complaint to the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States about the case of juvenile offender James Terry Roach, sentenced to be executed in South Carolina. The lACHR appealed to the US Secretary of State for James Terry Roach's execution to be stayed pending its consideration of the complaint. Neither a stay nor clemency was granted and James Terry Roach was executed.
Amnesty Intemational also appealed to the US authorities on several occasions not to deport Salvadorian refugees back to their country of origin, where Amnesty Intemational feared they could face human rights violations including extrajudicial execution.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
VII	201	Japan
