Turkey
Amnesty International was con-cemed about the continued imprisonment of several hundred prisoners of conscience, widespread and systematic torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and the imposition of the death penalty. The organization was also concerned about the fairness of trials before military courts, because of inadequate access to lawyers, prisoners' inability to consult privately with their lawyers and the use in evidence of confessions obtained by torture.
In July Amnesty International published a report, Turkey: Testimony on Torture. It detailed allegations of torture in police stations, detention centres and prisons between 1980 and 1984 and called on the Turkish Government to combat the use of torture.
Amnesty International Report 1986	305
At the end of 1985 martial law was still in force in nine of Turkey's 67 provinces and a state of emergency existed in a further 16 provinces, including Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir. The exact number of prisoners of conscience was not known, but according to official statistics published in the Cumhuriyet newspaper, on 1 November 1985 there were 15,569 political prisoners, of whom Amnesty Intemational believed at least some hundreds to be prisoners of conscience. Many other defendants in political trials were conditionally released while their trials continued, or were not taken into custody.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational included members of political parties and groups, trade unionists, writers, journalists, publishers, academics, members of the Kurdish ethnic minority and members of religious groups, both Islamic and Christian.
People imprisoned under Article 141 of the penal code, which prohibits "membership of illegal organizations", included alleged members of the illegal Turkish Communist Party and of other left-wing parties which had been legal until they were banned after the September 1980 military coup. Amnesty Intemational knew of only one member of the Turkish Workers' Party (TIP) in prison at the end of 1985, but others faced imprisonment as a result of sentences passed in 1984 and trials of TIP members continued in various parts of the country. At the end of April the retrial of members of the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Party (TIKP) concluded; nine defendants were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment and six to between five years and six years six months. Some defendants were free pending appeal; others remained in prison. Trials of members of the Turkish Socialist Workers' Party (TSIP) took place in various parts of Turkey and Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience 11 TSIP members on trial in Istanbul. (See Amnesty Intemational Report 1985 for all above cases.)
On 19 December the Plenary of the Military Courts of Appeal in Ankara ruled that the Turkish Peace Association (TPA) case (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983, 1984 and 1985) should be sent back again to the military court of first instance in Istanbul for retrial because of "insufficient investigation". The request for the release of the 12 defendants still in prison was rejected.
The trial of leaders, officials and advisers of the Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DISK), which started in December 1981, continued (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983, 1984 and 1985). At the end of 1985 all the defendants were free pending completion of the legal proceedings, except those held on other charges.
Journalists, writers and publishers were prosecuted throughout
306	Amnesty International Report 1986
1985 under various articles of the penal code and the Press Law. Many were charged under Article 142 of the penal code with "making communist propaganda". Some remained free pending the completion of legal proceedings, others were imprisoned for short periods or permitted to convert their prison sentences to fines. During 1985 Amnesty International learned that Feyzullah Ozer, who was already serving a total of 18 years and six months' imprisonment in (¡^anakkale Special Prison for "making communist propaganda", faced two ftirther trials on similar charges. He was one of the editors of Kitle, a weekly political journal associated with TSIP until it was banned in 1979, and the charges related to articles published in 1977 and 1978.
The trial of 59 intellectuals (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985), charged with violating Martial Law Decree 1402 by signing a petition for an end to human rights violations was still in progress at the end of 1985. The defendants remained free.
Many Kurds remained in prison throughout the year. Some were charged with or convicted of violent offences; others, charged on account of non-violent activities for the preservation of the Kurdish language and culture and for recognition of the Kurds as a separate ethnic group, were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. Among these were two lawyers — Ru§en Arslan (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983) and Mumtaz Kotan Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 and 1985) — who were released in February and May. Amnesty Intemational received no news of the reported trial of Mehdi Zana, a former Mayor of Diyarbakir already serving sentences totalling more than 30 years (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 and 1985). Recep Mara§li, the director and editor of Komal Publishing House in Istanbul (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 md 1985), in prison since January 1982 and already sentenced to a total of 29 years and 1 month's imprisonment in connection with various publications, membership of an iUegal Kurdish organization and statements he had made in court as part of his defence, received another seven-and-a-half year sentence in 1985, but Amnesty International was not informed of the charge. He was held in Diyarbakir Military Prison.
In February leading members of the National Salvation Party were acquitted at a retrial of intending to adapt "the basic social, economic, political or judicial orders of the State to religious principles and beliefs", as prohibited by Article 163 of the penal code (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 and 1985). In September a military court of appeal ratified the acquittals for all but one of the defendants; a further retrial was ordered for Sevket Kazan.
In June a court of appeal quashed the sentences passed in December 1984 under Article 163 on 23 Jehovah's Witnesses (see
Amnesty International Report 1986	307
Amnesty Intemational Report 1985) and ordered their release. The case was returned for retrial to the court of first instance which upheld its previous verdict and imposed sentences of from five to eight years. The defendants were in provisional liberty at the end of 1985, pending a further appeal.
Other prosecutions under Article 163 took place during the year, including that of Emine §enlikoglu, a writer and chief editor of the periodical Mektup, who was sentenced in May to six years three months' imprisonment because of a book she wrote. She was adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience. Members of Islamic sects convicted during the year under Article 163 included four members of the Nur sect; Sefa Sargin and AM Yildiz were each sentenced to six years and eight months' imprisonment for organizing a Nur school and Yasar Cagdas and Kemal Mak received sentences of four years and two months for attending the school.
In August and December Amnesty Intemational wrote to Prime Minister Turgut Ozal about three Greek Cypriots — Andreas Hatjiloizou, Andreas Oistas Kassapis and Leontios Leontiou — taken prisoner by the Turkish Armed Forces during the hostilities in Cypms in 1974 and missing since then (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1974/75, 1975/76, 1978, 1980, 1981). Amnesty Intemational told the Prime Minister that there was evidence that the three men had been held in Turkish prisons and called for an investigation into their whereabouts. No response had been received to either letter by the end of 1985.
Political cases continued to be heard by military courts, even in those provinces no longer under martial law. Some new cases were heard by State Security Courts (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that lawyers defending political prisoners were impeded in many ways; in particular by insufficient access to their clients and the lack of private consultations. Amnesty Intemational was informed by lawyers that in many cases the only evidence produced by the prosecution was statements allegedly induced by torture and later retracted in court.
Allegations of torture of both political prisoners and ordinary criminals continued throughout 1985. These related both to people held in incommunicado detention in police stations and to prisoners in military and civilian prisons. The permitted 45-day detention period was reduced to 30 days in May in those areas still under martial law. A bill amending the duties and powers of the police, passed by the Turkish Grand National Assembly (TBMM) in June, allowed the 24-hour maximum detention period in areas not under martial law to be extended to 15 days in cases involving three or more people. In areas under a state of emergency the detention period
308	Amnesty International Report 1986
could be further extended by order of the prosecutor.
Among the allegations of torture received was that of a lawyer who was detained in Istanbul in March. He was held for 35 days at Istanbul Police Headquarters and for six days at Selimiye Military Prison. He believed that the police were trying to find evidence upon which to charge him because of his defence of political prisoners, but in spite of being subjected to various forms of torture, including being hung by his wrists and given electric shocks, he refused to sign a statement prepared by the police and was eventually released without charge. His allegations were corroborated by a fellow detainee. Another lawyer, §akir Keçeli, wrote a detailed account of his torture and that of others in July and August by police officers of the Arms-Ammunition Branch and Political Branch of Yozgat Directorate of Security. He described how he was detained as the result of false information given under torture and how he in turn gave false information, which resulted in further detentions, when he could no longer bear the torture.
In October Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate allegations that prisoners in Sagmalcilar Prison in Istanbul had been severely beaten on 30 September. Reports of ill-treatment of prisoners in military and civilian prisons were received throughout 1985. In December Amnesty International wrote to the Turkish Chief of General Staff about conditions in military prisons; many prisoners were reported to have been held in solitary confinement for several years and to have had no contact with relatives, lawyers or fellow prisoners, nor exercise in the open air. Amnesty International named some prisoners said to have been held in such conditions since 1983. The letter referred to the reported lack of medical treatment for many seriously ill prisonei^; three prisoners were named whose deaths in 1985 were alleged to have been caused by torture and/or denial of adequate medical treatment.
In November Amnesty International delegates visited Turkey in order to investigate reports of the refoulement (forcible return) of Iranian refugees who Amnesty International feared could become prisoners of conscience or be subjected to torture or execution on their return to Iran. They held talks with officials in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Directorate of Security on procedures applied to Iranian asylum-seekers, particularly in the border area. At the end of 1985 Amnesty International was preparing a memorandum with recommendations on this issue to be sent to the Turkish authorities.
No executions took place during 1985 but 108 new death sentences were reported in the T?urkish press. Amnesty International did not know the exact number of people under sentence of death at the end of the year, but believed it to be several hundred. Cumhuriyet
Amnesty International Report 1986	309
reported on 26 December 1985 that 91 death sentences were awaiting ratification by parliament. Amnesty Intemational appealed throughout the year for a halt to executions and for the abolition of the death penalty.
In April, Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concems in Turkey under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-caUed "1503 procedure").
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Dl-treatment in Soviet prisons, corrective labour colonies and psychiatric institutions was a special focus of concem. Amnesty Intemational was also disturbed that many individuals continued to be imprisoned, or confined indefinitely in mental hospitals, solely for the non-violent exercise of their human rights. During 1985 it leamed of 46 death sentences and of 27 executions.
In November Amnesty Intemational wrote to Andrei Gromyko, who had been elected President of the USSR Supreme Soviet following the death of Konstantin Chemenko in March. The organization urged him to exercise his constitutional authority to grant an amnesty to all prisoners of conscience, and to initiate a sweeping program of legislative reforms. Amnesty Intemational urged the repeal of the laws restricting freedom of expression and freedom of conscience, and the introduction of measures to protect the rights of individuals in detention. These would include extending the powers of the procuracy to supervise conditions in psychiatric hospitals and corrective labour institutions, and laws to ensure that prisoners on remand were brought promptly before a judge. In conclusion Amnesty Intemational called on the government to reduce the number of capital offences with a view to eventual abolition of the death penalty, and to publish the number of death sentences passed and carried out each year.
In April the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet declared an
310	Amnesty International Report 1986
amnesty to mark the 40th anniversary of the ending of the Second World War. Like previous amnesties, this excluded prisoners convicted on political charges and on criminal charges commonly brought against prisoners of conscience. To Amnesty International's knowledge only one prisoner of conscience was amnestied — but he was reimprisoned on the same charge seven days later. Jonas Matulionis, a Lithuanian priest, had originally been serving three years' imprisonment for "disturbing the public order" after leading an All Saints' Day procession without permission.
Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of more than 580 individuals whom it knew or suspected to be prisoners of conscience, but believed the tme number was much Wgher.
Reports reaching Amnesty Intemational indicated that Soviet political prisoners were systematically ill-treated and sometimes even tortured. In a File on Torture in the USSR published in June, Amnesty Intemational examined the legal context in which ill-treatment took place, illustrating its concerns with evidence received since 1980. Soviet law sanctions hunger as a means of correction and punishment in the prisons and corrective labour colonies where most prisoners of conscience are held. The report said that prisoners suffered chronic hunger and medical neglect and were required to perform teixing compulsory labour. Sometimes courts imposed these conditions on prisoners who were too old, or too ill, to survive them. Several prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty Intemational died in imprisonment after medical advice to release them was rejected.
In more than 50 cases, prisoners of conscience were systematically beaten by officials or by convicts acting with official consent, according to allegations received by Amnesty Intemational since 1980. Most were prisoners in investigation prisons awaiting trial who, the report said, were an easy target for abuse. They could legally be held incommunicado for as long as nine months while their case was being investigated, and during that time were not even required to appear before a judge, as a safeguard against ill-treatment. Some political prisoners forcibly held in psychiatric hospitals for unlimited periods were also allegedly beaten or given powerful dmgs, after they had refused to repudiate their views.
Prisoners were entitled by law to send uncensored complaints about their treatment to the procuracy, which was responsible for seeing that their legal rights were observed. But often their complaints were confiscated by labour colony officials, or sent for investigation to the very officials of whom they had complained. Cut off from relatives and without access to lawyers, prisoners had little possibility of asserting their rights. The report was deeply critical of the safeguards for inmates of psychiatric hospitals. They had no
Amnesty International Report 1986	311
established procedure for sending complaints to the procuracy and were given pen and paper only at the discretion of doctors. All their letters were censored. In Amnesty International's experience, the authorities routinely punished prisoners who complained, and suppressed their complaints. Amnesty International knew of no case in which allegations of ill-treatment had been subjected to thorough, independent investigation, or in which officials responsible for alleged ill-treatment had been disciplined.
Information Anmesty International received after publication of the report amplified its concerns. Sixty-one-year-old Yakov Dirksen, a Baptist prisoner of conscience of long standing, died in June. In September Amnesty International learned that prisoner of conscience Vasyl Stus had died, aged 47. A Ukrainian poet and human rights advocate, he was sentenced in 1980 to 15 years' imprisonment and exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda", and put in the harshest category of labour camp. In 1983 he was held in almost continuous solitary confinement with reduced rations, as a punishment for writing poetry. Amnesty International appealed to doctors throughout the world to intercede on his behalf when it learned he was reportedly suffering from angina, gastric ulcers and renal disease. He was allowed no visits during his imprisonment.
Vasyl Stus was imprisoned in special regime labour camp Perm 36-1, where three prisoners of conscience died in 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). In September Amnesty International wrote to Aleksandr Rekunkov, the Procurator General of the USSR, urging him to investigate fully the deaths of Vasyl Stus and the other three men, and to make public both the methods of his inquiry and its findings. It also appealed to him to release the prisoners' medical records and the results of their post-mortem examinations to their relatives and to allow them to arrange independent autopsies. To Amnesty International's knowledge none of its requests was met.
In 1985 a number of prisoners of conscience had their imprisonment extended for activities which Amnesty International believed constituted the legitimate exercise of human rights. Four prisoners who continued to speak and act according to their conscientiously held beliefe faced fresh charges of "circulating anti-Soviet slander" or "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and were given new terms of imprisonment. They included Mykola Horbal, a Ukrainian Helsinki monitor, sentenced in April to a ftirther 11 years' imprisonment and exile on the second charge. All were convicted on evidence given by camp officials or criminal prisoners, in hastily arranged trials that Amnesty International feared did not meet international standards of fairness. It was not known, for instance, if they were allowed defence lawyers of their choice, or if their trials were open to relatives.
312	Amnesty International Report 1986
In five known cases labour camp officials brought a charge of "malicious disobedience" against prisoners of conscience whom they had repeatedly punished for lodging complaints about their treatment. All five were convicted and given new terms of up to three years' imprisoment. One was Tatyana Osipova, who had led more than 200 hunger-strikes in her Mordovian labour camp, after her written complaints about the ill-treatment of fellow prisoners were ignored. Amnesty Intemational detailed the events which led to her prosecution in a report on Conditions for Women Prisoners of Conscience in the "Small Zone" published in July.
The authorities continued to use psychiatric confinement for political purposes. At least eight people with a history of harassment for political activity were put in mental hospitals against their will during an eight-day intemational youth festival which began in Moscow in July, apparently to prevent them meeting foreigners. They were rele^d shortly afterwards. Another seven individuals were reportedly confined during 1985 for distributing religious literature or writing complaints to the government. Since all were confined to prevent or punish their peaceful exercise of human rights. Amnesty Intemational regarded them as prisoners of conscience. Unlike in previous years, in 1985 Amnesty Intemational learned of no prisoners of conscience being put in top-security special psychiatric hospitals.
The state has a monopoly of publishing in the USSR and censore all printed materials. Individuals who produce uncensored literature and circulate it from hand to hand risk imprisonment for "circulating anti-Soviet slander" or "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". At least 65 people were imprisoned on these charges in 1985, most of whom received up to three years' imprisonment on the first charge. Some had actively dissented from specific govemment policies — such as Ukrainians, Estonians and Georgians who had allegedly criticized official treatment of non-Russiar« in the USSR. Others had printed religious texts on home-made presses. Amnesty Intemation-al's attempts to send an observer to the trial of Boris Mityashin, a lorry-driver from Leningrad, were unsuccessful. He was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment and exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda", after being convicted of circulating unofficial poetry.
One prisoner of conscience was reportedly acquitted of "circulating anti-Soviet slander" — only the second acquittal ever on a political charge known to Amnesty Intemational. He was Viktor Walter, pastor of a Pentecostalist congregation who went on hunger-strike to demand the right to emigrate. In April, the Maritime Territorial Court found him not guilty of telling foreign radio stations about the strike. He was nevertheless imprisoned for organizing it and Amnesty
Amnesty International Report 1986	313
International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Religious believers are obliged to register their congregations with the state, and, in doing so, give up their right to teach religion to children, evangelize, or appoint their own clergy. Unregistered churches are Ulegal and their members are liable to imprisonment of between three and 10 yeai^ for "violating the laws separating church from state" or engaging in "anti-social religious activity". The courts imprisoned more than 70 people on these charges, most of them Baptists and Pentecostalists who rejected any restrictions on their religious freedom and so refused to register. Others belonged to congregations forced to meet and worship illegally, because the authorities had rejected their applications to register. They included devotees of Hare Krishna, and members of the Jehovah's Witness Church, traditionally banned in the USSR.
It remained very difficult for most Soviet citizens to leave their own country. Leaving without permission was a crime punishable by up to three years' imprisonment for "illegal exit abroad", or 15 years and even death for "treason — in the form of flight abroad".
Amnesty International learned of an Estonian worker, Enn Veepalu, arrested in March on a charge of "illegal exit abroad" and at least another 35 would-be emigrants who were imprisoned on other charges. One was Vladimir Balakhonov. While working as a translator at the World Meteorological Office in Geneva in 1972, he had applied for political asylum, but withdrew his application to rejoin his family in the USSR. In 1973 he was arrested for "treason — in the form of refusal to return from abroad" and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment. After his release in 1985 he applied for an exit visa and wrote to the UN Secretary-General asking for his help in emigrating. In May Amnesty International learned that he had been rearrested for "circulating anti-Soviet slander" and appealed for his release as a prisoner of conscience.
Eleven Jews applying to emigrate were also imprisoned on this charge for allegedly sending appeals abroad or circulating material on Israeli life. Amnesty International investigated the cases of another five Jews imprisoned on criminal charges which it suspected were false. Several Pentecostalists and citizens of German origin were imprisoned for public order offences, after drawing attention to their wish to emigrate through hunger-strikes and vigils.
Soviet newspapers do not always report death sentences at the time they are passed. Although Amnesty International learned of 46 death sentences in 1985 and 27 executions, it believed the real figure was higher. The USSR is formally committed to the abolition of the death penalty, but retains 18 capital offences in peacetime. Most of the sentences reported in 1985 involved crimes of violence. Amnesty
314	Amnesty International Report 1986
International appealed against every death sentence of which it learned, and in November submitted to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions the cases of two men — reported only as Yegorov and Komissarov — who had been sentenced to death without right of appeal by the Belorussian Supreme Court.
