Angola
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of many alleged government opponents, including alleged supporters of armed opposition groups, some of whom had been held for several years. At least 100 people were tried by military tribunals and the organization was concemed about the apparent unfairness of their trials and about the 20 or more death sentences imposed. At least 14 people were executed in 1985, and the death {penalty remained a major Amnesty Intemational concem.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports of abuses committed by the Uniào Nadonal para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, which continued fighting the govemment throughout 1985. It was particularly active in the centre and south of the country where it apparently controlled some territory. During 1985 UNITÀ released about 30 foreign workers whom it had taken captive but Amnesty Intemational had no information about other prisoners held by UNITA. There were also unconfirmed reports of summary executions by UNITA.
Amnesty Intemational was unable to estimate how many political detainees were held by the govemment but they numbered at least several hundred. The main holding centres were in the capital, Luanda, and at Bentiaba detention camp in Namibe province, but some political detainees were also held in other prisons in certain provincial capitals. Sometimes prisoners' families did not know their whereabouts after prisoners were moved from one prKon to another. Suspected govemment opponents were arrested in 1985 but Amnesty
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
Intemational was unable to ascertain most of their identities or to distinguish which of them, if any, were prisoners of conscience. Many detainees arrested in previous yeai^ also continued to be held without charge or trial. They included some who had already been held for over 10 years. For example, Lizamoa Mongambenge, who had been serving with a unit of the Zairian armed forces operating in Angola when he was captured near Luanda in September 1975, had been detained without charge since then. In October 1985 Amnesty Intemational drew attention to his case in a letter to President José Eduardo dos Santos, appealing for an end to his indefinite detention without trial, but, by the end of the year, had received no response.
According to Angolan law, suspects may be held without charge for a maximum of seven months. In practice, however, it appeared that many political detainees were held without trial for longer periods under administrative detention orders. Many of these untried detainees were arrested on suspicion of supporting UNITA; relatively few were brought to trial. Tliere were few safeguards against the arrest and detention of political suspects by the security services on little or no evidence.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the detention without trial since 1979 of Kiassonga Manuel Peterson, former head of the security services of the Frente Nacional da Libertaçào de Angola (FNLA), National Front for the Liberation of Angola. He was arrested shortly after he returned voluntarily to Angola ft^om Zaire to take advantage of a pohcy of clemency announced in 1978. Other former FNLA members and some from UNITA are reported to have retumed to Angola or surrendered to the authorities without subsequently being imprisoned. Amnesty Intemational's inquiries to the Angolan authorities about the legal status of Kiassonga Manuel Peterson received no reply by the end of 1985. However, the authorities did inform Amnesty Intemational of the release in September of one long-term detainee, Lukas Tshisumba. He had been arrested in 1979, when he was about 16 years old, on account of his alleged Unks with UNITA. Amnesty Intemational also leamed of the release during 1985 of other political prisoners who had been detained without charge for longer than the maximum f>eriod of seven months. Among them were four of the eight Zairian refugees arrested in March 1983 in Luena, the capital of Moxico province (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985).
Although many people were detained without trial for political reasons, some were brought to trial in 1985. Most appeared before military tribunals but some were tried by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal, a civilian court. Amnesty Intemational received information about some 50 p>eople who were tried by military courts for
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
21	Japan
offences allegedly committed on behalf of UNITA. Of these, 17 were reportedly sentenced to death, mostly for espionage, treason or compUcity in armed rebellion. Most trials of this nature were reported in the local press but it is possible that the true number of those prosecuted, sentenced to death and executed was greater than that known to Amnesty Intemational.
Amnesty Intemational beheved that the trials before military tribunals may have failed to meet intemationally recognized standards of fairness, independence and impartiaUty. For instance, the independence of military courts appeared to be hmited since the judges, who are officers in the army which is engaged in fighting UNITA, could be dismissed by the Minister of Defence and defence lawyers were allegedly not given adequate opportunity to present a full defence for their clients. Some defendants who were sentenced to death by mihtary courts in 1985 had been paraded in public after their arrests in 1983 and 1984 when they made self-incriminating statements. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that statements made by prisoners in the presence of journalists or other members of the public may have been made under duress. It is not known whether those sentenced to death by military courts were able to lodge appeals with the mihtary appeals court, the Armed Forces Military Tribunal. In view of the absence of information about appeals hearings. Amnesty International was concemed that the right of appeal guaranteed by Angolan law may not have been respected. Whenever a death sentence was announced Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to ensure that the defendant was given a full opportunity to appeal and also urged the commutation of the sentence. In March the organization submitted its concems about the death penalty to the authorities and requested information clarifying the appeals procedure but there was no response by the end of 1985.
On 12 April five people who had been sentenced to death and two others who had received sentences of imprisonment were paraded before a crowd of people at the Electro Sports Stadium in the city of Huambo. They had been convicted three days previously of various acts of terrorism and two of them were accused of participating in a bomb attack in Huambo city in April 1984 in which between 30 and 100 people were reported to have been killed. The crowd called for the death of all seven convicted prisoners. None of the seven were known to have been executed by the end of 1985.
In April and August 1985 a total of 14 people who had been sentenced to death in three separate trials between August and December 1984 were reported to have been executed. Seven of them had been paraded before a crowd of hundreds of people at a factory in Lubango, Huila province, before they were led to the firing-squad.
vili
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
On 16 September the People's Revolutionary Tribunal sentenced three people to death. Amilcar Femandes Freire, a 65-year-old Portuguese businessman, Francisco Alberto Albarrau, a despatch clerk, and Agatáo Dangala Kamati, a soldier in the Angolan army, were found guilty of passing economic, political and military information to the South African secret services. The Appeals Court confirmed these death sentences on 11 October. However, they were not known to have been executed by the end of the year.
In early 1985 Angolan government sources reported that UNITA had executed a number of its own supporters in southern Angola. They apparently included members of minority ethnic groups within UNITA some of whom were non-combatants. The same sources alleged also that a number of UNITA officers were executed after they had been suspected of dissidence. Amnesty Intemational was unable to obtain independent confirmation of these reports.
During the year some 30 foreign workers who had been captured by UNITA in 1984 and 1985 were released. However, Amnesty International was concerned that one other foreigner, a national of Sao Tomé and Principe captured in 1979, was still being held at a UNITA camp where he was working as a doctor. According to UNITA sources he remained there voluntarily, but his family believed that he was being held against his will.
