Indonesia and East Timor
Over 100 Muslim activists, many of them possible prisoners of conscience, were tried and convicted during 1985 for offences ranging from subversion to spreading false information. Reports that susp)ec-ted criminals and alleged government opponents had been extrajudicially executed continued to be received. Five judicial executions were carried out, including the execution by firing-squad of four men alleged to have held high-ranking positions in the banned Partai Komimis Indonesia (PKI), Indonesian Communist Party, all of whom had been in detention for over 16 years. Amnesty International remained concerned about reports of torture and ill-treatment by the Indonesian security forces of prisoners, many of whom were suspected of supporting independence movements in Irian Jaya and East Timor.
On 25 June Amnesty International published a report, East Timor: Violations of Human Rights, and launched a campaign to publicize its concerns there. The report documented cases of extrajudicial executions, "disappearances", torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and unfair trials which had taken place in the territory since the Indonesian invasion of December 1975. The report called on the
225	Amnesty International Report 1986
Indonesian Government to investigate fully reports of such abuses, to clarify the fate of those reported to have "disappeared", to issue instructions to all security forces prohibiting the use of torture in all circumstances, to prosecute people found to have perpetrated such abuses and to make information on political trials publicly available. The government issued a statement rejecting Amnesty International's allegations and stating that the report was based on "rumours and questionable sources". At the same time, however, it began to release lists of prisoners brought to trial in Dili, a development Amnesty International regarded as positive.
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. These included Muslim activists arrested in late 1984 following a violent demonstration on 12 September 1984 in the Tanjung Priok area of Jakarta (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Many were brought to trial in 1985. In March Amnesty International asked the Ministry of Justice for permission to send observers to the trials but was refused. At least eight Muslim muballigh (preachers) were arrested after the demonstration and charged with subversion under Presidential Decree 11/1963 which carries a maximum penalty of death. They were said to have incited the demonstration and undermined government authority through their writings and speeches. Mawardi Noor, a muballigh adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International, was tried on subversion charges for lectures he gave in 1983 and 1984 in which he reportedly criticized government officials for corruption and argued that certain government policies were contrary to Islamic teachings.
A number of people were arrested in late 1984 for distributing leaflets criticizing the actions of the military during the Tanjung Priok demonstration, when at least 30 people were killed by security forces. Amnesty International knows of 24 people arrested for distributing such leaflets but believes the total figure to be much higher. The organization adopted sbi as prisoners of conscience. Outside Jakarta, sentences for such offences appear to have been particularly heavy. In Temate, two students were sentenced in October to 10 and 15 years for reading a banned leaflet in public.
Among those arrested in the wake of the Tanjung Priok demonstration were several leading members of an opposition group largely composed of retired military officers and politicians. Members of the group had publicly called for an independent commission to investigate the Tanjung Priok incident and criticized President Suharto on constitutional grounds. Haji Andi Mappetahang Fatwa and retired Lieutenant General Hartono Rekso Dharsono were put on trial in August charged with subversion. Haji Fatwa was sentenced
226	Amnesty International Report 1986
in December to 18 years' imprisonment. General Dliarsono had not been sentenced by tiie end of 1985. Amnesty International considered both men to be prisoners of conscience and appealed for their release.
Also brought to trial for offences related to the Tanjung Priok incident were 28 youths accused of using violence against security forces. All but four had been shot by the military during the demonstration and were arrested in hospital. Some appeared to have joined the demonstration, others who lived nearby to have become caught up in it by accident. All were eventually taken to Cimanggis Military Detention Centre where they were reportedly beaten and intimidated and initially denied access to family and counsel. Amnesty International was investigating their cases. It was concerned that their interrogation depositions, later used against them in their trial, may have been extracted by force and threats. All 28 were convicted of criminal offences and sentenced to terms ranging from one to three years' imprisonment.
Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of several prisoners associated with an Islamic school network, some members of which claimed responsibility for a series of bomb explosions in Central and East Java in late 1984 and early 1985. Four students — Andi Sukisno, Sugeng Budiono, Murdjoko and Faizal Fachri — were arrested in Malang, East Java, tried on subversion charges, and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. The four had reportedly attended courses given by the network, but no evidence presented during their trials appeared to implicate them in the bombings. They were also said to have been involved in the publication of a bulletin which criticized the government and accused the Indonesian armed forces of spying on Muslim activists.
Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of three people arrested in Yogyakarta, in connection with a militant Islamic bulletin, al-Ikhwan, which was highly critical of the government handling of the Tanjung Priok demonstration, the national family planning program and other government policies. Amnesty International believed that those arrested in connection with al-Ikhwan — Irfan Suryahardy, who had been released in April after having been detained without charge or trial for over a year since his arrest in February 1984 in connection with another banned publication, and two students, India and Ahmad 2^net Sumarlan — may have been detained for the non-violent expression of their beliefs.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the detention of approximately 200 so-called A-category prisoners, whom the government considered were directly involved in a coup attempt in 1965. The organization was concerned that they did not receive a
227	Amnesty International Report 1986
fair trial and that many would have been eligible for release if the rules on sentencing, remission, and parole had been applied consistently (see Amnesty International Report 1985).
The organization continued to receive reports of the extrajudicial execution of suspected criminals in what appeared to be the continuation of a campaign which reached its height in 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984 and 1985). In February, following numerous reports of such killings. Amnesty International appealed to the Commander of the Armed Forces to instruct aU security forces not to summarily execute suspected criminals.
Amnesty International was also concerned about unconfirmed reports of deaths in detention of suspected supporters of Organisasi Papua Merdeka (0PM), Free Papua Movement, which has been waging an armed struggle for the independence of Irian Jaya from Indonesia since the mid-1960s. The prisoners reported to have been killed had fled across the border into Papua New Guinea in 1984 but were forcibly deported and reportedly imprisoned by the Indonesian authorities upon their return.
Torture and ill-treatment by the Indonesian police and military continued to be reported. In January, Amnesty Intemation^ received reports that several suspected OPM supporters had been tortured in the former Panorama Bar in Jayapura, used as an interrogation centre by Kopassus, the Indonesian Special Forces. Four other suspected OPM supporters forcibly deported from Papua New Guinea in June — Nabot Wanma, Ones Serontouw, Isaak Waroumi and Abraham Hamong — were said to have been tortured following their imprisonment immediately after arrival in Jayapura. Amnesty International was concerned that 12 other refugees deported in October would also face torture.
Torture and ill-treatment were also reported from the Indonesian-occupied territory of East Timor where an unknown number of suspected sympathizers with the armed resistance organization Frente Revolucionaria de Timor Leste Independente (Fretilin), were believed to be in custody in district military commands. In December Amnesty International appealed to the Indonesian Government to investigate reports that several people arrested in early May in Lautem district had been detained and tortured in the district military command headquarters in Lospalos. The Indonesian Government has denied that there are any prisoners outside Dili.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the fairness of trials of political prisoners in East Timor. By the end of 1985 approximately 200 prisoners had been tried, all of whom had reportedly pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit rebellion. Amnesty
228	Amnesty International Report 1986
International urged the Indonesian Government to permit international observers to attend the trials.
In June Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in East Timor under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
In a statement to the UN Special Committee on Decolonization on 8 August, Amnesty International noted that it had received fewer reports of human rights violations in East Timor in 1985 than it had for the corresponding period in 1984 but that, given the previous pattern of violations, a decline in the number of reports could not be interpreted as an indication that the human rights of the East Timorese were now guaranteed. It noted that reports of "disappearances" and arbitrary arrest and detention continued.
Four PKI prisoners were executed by firing-squad in 1985 after more than 16 years under sentence of death. These were believed to be the first executions of PKI prisoners in over a decade and were carried out despite reported informal assurances from the government that such prisoners would not be executed.
Mohamad Munir, former head of the PKI-affiliated trade union federation, was executed on 14 May after his final appeal for clemency had been rejected by President Suharto. Three other prisoners — Gatot Lestario, Djoko Untung and Rustomo — were executed between 1 and 3 July in Madura. All had been accused of involvement in an underground PKI organization in south Blitar in 1967, said to have been planning an armed uprising against the government. The four executions were reportedly carried out in secret. On 23 August Amnesty International appe^ed to President Suharto to stop all executions and commute aU death sentences. It continued to be concerned about 28 PKI prisoners who remained under sentence of death at the end of 1985.
Salman Hafidz, a member of an Islamic organization convicted of armed robbery, murder and subversion, was also executed in February. Several death sentences were imposed on prisoners during the year, among them an alleged drug-trafficker, Husni, in March, and two Muslims convicted of murder, armed robbery and subversion, Abdullah Umar and Bambang Sispoyo, in June. Abdullah Umar had originally been sentenced to life imprisonment; his sentence was changed to death on appeal by the prosecution.
229	Amnesty International Report 1986
