Syria
The main concerns of Amnesty Intemational were the continued detention without charge or trial of thousands of political prisoners under Syria's state of emergency legislation; the imprisonment of over 290 prisoners of conscience; the long-term detention without trial of most political detainees and the detention of political prisoners after the expiry of their sentences; the routine use of torture by the security forces; and the death penalty. During 1985, no responses were received from the authorities to any of Amnesty International's appeals.
Two amnesties were declared during 1985 but only one benefited political prisoner. It was announced by President Hafez al-Assad on 25 January, and covered members of the Tanzim al-Tdi'a al-Muqatila, Fighting Vanguard Organization, a faction of the banned al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun, Muslim Brotherhood, based outside Syria. Between 200 and 500 members were reported to have been released from prison as a result of the amnesty although Amnesty Intemational was unable to verify this. Other members of the Muslim Brotherhood convicted of crimes against the security of the state reportedly remained in prison, and a number of people held on suspicion of belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood were believed to be still in detention.
Amnesty International Report 1986	357
During 1985 Amnesty International worked for the release of 296 adopted prisoners of conscience and was investigating the cases of 182 possible prisoners of conscience. Most of these prisoners had never been tried, and they included officials of previous governments held for up to 15 years; people arrested on suspicion of sympathizing with the Iraqi wing of the Ba'th party and held for over 10 years; members of the legal, medical and engineering professions; and members of banned political parties held for over five years. Amnesty Intemational learned of the release of 16 prisoners on whose behalf it was working, of whom 15 were adopted prisoners of conscience.
Between January and October, 13 members of the banned Communist Party Political Bureau (CPPB) were released. However, Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the continued detention of 144 other party members, 54 of whom were adopted as prisoners of conscience in Febmary, and none of whom had been tried. At the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was seeking confirmation of reports that a further 22 party members had been released.
In January Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience 30 members of the banned Party for Communist Action (PCA) who were arrested between June and August 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). In March, confirmation was received of the release at the end of 1984 of two PCA members. The organization also sought the release of 70 other party members, none of whom has been charged or tried. They included Hind Qahwaji, a 29-year-old agricultural engineer adopted as a prisoner of conscience in June. She was detained for five months between October 1982 and March 1983 and then rearrested in March 1984. According to reports, she was tortured soon after her rearrest and had to have an of>eration on her utems as a result. In July Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of seven PCA members, including Hind Qahwaji, whose health was reported to be poor and deteriorating and who were said to be being denied adequate medical care.
Amnesty International leamed of the release in April of Yusuf Nasir al-'Awdat, a 60-year-old lawyer whose case it was investigating. He was one of a group of about 350 detainees, both civilians and military personnel, who had been brought before the Supreme Court of State Security in a mass trial in August 1971. They had been charged with plotting to overthrow the previous govemment and to reinstate those removed from power in 1966. Yusuf Nasir al-'Awdat was sentenced to life imprisonment, later commuted to 15 years, and was released after serving 15 yeare. However, four others in this group whose 15-year sentences expired in May were reported to be still in detention at the end of October. The four - Mahmud Fayyad,
358	Amnesty International Report 1986
Husain Zaidan, Jalal al-Din Mirhij and Mustafa Fallah - were reported to have been transferred in May to a detention centre in Damascus, then returned to al-Mezze Prison in October. All were said to be in poor health. Amnesty International sought further details on their cases.
In 1985 Amnesty International investigated the cases of three people arrested in 1980, reportedly for founding an organization known as Ittihad al-Nidal al-Shuyu'i (UCS), Union for Communist Struggle. They were said to be among seven people, aged between 14 and 19 at the time, who had issued a statement in early May 1980 announcing the formation of the UCS, and calling for opposition to government policies. By the end of May 1980 they had all been arrested and all copies of their statement were believed to have been seized. TTiree of them - Haitham Kamel Mustafa, his brother Wajdi and Ibrahim Sa'ad - were known to be still in detention in 1985, and were being held without charge or trial in Kafr Sousseh Prison in Damascus. In early October Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Haitham Kamel Mustafa, who was reportedly in poor health and not receiving adequate medical care.
In early June about 700 people were reported to have been arrested in Damascus by the security forces during a demonstration protesting against the killing of Palestinians in the refugee camps of Sabra, Shatila and Burj al-Barajneh in Lebanon in May (see entry on the Lebanon). According to reports, those arrested were mostly Palestinians from the refugee camp of al-Yarmuk in Damascus, but a number of Syrians were also arrested. On 6 June Amnesty International expressed concern to President Assad about the arrests and about reports that some of the demonstrators had been wounded and killed. The organization urged the government to investigate these reports and to ensure that no prisoners were held solely for having expressed their conscientiously held beliefs without having used or advocated violence. Later reports indicated that a number of Palestinians from refugee camps in other cities, including Aleppo and Homs, had also been arrested. At the end of 1985 many of the detainees had reportedly been released but at least 200, said to be supporters of the Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasser 'Arafat, were believed to be still in detention. Among them were reported to be over 90 Palestinians arrested in Lebanon and transferred to prisons in Syria.
Amnesty International learned of the release in October of 31 Lebanese prisoners who had been detained in Damascus, some reportedly since 1978. All were members of the Lebanese Forces' militia. In exchange, 15 Syrian prisoners held by the Lebanese Forces were released in December (see entry on the Lebanon).
Amnesty International Report 1986	359
During 1985 Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in the custody of Syria's security forces. Reports indicated that prisoners continued to be subjected to both physical and psychological torture at all stages of their detention. A number of political prisoners released during 1985 were reportedly tortured to make them sign declarations renouncing their political affiliations as a precondition for their release. In one case, the parents of a political prisoner were threatened with torture in his presence in order to force him into signing such a declaration.
In January Amnesty International renewed its appeals on behalf of Riad al-Turk, the CPPB's First Secretary, after receiving reports that he had once more been tortured while undergoing interrogation in December 1984. His condition was reported to be very serious: he was said to be suffering from kidney failure, deafriess and a broken arm and leg.
A number of urgent appeals were issued during the year on behalf of detainees who were reportedly seriously ill and denied adequate medical care. Among them was 'Abd al-Majid Manjouneh, a 48-year-old lawyer who was reported to be suffering from several ailments, including a slipped disc, diabetes and inflammation of the kidneys. He was arrested together with a group of lawyers following a one-day general strike on 31 March 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1984), 13 of whom continued to be detained without trial. They were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience in 1980.
Amnesty International learned of 15 officially confirmed executions in 1985. Twelve people were executed between May and September, of whom three were military personnel. Of the 12, six had been convicted of spying for Israel and of jeopardizing state security, while the others had been convicted of various crimes including murder, theft and rape. In September Amnesty International reiterated its concern to the authorities about these executions, stating its unconditional opposition to the death penalty. In December three civilians were executed after being convicted of crimes including murder, attempted murder and robbery.
360	Amnesty International Report 1986
