^ : I Tunisia
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of cor^ence; a pattern of arrests of members of political groups and of trade unionists, and their short-term detention, often incommunicado, without charge or trial; the torture and ill-treatment of detainees; and the death penalty, which was extended to cover more offences in 1985.
In September 1985 Amnesty Intemational adopted as a prisoner of conscience Bechir Essid, a lawyer and founder of the Rassemblement nationaliste arabe (RNA), Arab National A^mbly Movement, who had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment in Tunis on 22 March 1984, on charges including defamation of the President and incitement to killing, arson and stealing. The charges were based on two communiqués published in January 1984. He remained at liberty pending his appeal on 22 June 1985 before the Court of Appeal in Tunis, which upheld the conviction but reduced the sentence to one year's imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational obtained copies of these communiqués but did not find any indication of the use or advocacy of violence in them.
On 14 Febmary Mohamed Khemili, Secretary General of the Gafsa branch of the Tunisian League of Human Rights and a member of the Secondary School Teachers' Union, was sentenced by the Court of First Instance in Gafsa to four months' imprisonment, reduced on appeal to three months. He was charged with participation in an unauthorized demonstration and membership of an "illegal secret organization". Amnesty Intemational believed Mohamed Khemili to be a prisoner of conscience and appealed for his immediate release.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of 29 members of the Islamic Liberation Party (ILP) sentenced in August 1983 to between two and eight years' imprisonment (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). During 1985 Amnesty Intemational learned of the release of 11 of these prisoners upon completion of their two-year sentences. In 1985 Amnesty Intemational received reports of two further trials, in March and May, of individuals arrested between December 1984 and March 1985 charged with membership of the ILP and with distributing printed material related to it. They were sentenced to between six months and two years'
Amnesty International Report 1986	361
imprisonment. In September Amnesty Intemational appealed on their behalf, expressing conœm that they might have been imprisoned solely for the non-violent expression of their conscientiously held beliefs. Amnesty Intemational requested details of the circumstances of their arrest and detention, and raised other concems, including reports that some of them had been denied access to lawyers and relatives. The organization raised allegations of torture and ill-treatment during their pretrial detention and called for all such allegations to be independently investigated and the findings made public. By the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational had received no response from the authorities.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational was concemed about a pattem of arrest and short-term detention without charge or trial of members of various political groups and of trade unionists. The detainees were often held incommunicado for up to two months and there were allegations that they were tortured. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly asked the authorities for information about these arrests, urging respect for all safeguards relating to arrest and detention. No reply was received.
During October and November several hundred people were reportedly arrested in connection with the breakdown of annual wage talks between the govemment and the Union générale des travailleurs tunisiens (UGTT), General Union of Tunisian Workers, which resulted in strikes, splits within the UGTT and clashes between police and trade unionists. Among those arrested were Habib Achour, Secretary General of the UGTT, placed under house arrest on 8 November, and three members of the executive committee of the UGTT. Amnesty Intemational appealed for them to be allowed access to both family and lawyers and to be promptly charged or released. The majority of those arrested in late October and early November were later released, but over 100 were reportedly brought to trial.
On 31 December Habib Achour and 12 other trade unionists were tried in Sfax on charges of breaking into and taking control of a fishing cooperative in Sfax in an incident which took place in 1982. The trial was held in camera by decision of the Prosecutor-General. Habib Achour and Mohamed Chaaban, Secretary of the Sfax UGTT, were sentenced to one year's imprisonment. Six other defendants received sentences of six months' imprisonment and the others were acquitted. Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information about this trial.
On 5 March the Tunisian parliament approved a draft law revising Articles 126, 227 and 221bis of the penal code, which increased the number of offences punishable by the death penalty. Amnesty
362	Amnesty International Report 1986
International appealed to President Bourguiba to ask parliament to reconsider its decision and to work towards the eventual abolition of the death f)enalty.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational learned of five executions, all for murder. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities in every case, reiterating its unconditional opposition to the death penalty.
	jfe» ij	
		V. l.
		
Jr		1 VL T^jpC
\		\\ /
		
