Zimbabwe
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of several hundred suspected political opponents of the govemment, including prisoners of conscience, and the "disappearance" of others abducted by people reportedly acting on behalf of the govemment. There were many reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees and the use of the death penalty increased.
The first post-independence elections were held in June and July and resulted in a slightly increased majority for the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union — Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) party of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe.
In October an Amnesty Intemational mission visited Zimbabwe to investigate the organization's concerns, in particular the many detentions of suspected political opponents of the govemment which had been reported since the elections. After the mission had left Zimbabwe, Amnesty Intemational sent a message to Prime Minister Mugabe expressing concem at the large number of political detainees held for long periods and urging the govemment to stop the torture of political detainees in police custody which had been widely alleged to Amnesty International's delegates. When there was no response to this. Amnesty Intemational publicly appealed to the govemment for immediate action to prevent torture and for an impartial inquiry to investigate such allegations. There then followed two meetings in London between Amnesty International representatives and the Minister of Home Affairs in which Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to set up an impartial inquiry to investigate allegations of torture. The Minister refused and instead proposed a joint inquiry by the govemment and Amnesty Intemational, in which Amnesty Intemational would provide the government with names of those who said they had been tortured. This Amnesty Intemational refused to do for reasons of confidentiality and protection of those who had provided information. Amnesty Intemational subsequently submitted to the government a detailed explanation of its original call for an inquiry and a description of the nature of the available evidence.
Throughout 1985 Zimbabwe continued to be affected by the activities of armed anti-govemment guerrillas, commonly termed "dissidents", who were alleged to have been responsible for the killings of civilians, including members of ZANU-PF. The govem-
118	Amnesty International Report 1986
ment alleged that the "dissidents" received aid from South Africa and that they included former members of the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA), which during the war of independence had been the military wing of the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) led by Joshua Nkomo. Govemment representatives repeatedly alleged that senior ZAPU members were responsible for organizing support for the rebels, but ZAPU denied this. The state of emergency, which has been in force in Zimbabwe continuously since 1965, was again renewed by parliament at six-monthly intervals.
Under the Emergency Powers (Maintenance of Law and Order) Regulations the police or other security officials may detain for up to 30 days anyone deemed to be a threat to public order. The Minister of Home Affairs may detain anyone indefinitely on the same grounds. A detainee may be held incommunicado for seven days but then must be given access to a lawyer and family visits. At various times during 1985 it was reported that between 40 and 70 people were being held in Chikumbi Maximum Security Prison in Harare under ministerial detention orders of indefinite duration. They included a number of prisoners of conscience, among them Vote Moyo, a member of Parliament detained since 1982, the Reverend Elia Masiyane, a Lutheran Church minister arrested in 1984, and Dumiso Dabengwa and Lookout Masuku, former ZIPRA guerrilla leaders during the war of independence who had been acquitted of treason and unlawful possession of arms in the High Court in 1983. All were members or supporters of ZAPU, in common with most of those detained. Also detained in Chikumbi were Phineas Sithole and Naison Dhlamini, two leaders of the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), a small opposition party, not connected with the miing ZANU-PF. They were also adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience.
In March a group of 15 trade unionists was arrested in Harare and Kwekwe. Many were members of ZANU-PF and at least one, M. Mashayamombe, had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience before Zimbabwe's independence. They were mainly from the General Engineering and Metal Workers' Union (GEMWU) and included the union's president, S. Nyamhunga. They were apparently arrested because they had accused certain GEMWU leaders of cormption and had organized socialist discussion groups within the trade unions. Amnesty Intemational adopted them as prisoners of conscience. Most were released after a few weeks. The last two to be released were South African exiles Darcy du Toit and David Hemson, who were deported to Britain in late April. David Hemson had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience when under a banning order in South Africa.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	119	Japan
Throughout 1985 large numbers of political opponents were detained by the police or Central Intelligence Organization (CIO), mainly in those areas most affected by armed rebel activity — Matabeleland and parts of Midlands provinces. The number of detentions reported increased sharply after the parliamentary elec-tioiK. In the latter half of the year arrests focused on Bulawayo, the main city in Matabeleland, and were reported to have been carried out by the Police Internal Security and Intelligence (PISI), a special unit responsible directly to the Minister of Home Affairs. Membere and employees of Bulawayo city council were a particular target. At one point in August all the black councillors, who were ZAPU members, were in detention. At different times the mayor and three of his predecessors were detained. Also among those arrested were five ZAPU members of parliament. One of these, Edward Ndlovu, had serious health problems, but was held for several weeks in poor conditions in police custody before being given access to a medical specialist. The allegation against many of those detained was that they had been connected with armed rebels. However, few of those held under the emergency regulations have been charged with criminal offences and Amnesty Intemational believed that the real reason for their detention may have been their support for ZAPU.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of torture of political detainees and others held in police custody. Many such reports referred to Stops Camp, a police and CIO detention centre in Bulawayo. It was believed that at various times during 1985 there were at least 200 detainees in the camp. Former inmates said that most detainees were held in three large "cages" that were open to the elements. Other political detainees were said to be held in eight security cells, sometimes in solitary confinement. It was alleged that some of those in the security cells were kept for long periods in leg-irons. Interrogation and torture were said to have been carried out in a separate block of offices.
Although not all prisoners were tortured, many were reported to have been beaten with tmncheons, rhinoceros-hide whips, mbber hoses or sticks — often on the soles of the feet. Some victims were said to have been hung upside down and beaten, with their heads in buckets of water. In a frequently described torture, the victim's head was forced into a canvas bag full of water which was tied tightly around the neck. When the victim lost consciousness the torturers sometimes kicked him or her in the stomach until the victim vomited the water. The process would then be repeated. Electric shocks were sometimes applied to the feet or genitals while the water bag was over the prisoner's head.
Aninesty International has received reports of torture in Zim-
120	Amnesty International Report 1986
babwe since 1982. Some of the methods described were similar to those used by the former Rhodesian Government. It was reported that many political detainees did not receive detention orders as required under the emergency regulations and so were held unlawfully, nor were they allowed to see a lawyer or relatives within the prescribed seven-day limit.
Throughout 1983 and 1984 Amnesty Intemational had received reports of political killings of civilians by the army during its operations against armed rebels in Matabeleland. No further allegations of large-scale killings by the security forces were received in 1985, although there were isolated incidents in which soldiers or militia were alleged to be responsible for the killings of civilians. Responsibility for such killings was sometimes officially attributed to "dissidents", although contrary reports had been received by Amnesty Intemational. One such case was the killing of seven people in April at a restaurant in Inyathi owned by a member of ZAPU's central committee. The semi-official press alleged that "dissidents" were responsible, but evidence received by Amnesty Intemational cast serious doubt on this.
In January there began a series of abductions and "disappearances" of prominent local figures in the rural areas of Matabeleland and Midlands, most of them known ZAPU members or sympathizers. These abductions continued until about April. The victims were taken at night by armed men and not seen again. Often a number of people would t^ taken from the same village on the same night. Amnesty Intemational documented more than 90 "disappearances" of this sort during the early months of 1985. Joshua Nkomo, the ZAPU leader, presented the names of 56 alleged "disappearance" victims to parliament in March, alleging that the total number of "disappeared" up to that time was 375. He accused the security forces of responsibility for the abductions. Govemment representatives reportedly claimed that "dissidents" were responsible. However, there was evidence that the security forces were involved. For example, many reports referred to the fact that those carrying out the abductions used vehicles (which are not used by the rebels). In some instances, villagers alleged that they recognized those carrying out the abductions as members of the army or police. Also, the "disappearances" were frequently reported to the police, but usually no serious investigation was conducted. Often relatives claimed that the police did not even visit their homes to take statements from witnesses. The fact that most of those abducted were well-known local ZAPU members also suggested that the "disappearances" were politically motivated.
The exact fate of most of the "disappeared" was not known. The
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	121	Japan
Zimbabwean Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace reported in May that it had discovered 11 people in CIO custody in the Midlands town of Kwekwe who had been abducted in April from the nearby Silobela area. However, in most instances relatives believed that those who had "disappeared" were subsequently killed. At the time of the abductions mass graves were reported to have been discovered in Nkayi and Tsholotsho and it was widely alleged that they contained the bodies of "disappearance" victims. Amnesty International urged the government in February to investigate these mass graves and the "disappearances" to estabUsh the fate of the victims and whether members of the security forces were responsible. However, Amnesty International received no reply.
Amnesty International was concerned about the increased use of the death penalty. At least 14 people were reported to have been sentenced to death for murder during 1985. Twelve people are believed to have been executed during 1985, compared with a total of eight during the previous five years since independence. Ten were hanged in one week in August. In 1984 Prime Minister Mugabe and the Minister of Justice had stated that Zimbabwe would consider abolishing the death penalty once the "dissident" problem was over. Despite this, the use of the death penalty increased and, of the 12 executed in 1985, only four were reported to have been "dissidents".
