Korea (Republic of)
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention of a large number of prisoners of conscience. Hundreds of people were detained for short periods, some several times, for participating in peaceful protests or making anti-government statements. Some well-known dissidents were repeatedly placed under house arrest for a few days or for several weeks. In June the authorities' policy towards dissent became harsher and many student leaders and a number of leading political activists and trade unionists were arrested and prosecuted on charges which called for several years' imprisonment. Some 25 prisoners of conscience who had been arrested between 1971 and 1982 remained in detention. Several people interrogated under the National Security Law (NSL) were reportedly tortured and Amnesty International received reports of the ill-treatment of a number of convicted political prisoners. Five executions took place.
On 14 August Amnesty International submitted to the authorities a memorandum detailing its concerns and making a number of recommendations to redress past human rights violations and ensure greater respect for human rights in the future.
Two Amnesty International delegates visited South Korea from 27 November to 7 December. They attended the trial hearings of 13 students accused of subversion in connection with the student publication Kitpal and of 20 students who were accused of subversion and espionage on behalf of North Korea. They also met a number of lawyers, representatives of non-governmental organizations and officials from several ministries, including the Ministry of Justice.
Following student demonstrations, occupations of buildings and displays of support for industrial workers in dispute, in late June the authorities arrested some 60 leaders of university student councils. A
235	Amnesty International Report 1986
number were accused under the NSL of aiding North Korea through their professed ideology of the "three mm" (the liberation of the masses, democracy and unification). Others were charged with organizing illegal demonstrations. According to official statistics, between late May and late October about 2,000 students were taken to police stations for participating in anti-government protests. Of them, 309 were charged under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations (LAD) and faced up to seven years' imprisonment; over 1,000 were referred to summary courts and sentenced to up to 29 days in police detention; most of the others were released with a warning. The press reported that on a number of occasions students responded to police tear-gas with stones or petrol bombs. However, Amnesty International believed that some of the students might be prisoners of conscience.
Throughout 1985 people were detained by police for the peaceful expression of their political views or for taking part in non-violent demonstrations. Their detention lasted from a few hours' questioning to 29-day sentences imposed by summary courts under the Minor Offences Punishment Act. The largest numbers were detained in connection with the 12 February parliamentary election and on the anniversary of the Kwangju incident of May 1980. Those detained came from many walks of life: bookshop managers who stocked books the authorities considered radical; painters whose works depicted the lives of workers; supporters of workers on strike; relatives of political prisoners and participants in meetings against torture; farmers who protested against the government's agricultural policies; students; clergymen; members of dissident organizations of journalists; Buddhist laymen and monks; Christians; and politicians. Some of them were detained repeatedly.
House arrest was also imposed frequently on some 20 well-known dissidents to prevent them from attending or addressing meetings. Such measures were applied when opposition politician Kim Dae-jung returned to South Korea in February; on the anniversary of the Kwangju incident; and during a meeting of international financial institutions in Seoul from 8 to 11 October.
Amnesty International believed that there might be prisoners of conscience among workers arrested during strikes at the Daewoo Motor Company plant in Inchon in April, and in the Kuro industrial estate in Seoul in June.
Among the people charged under the NSL whom Amnesty International considered to be prisoners of conscience were Kim Chin-gyong and Yun Chae-chol, two high-school teachers, and Song Ki-won, a writer and publisher, who were arrested in August. The two teachers had contributed articles criticizing the education system
236	Amnesty International Report 1986
to the first issue of Minjung Kyoyuk (Education for the Masses) which Song Ki-won published. Their trial started on 10 December.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the detention of Song Jin-sup and Lee Sang-don. Both were staff members of the Urban-Ruri Mission in Yongdungpo, Seoul. They were arrested in mid-December 1985 and charged under the NSL in connection with an article on unemployment in the Mission's newspaper. This was Song Jin-sup's third arrest in five months in connection with the Mission's newspaper; in August he had been sentenced to five and in November to 15 days' imprisonment.
On 12 December, Kim Byong-kon, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National Youth Alliance for Democracy (NYAD), a group set up in late 1983 with the stated aims of furthering democracy, raising workers' living standards and the unification of Korea, w^ sentenced to two years' imprisonment. He was convicted under the LAD and Article 1(W(2) of the criminal code of distributing a statement in February to foreign journalists calling on foreign governments to withdraw their support from the South Korean Government. He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
No political prisoners were released under presidential amnesties traditionally granted on certain anniversaries and Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of some 25 long-term prisoners of conscience. Among them was Lee Tae-bok, the owner of a small publishing company arrested in 1981 on account of his endeavours for workers' ri^ts, who was serving a sentence of 20 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International was concerned about his ill-health and made a special appeal for his release. In December 1984 the Seoul High Court had invalidated the preventive detention order issued by the Minister of Justice on prisoner of conscience Kang Jong-kon but on 14 February 1985 the Minister renewed the detention order. Kang Jong-kon had been detained in preventive custody since February 1981 when his sentence under the NSL expired.
Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about the reported torture of a number of p)eople questioned by the Anti-Communist Bureau of the National Police or by the Agency for National Security Planning (ANSP) and urged them to investigate these allegations. In March several students and graduates of Seoul National University were reportedly tortured by police who were questioning them about the student magazine Kitpal. On 30 August and 1 September the chief editor of the national newspaper Dong-A Ilbo, together with the head of its political section and another journalist, were detained by the ANSP and allegedly severely beaten.
Amnesty International was concerned about the reported torture
237	Amnesty International Report 1986
of Kim Keun-tae, a political economy graduate and former chairman of the NYAD. On 4 September Kim Keun-tae was taken to the Namyoung-dong office of the Anti-Communist Bureau of the National Police and interrogated there until his transfer to the Seoul prosecutor's office on 26 September. One month later he was charged with praising North Korea and organizing demonstrations. At his trial, which started on 19 December, he claimed that he was repeatedly given electric shocks, beaten, subjected to "water torture", threatened with death, and denied sleep and adequate food. Amnesty International's concern about the reports of Kim Keun-tae's torture was reinforced by the fact that his relatives and lawyers were denied access to him for many weeks. On 12 October a court refused his lawyers' application to have him examined in order to document evidence of torture. On 7 November a court granted a prosecution request to ban him from meeting his wife on the grounds that he might ask her to remove evidence. Requests by his lawyers to see him were routinely refused until 9 December. In November the Supreme Prosecutor's Office stated that its investigations had found no trace of torture and that "Kim's complexion appeared healthy and there was no sign of torture in his walk or other physical and mental movements.
Also of concern to Amnesty International was the health of Lee Ul-ho, another official of the NYAD, arrested on 2 September. At the request of the prosecuting authorities, on 16 October a court ordered him to be examined in a mental hospital. He was said to show suicidal tendencies. Amnesty International called for adequate medical care and an investigation into reports that he had been tortured.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports that 19 political prisoners held in Taegu prison were beaten on 31 July as they held a protest against overcrowding. Lee Chul, an adopted prisoner of conscience, was reportedly beaten unconscious; another prisoner of coiKcience, Chong Ching-kwan, had his teeth broken. The authorities denied that the guards beat Chong Ching-kwan and stated that his injuries were self-inflicted. Chong Ching-kwan subsequently filed a complaint against the prison authorities with Taegu district court. Another prisoner of conscience, Soh Sung, who has been detained since 1^1, was reportedly beaten in Taejon prison in July for going on hunger-strike.
Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death sentences on several prisoners, including Kim Beong-ju, a businessman firom Japan whose death sentence for espionage was confirmed by the Supreme Court on 22 January. Amnesty International also expressed concern to the authorities about the execution on 31
238	Amnesty International Report 1986
October of five people convicted of murder and rape or rape and robbery.
