Gambia
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the arrest of a number of people apparently for political reasons, some of whom were possibly prisoners of conscience, the reported detention without trial of an alleged govemment opponent arrested in 1983, and the death penalty. One person tried in connection with an unsuccessful coup attempt of 1981 was sentenced to death but death sentences imposed before 1985 on the others convicted in this connection were commuted.
The state of emergency imposed in the aftermath of an unsuccessful coup attempt in July 1981 was lifted in Febmary. Under the emergency, police had been empowered to detain people suspected of "acts prejudicial to the public safety or to public order". These powers had been used extensively in the months following the coup attempt to detain hundreds of people suspected of participating in it. Subsequently, however, the powers were used on a much more limited scale to detain other suspected opponents of the govemment, usually for relatively short periods.
In Febmary, shortly before the emergency was lifted, Amnesty Intemational leamed of the arrest of several suspected sympathizers with the Movement for Justice in Africa (MOJA), which had been banned in 1980. Those held included Mariama Manjang, a young woman related to a leading member of MOJA living abroad, who
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
49	Japan
was apparently alleged to be in jxissession of subversive literature, and Wassa Fatty. Dumo Saho, who had previously been detained for "membership of an illegal society" from October 1983 to July 1984, was also arrested. However, all three were released on bail within a short time.
Amnesty Intemational was informed by the govemment in Febmary that two people, who had retumed from exile in Cuba in 1983 and about whose subsequent detention Amnesty International had expressed concem (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984), had been released.
It was confirmed, however, that a third man who returned at the same time, Fansu Camara, was still in custody. The authorities said he was in "protective custody" at his own request. He had allegedly been involved in the attempted coup in 1981. He and the two others were said by the authorities to have retumed voluntarily from Cuba. Amnesty Intemational did not know the legal basis for Fansu Camara's detention.
In July it was officially reported that another alleged coup conspirator had retumed volimtarily to the Gambia from Cuba. Feta Camara, a former corporal in the Gambia Field Force, was arrested and charged with treason. He was brought to trial, convicted and sentenced to death in December 1985.
Earlier, on 24 April, President Dawda Jawara signed an order under section 54 of the Constitution to extend clemency to 16 prisoners sentenced to death after being convicted of involvement in the 1981 coup attempt. Six of them had their sentences reduced to life imprisonment and the sentences passed on the others were commuted to prison terms ranging from 10 to 20 years. This act of clemency on the part of the President followed similar commutations of death sentences in 1984.
