Honduras
Amnesty International's concerns included the detention without trial and the torture of political detainees; trials of political prisoners apparently based on confessions obtained as a result of torture; "disappearances"; and reported harassment and intimidation of Salvadorian refugees by Honduran armed forces, including one serious attack on a refugee camp which resulted in two deaths.
Amnesty International was also concerned about reports that irregular military forces opposed to the Nicaraguan Government operating from bases in Honduras tortured and summarily executed captives. The organization as a matter of principle condemns the torture and execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups. Amnesty International appealed to the Honduran authorities on two occasions following reports that Nicaraguan civilians were being held by the irregular military forces in Honduras.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports that detainees were tortured in the custody of the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (DNI), National Directorate of Investigations, the armed forces and the Fuerza de Seguridad Pública (FUSEP), Public Security Force. Gustavo García España was seized on 3 July by armed men in the northern department of Atlántida, with a Spanish priest who was later released. TTie two men were taken to DNI premises in La Ceiba, where they were reportedly beaten and tortured during interrogation by DNI officers for three days. Despite a writ of habeas corpus , the police reportedly refused to hand Gustavo Garcia over to the courts on three occasions, and only did so after pressure from the Supreme Court of Justice and the Honduran Congress. The press reported that Gustavo Garcia fainted when he was presented to the court on 18 July after more than two weeks' incommunicado detention; he then said he had been "savagely tortured" by members of the DNI who had forced him to confess falsely to offences against state security. Amnesty International urged a full and impartial inquiry into this case and sought assurances that any statement made under torture would not be used in evidence.
Amnesty International believed that the fairness of a number of trials was undermined because prisoners had been held incommunicado for long periods before being charged, and had allegedly been tortured. José Gonzalo Rores Trejo, a 50-year-old shoemaker,was arrested in March 1983 in San Pedro Sula with Inés Consuelo Murillo Schwaderer, who was later released and left the country. The two
170	Amnesty International Report 1986
were reportedly seized without warrant by military intelligence officers, held in secret detention centres without access to a lawyer or members of their family, and repeatedly tortured. Their detention was not acknowledged for 78 days. At the time of their first court appearance on 1 June 1983, both stated that they had been tortured. Inés Murillo was released in July 1984 but at the end of 1985 José Rores — who was reported to be seriously ill with cancer — remained in prison charged with several offences against state security. His trial was said to be still at the indictment stage (sumario).
José Flores was one of a group of 20 political prisoners on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational appealed following reports that on the night of 13 Febmary they were forcibly removed from the cells where they were being held in the Central Penitentiary by a group of soldiers under the command of the prison warden, and for four days placed in a punishment cell. They were said to have been beaten, held naked and incommunicado, and to have had cold water thrown over them at night.
On 17 October a second and "final" report was issued by an Armed Forces Commission set up in March 1984 to investigate 112 cases of "disappearances" submitted by human rights organizations in Honduras. The nine-page report l^ted meetings between the Commission and armed forces personnel named in the submissions but gave no information on the content of the meetings. The report concluded that it was not possible to determine with certainty that military personnel had been involved in the "disappearances" and that none of those said to have "disappeared" were in detention in military or police units. Human rights organizations in Honduras rejected these conclusions. They denied that there had been a proper inquiry and questioned whether a Commission composed only of armed forces personnel could impartially investigate cases in which the military were accused.
Amnesty Intemational believed that the report did not clarify any of the cases it was investigating and continued to seek further information about a number of "disappearance" cases. They included that of José Eduardo López, who was reportedly abducted on 24 December 1984 in San Pedro Sula by army security agents believed to be members of the DNI. José Eduardo López had previously reported that he had received death threats and that he held the state security forces responsible for anything that might befall him. The authorities deny that he was arrested. Another case being investigated by Amnesty Intemational was that of Rolando Vindel González, president of the Sindicato de Trabajadores de la Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (STENEE), the National Electricity
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	171	Japan
Workers' Union, who was abducted on 18 March 1984 during a wage dispute between STENEE and the state-owned power company (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985).
Amnesty Intemational received reports which suggested a pattem of harassment and intimidation of Salvadorian refugees in Honduras. On 3 September the organization issued urgent appeals following an incursion by Honduran troops on 29 August into the refugee camp of Colomoncagua. Eye-witnesses reported that soldiers fired indiscriminately and without provocation at the tents and the refugees themselves with machine guns and rifles. Ten refugees were arrested, over 50 others wounded by gunfire or seriously beaten, two women raped and two people killed during the attack, one of them a two-month-old baby. Three wounded men were taken to hospital in Tegucigalpa and one of them, Santiago Hernández, died on 25 October. He was aged 70 and deaf. At the end of 1985 the 10 men detained remained in custody awaiting documentation to allow them to travel to another country of refuge. Honduran and Salvadorian officials claimed that the camps were being used by guerrillas of the Salvadorian Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberación Nacional (FMLN), Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, for storing weapons and planning guerrilla activity. However, the refugees themselves and intemational relief workers living and working in the camps denied this.
Earlier reports indicated that the refugee camps close to the border with El Salvador — which house about 9,000 Salvadorian refugees — were being kept under close military surveillance, and that refugees had been harassed and threatened. The incidents came at a time when there were reports that the Honduran Government intended to repatriate the refugees or relocate the camps further away from the border. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to ensure the safety of the refugees. With regard to repatriation. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that refugees who retumed to El Salvador because of intimidation in the camps in Honduras, or who were forcibly retumed, faced human rights violations including arbitrary arrest, torture and extrajudicial execution (see entry on El Salvador).
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational received reports of abuses by Nicaraguan armed opposition forces operating from permanent bases in Honduras with the knowledge of the Honduran authorities. Two groups were fi-equently cited as responsible — the Fuerza Democrática Nicaragüense (FDN), Nicaraguan Democratic Force, and the largely Miskito Indian group MISURA. Since reports indicated that these forces routinely resorted to torture and execution of captives. Amnesty Intemational asked the Honduran authorities to guarantee the safety of
172	Amnesty International Report 1986
captives in two cases. In one case, a dtizen of the Federal Republic of Germany, Regine Schmemann, had been seized by MISURA forces on 14 June with forestry technicians Fausto Cristy and Jorge Canales, both Nicaraguans, while the three were working in the northem Nicaraguan department of Zelaya. Tliey were subsequentiy taken into Honduras to the MISURA camp at Srum Laya. Following intemational protests. Regine Schmemann was removed from Srum Laya on 2 July by a delegation of three men, one of whom later identified himself as a Honduran army officer. Amnesty Intemational welcomed the steps reportedly taken by the Honduran army to secure the release of Regine Schmemann and urged that similar measures be taken on behalf of Fausto Cristy and Jorge Canales. In another case. Amnesty Intemational wrote on 27 September to the Honduran President to express concem about eight Nicaraguan teachers who were reported to have been forcibly abducted from Nicaragua between September 1984 and June 1985. Amnesty Intemational believed they were being held captive by the FDN without legal authority in territory under Honduran jurisdiction. In mid-November it was reported that one of them — Maria Mercedes Rivas Obregón — had escaped and retumed to Nicaragua. She told a press conference in Managua that she had been kidnapped by the FDN and held inside Honduras for part of her captivity, where she was raped and tortured. She believed that four of her coUeagues may have been killed by the FDN. No reply was received from the Honduran Govemment in e'ther case.
Information was submitted by Amnesty Intemational to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disapp)earances.
On 24 November the Liberal Party's José Azcona Hoyo was elected President. He was due to take office on 27 January 1986.
