Nepal
Amnesty International remained concerned about continuing arrests of prisoners of conscience, among them large numbers of politicians, political party supporters, teachers and students and some journalists. Nepalese Christians were arrested because of their religious beliefe. Many people were arrested after a number of bomb explosions in June and Amnesty International was concerned that these prisoners were not protected by customary legal safeguards. Over a dozen political prisoners whose sentences had expired were held in preventive detention under the Public Security Act (PSA) and some political prisoner were reportedly held without charge. Amnesty International was also concerned about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners. Legislation was enacted extending the death penalty to ordinary criminal offences, primarily murder.
From 8 January for several weeks, teachers held public meetings and demonstrations to press for the registration of Ûie Nepal National Teachers' Organization (NNTO), and for improved wages. Many hundreds were arrested, and there were allegatioiK of police violence against demonstrators both before and after arrest. In February Amnesty International communicated its concern about these arrests and alleged police ill-treatment. Many teachers were soon released but leaders of the NNTO and others were kept in detention. In April Amnesty International urged the Prime Minister to release all those arrested solely for having participated in non-violent assemblies. Among some dozens of teachers who remained in detention several months later, reportedly without charge, was Devi Prasad Ojha, General Secretary of the NNTO.
Political activity was restricted in Nepal and, under the country's "non-party" system of government, political parties were officially prohibited. Opposition parties, however, continued to exist and the Nepali Congress Party, supported by the Nepal Communist Party and other groups, launched a satyagraha (civil disobedience movement) on 23 May to press for a return to party politics. In the weeks leading up to the campaign. Congress Party members were arrested, for example when collecting signatures on petitions. After the launch of the satyagraha, which involved public meetings, processions and pickets of government offices, thousands of government opponents were arrested, many of whom Amnesty International considered likely to be prisoners
244	Amnesty International Report 1986
of conscience. Journalists accused of writing articles in support of the opposition's activities were also detained, mostly for short periods.
The satyagraha was called off after bomb ej^losions killed eight people in Kathmandu and elsewhere on 20 and 21 June, a form of action from which the Congress Party and other political groups dissociated themselves. Responsibility was claimed by an organization based outside Nepal. However, hundreds of Congress and Communist Party supporters were held under the preventive detention provisions of the PSA imtil late August, when phased releases began. By early December, several dozen people arrested during the satyagraha were still detained in Kathmandu, but Amnesty International did not know how many of those arrested in more remote parts remained in detention.
Several hundred people were arrested after the bomb explosions of whom over 100 were believed to be still held at the end of 1985. Under the Destructive Crimes (Special Control and Punishment) Act 1985, enacted in August, prisoners arrested in connection with the bomb explosions could be held without charge in police custody for investigation for 90 days and this could be extended for a further 90 days with a court's permission. Of particular concern to Amnesty International were reports that the authorities had refused to acknowledge the arrest of some prisoners, who had been denied access to relatives and defence counsel for long periods. In several cases, habeas corpus petitions were filed on behalf of these prisoners. During Supreme Court hearings of a petition on behalf of Ganesh Shah, an engineer in government service before his arrest in late June, police authorities in Kathmandu reportedly twice denied holding him in custody although he was ultimately released around the end of November.
More than 12 pr^ners who had been convicted during the 1970s of politically motivated criminal offences including murder were kept in jail after the expiry of their sentences. When some of them challenged their continued imprisonment through habeas corpus petitions to the Supreme Court, which ordered their release, it became clear that they were being held under the PSA. Amnesty International was concerned that the PSA allows preventive detention under nine-month detention orders which are not subject to judicial review and are renewable up to a maximimi of three years.
Other prisoners reportedly held without charge throughout 1985 included 15 people arrested in January 1984 in Piskar when attending a play said to have been insulting to the monarchy (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Some of them went on hunger-strike in July to protest at their continued detention without charge and Amnesty International inquired about the grounds for their imprisonment.
245	Amnesty International Report 1986
Amnesty International was conœmed about continuing arrests of Christians, either for propagating their faith or for having converted from Hindu^m. It considered them to be prisoners of conscience. Conversion is prohibited under the Constitution. Dozens of Christians were arrested during 1985, some of whom were reportedly ill-treated in police custody. Not all cases brought to court resulted in conviction, although sentences of three months to six years were imposed by the lower courts in many cases. Those involved were released on bail after several weelœ' imprisonment.
Among political prisoners reportedly tortured in police custody was Sarbottam Dangol, on whose behalf Amnesty International issued urgent appeals. Arrested on 29 May apparently on suspicion of involvement in the satyagraha, he was reportedly tied to a bamboo pole, hung upside down and beaten with fists and iron bars, suffering serious injuries to his legs for which he was treated in a police hospital. For several weeks he was denied access to his family. Amnesty Intemational called for an investigation into the reports of torture of Sarbottam Dangol and other political prisoners.
In 1945 Nepal abolished the death penalty for ordinary criminal offences, retaining it only for attacks on the Royal Family, certain anti-state acts such as insurrection and some military offences. Legislation providing for the death penalty was considerably broadened during 1985. The Legal Code was amended to include the penalty of death for certain murders, including those committed during hijacks or kidnappings, by using toxic substances or when "subjecting any person to prolonged torture . . . or recklessly using weapons". The Destructive Crimes (Special Control and Punishment) Act 1985, introduced initially for three years, made available the death penalty for anyone using explosives or weapoi^ to damage public security leading to death. The law was applied retroactively, in violation of intemational legal standards, and provided for in camera trial before a special court appointed by the government, whose composition could be changed by government order. The Nepal Special Services Act 1985, which established a Nepalese intelligence agency, contained the provision that a Special Service employee contravening the conditions of employment (misusing their position or divulging secret information, for example) might face the death penalty "depending on the extent of his guilt".
246	Amnesty International Report 1986
