China
Amnesty International's main concerns were the continued imprisonment of long-term prisoners of conscience and the arrest of other possible prisoners of conscience; the conditions under which they and other prisoners were held and the extensive use of the death p>enalty for a wide range of offences.
Following the publication of the Amnesty International Report 1985, a Foreign Ministry spokesman questioned by foreign journalists in Beijing reportedly said that the question of political prisoners and human rights violations did not arise in China as its constitution granted citizens the right to speak, to meet, to demonstrate and to publish. He reportedly said that the organization's demand that China put an end to executions amounted to interference in domestic affairs and that current circumstances prevented the authorities from abolishing the death penalty.
This was not the only time that the authorities maintained that there were no political prisoners in China, acknowledging only the existence of "counter-revolutionaries". Amnesty International, however, believed that some people imprisoned under this designation were prisoners of conscience.
The testimony of one prisoner of conscience, written in his cell in Beijing Prison No. 1, became available outside China in October. The author, Xu Wenli, an electrician and editor of an unofficial journal, had been arrested in Beijing in April 1981 and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary" offences in June 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1983). Xu Wenli's manuscript, entitled "My Self-Defence" and dated December 1984, describes the events which led to his arrest, his treatment in detention during pretrial investigation, and his trial and appeal hearings. Although Amnesty International was not in a position to verify every detail, the manuscript is consistent with reports which Amnesty International has received from a number of sources.
In the manuscript Xu Wenli gave the following account. After his arrest on 10 April 1981, he was held incommunicado for 15 months and allowed no visits, correspondence, books or writing paper. He was formally charged only four months after his arrest, despite the 10-day legal limit on preliminary detention. During the first eight months of his detention he was interrogated 200 times — up to three sessions per day — with seven interrogators taking turns to question him. Describing his detention in "K Block" of the Banbuqiao
216	Amnesty International Report 1986
detention centre during this period, he stated that although he was not himself ill-treated, he could frequently hear "the sounds of beatings and cursing, and the sound of electrical assaults being carried out within the prison buildings". At a preliminary court hearing in February 1982, Xu Wenli named two lawyers he wanted to represent him but was told by the presiding judge that they were not available. A lawyer from the Legal Advisory Department was appointed to defend him. He also asked for his relatives to be present but neither his wife nor other relatives were allowed in the courtroom at his trial on 8 June 1982. Although about 50 people attended the hearing, all had been admitted on a ticket basis and the majority were from various sections of the court itself. At the beginning of the trial Xu Wenli unsuccessfully asked the presiding judge to withdraw on the grounds that the judge had presumed him guilty, having asked him to acknowledge his guilt on several occasions before the trial "to secure more lenient treatment". Xu Wenli was found guilty as charged. His appeal was unsuccessful and his sentence of 15 years' imprisonment was upheld. On 10 September 1982 Xu Wenli was transferred to Beijing Prison No. 1. He was allowed occasional visits from his family, but was held in solitary confinement in a six-square-metre cell.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports that prisoners, including adopted prisoners of conscience, were being held in solitary confinement for prolonged periods, endangering their mental and physical well-being. Among those reported to be so held were other editors of unofficial joum^s who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience, such as Fu Shenqi, detained since 1981 in Shanghai, and Wei Jingsheng, who was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in Beijing in 1979. New information about Wei Jingsheng confirmed that he had been transferred from Beijing to the Ge'ermu labour camp in Qinghai province, and that he had not recovered from a nervous breakdown suffered after several years in solitary confinement. A report received in December stated that he was showing signs of catalepsy, spending long periods staring blankly at the sky.
The organization continued to call for the unconditional release of other prisoners of conscience, among them elderly Roman Catholic priests detained since the 1950s for remaining loyal to the Vatican, and Tibetans arrested for advocating Tibetan nationalism or for practising their religion. In September Amnesty International learned of the death in detention of Father Shen Baishun, a Roman Catholic priest serving a 10-year sentence. Aged 82, Father Shen had been reported to be suffering from a heart condition.
Among prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International during the year was Geng Qichang, who was sentenced in December
217	Amnesty International Report 1986
1983 to three years' imprisonment plus two years' deprivation of political rights for "conœaling a crime". This charge was reportedly based on his failure to report to the police the activities of a worker who had written and publicly displayed political posters. Geng Qichang was a high-ranking party official in Henan province in the early 197(^ and a member of the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee from 1969 to 1978. Following the disgrace of party officials considered to be supporters of the "Gang of Four", Geng Qichang was relieved of all his posts within the party in March 1978 and later became Deputy Director of the Zhen^ou Vegetable Research Institute.
Very few prisoners of conscience were reported to have been released during 1985. One widely reported release was that of the 84-year-old Roman Catholic Bishop of Shanghai, Gong Pinmei, who after nearly 30 years in jail was released on parole on 3 July by order of the Shanghai High People's Court. He had been arrested in 1955 in Shanghai during a nationwide purge of "counter-revolutionaries". The assistant director of the High People's Court in Shanghai was reported to have said that he was still "a criminal under surveillance", and that he would be pardoned only after a probation period of 10 years. The official Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association in Beijing reported that Bishop Gong "admitted that he had been guilty in opposing the Communist Party, the government and all aspects of the [church] reform". This, however, has not been confirmed by Bishop Gong. By the end of 1985, all requests for interviews with him had been refused.
Amnesty International started investigating the cases of four prisoners accused of having formed a "counter-revolutionary" organization with the alleged intention of setting up an autonomous republic in the three provinces of northeast China. Tliey were alleged to have formed a committee in 1981 and to have disseminated "counter-revolutionary" literature by publishing a periodical; they were also accused of making "false charges" against cadres. They were tried in the second half of 1983 in Changchun, Jilin province, and sentenced to terms of from seven years to life imprisonment.
The organization was also concerned about a number of other arrests and trials. Several groups of Protestants were arrested and tried in various places for propagating or practising religion in private houses ("house churches"), for itinerant preaching or for criticizing the official church. They included three "house church" leaders from Guangzhou reportedly sentenced to prison terms of two, seven, and 10 years in October on charges of "inciting counter-revolution" and distributing Christian literature. In another case, a blind man accused of putting up posters in the city of Chengdu to "vent his dissatisfaction
218	Amnesty International Report 1986
with the Chinese leaders" was officially reported to have been arrested there at the end of November and "punished".
Suspected political activists were reportedly arrested and detained without charge in Lhasa in September, two weeks before the celebrations of the 20th anniversary of the foundation of the Autonomous Region of Tibet. They included people advocating Tibetan independence, and visiting Tibetans from Nepal and India. Most were reported to have been released shortly after.
Students were reported to have been arrested in several cities during a series of demonstrations which started in September in Beijing. On 18 September several hundred students from Beijing University marched through the centre of the capital to protest against die import of Japanese consumer goods and Japanese "militarism". Similar student demonstrations later took place in Beijing and other cities. According to foreign press correspondents, more than 100 students were arrested in Beijing following the peaceful protest on 18 September and others were also arrested there on 20 November following ftirther student protests. In late December, however, the Minister of Public Security denied that any students had been arrested, although he acknowledged that "some persons" who "disrupted public order" in Beijing on 20 November had been detained temporarily by the police and that "some bad elements" who had "pilfered and vandalized public property" during a student demonstration in October in Chengdu had also been detained or fined. By late 1985 no further information was available about those arrested.
The use of the death penalty for a wide range of offences remained a major concern. Legislation providing for accelerated procedures for trial, appeal and execution continued to be applied and Amnesty International was concerned that some executions appeared to take place immediately after sentencing. During 1985 Amnesty International documented 135 executions, 17 death sentences (where it was not specified whether execution had been carried out) and seven cases in which the death sentence was imposed with a two-year suspension of execution. Most information which reached Amnesty International came from a few major cities and the total number of executions and death sentences throughout the country was believed to be much higher. In a majority of the cases recorded, the death sentence was imposed for offences such as murder, robbery and rape, but it was also imposed for espionage, abduction and pimping, drug-trafficking, hijacking, forming a "reactionary secret society" or "exploiting feudal superstitions", fraud, smuggling and other "economic crimes".
Six people were sentenced to death in April in Xian, the capital of
219	Amnesty International Report 1986
Shaanxi province, for holding "dance and sex parties" at home. Three of them were executed by firing-squad immediately after sentencing by the Xian Intermediate People's Court. In December two men were executed in Guangdong after being convicted of obtaining cash totalling 321,000 yuan (about US$100,000) through fraud. In late 1985 the official press warned that "economic crimes" would be punished most severely in future.
Amnesty International noted with concern an official report of a case in which a death sentence with a two-year reprieve pronounced in 1980 was changed five years later to a death sentence with immediate execution. Yang Xiaoming was convicted of premeditated murder and sentenced to death in 1980 by the Intermediate People's Court of Xining city in Qinghai province. When reviewing the case at that time, the provincial High People's Court changed the immediate death sentence to one with a two-year reprieve. Five years later, however, the Xining Intermediate People's Court reopened the case and changed the verdict back again. TTie provincial Party Secretary, commenting on the case at a public rally on 29 July, was reported to have blamed the provincial High People's Court for "wrong judgment" in this case, as well as the "former principal responsible comrades" of the provincial Party Committee who "bore important responsibility for it".
