Burkina Faso
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of other alleged political opponents of the government, several of whom were reported to have been severely tortured. One detainee was believed to have died as a result of torture; the govemment denied this but failed to account adequately for his death in custody.
There was a major confrontation between the country's trade union leaders and the govemment of Captain Thomas Sankara, which came to power in August 1983 after a coup. In late January, leaders of the main trade unions jointly signed an open letter which criticized some govemment policies, claimed that democratic and trade union rights were under threat and called on workers to unite in defence of their rights. The govemment reacted by suspending from office and detaining Ousmane Koanda and Hubert Yameogo, leading officials respectively of constmction industry and health service unions, and suspending at least eight other union leaders, some of whom may also have been detained. In late Febmary, four other union leaders were arrested: Joseph Yameogo and Salif Kabor6, leading members of the national trade union confederation, Toile Sagnon, a miners' union leader, and Tiladi Yonli.
Amnesty Intemational considered all the detained trade union leaders to be prisoners of conscience and made intemational appeals for their release in March and April. No charges were brought against any of them and they were all eventually released on 4 August, the second anniversary of the coup which brought President Sankara to power. Four other trade unionists held since March 1984 were also freed. Jean Pagnimba Bila, Ousmane Ismael Kindo and Joachim Bahieba Sib had been detained for alleged "subversive political activities" after their trade union, the Syndicat national des ensei-gnants africains de Haute-Volta (SNEAHV), National Union of African Teachers of Upper Volta, which was formed before the country was renamed Burkina Faso, called a strike in March 1984. However, no charges were ever brought against them or a fourth SNEAHV official, Kone Batiemoko, who had also been detained and held without trial for more than one year. Two of the SNEAHV leaders were reportedly released in June and the others on 4 August.
The authorities also freed Joseph Ouedraogo, former President of
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
the National Assembly who had been held without trial since October 1983, and Jean-Baptiste Kafando. Arba Diallo, a leading member of the Ligue patriotique pour le développement (LIPAD), Patriotic League for Development and a former government minister, was released in late February. He had been arrested with other LIPAD members in October 1984. However, at least two other LIPAD leaders, Adama Touré and Soumane Touré, were detained throughout 1985. The latter was accused of financial misdemeanours but no specific charges had been brought or judicial process commenced by the end of 1985. It appeared that the charges against him might be politically motivated although ostensibly of a criminal nature. Henri Guissou and Ali Lankoande, two members of another opposition group, the Front progressiste voltaïque (FPV), Progressive Front of Volta, were also believed still to be detained without trial at the end of 1985. They had been arrested in November 1983 and held under house arrest.
Jean-Baptiste Ouedraogo, the former head of state, remained in custody without trial throughout the year. In August, however, he was moved from detention at Pô military camp to house arrest. General Marc Tiémoko Garango, who had been detained without trial since November 1983, was also reportedly transferred to house arrest in August although some sources suggested that he had been freed by the end of 1985.
In May, there were bomb explosions at military depots in Bobo Dioulasso and Ouagadougou, the second of which caused several deaths. Many people were reportedly arrested in connection with these explosions, particularly in the Bobo Dioulasso, Dagari and Samo regions. In July, Amnesty International received reports that some of those detained had been tortured with electric shocks, bums and sexual abuse while held at the headquarters of the Sûreté du territoire, security police, in Ouagadougou. Adjutant Hamidou Zeba, a former paratrooper, was reported to have died as a result of torture and several other detainees, including Koutou Djeba, a former teacher, and Théophile Some, a postal worker, were reported to have become seriously ill. In July Amnesty Intemational submitted infomiation about these cases to the UN Special Rapporteur on torture.
Amnesty International expressed its concem to the govemment about these reports and called for an urgent inquiry into the death of Adjutant Zeba and the treatment of other detainees. The authorities denied that any detainees had been tortured and said that Adjutant Zeba's death was due to cirrhosis of the liver caused by excessive alcohol consumption. Several detainees were presented to joumalists in order to deny the torture allegations but they included only one of some six detainees about whom Amnesty Intemational had publicly
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
27	Japan
expressed conœm. The others were not produced and were believed to be still detained incommunicado at the end of 1985. The director of the Sûreté du territoire was reported to have resigned in the wake of the torture allegations but subsequently to have been reinstated. No inquiry into the treatment of the detainees is known to have been held and no inquest into Adjutant Zeba's death had taken place by the end of 1985.
