?	I Thailand
263
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of people convicted of "lese majesty" because they had expressed nonviolent political opinions on matters involving the Royal Family. It also remained concerned about the extended detention without charge of people allegedly involved in "communistic activities", and about the use of unfair martial law trial procedures against people accused of "lese majesty" or "communistic activities". It received reports of prisoners dying in custody due to severe ill-treatment: During 1985 , 76 people convicted of non-political offences were reportedly sentenced to death, and government armed forces were alleged to have extrajudicially killed members of ethnic minority groups suspected of political or criminal offences.
During 1985 Amnesty International campaigned for the release of six prisoners of conscience imprisoned since 1983 after being convicted by military courts operating under martial law provisions. They were convicted of having violated Section 112 of the penal code, which proscribes peaceful acts which may be deemed by the court to constitute "lese majesty". One of the six, Kaat Kritkraiwan, is believed to have t^en released towards the end of 1985 after completing a specially reduced prison term. The five still imprisoned, who were serving sentences ranging from four to eight years, were Anan Seenaakhan, Samaan Khongsuphon, Thawan Saengkaan-janaanon, Phongtheep Manuuphiphatphong and Rat Uttaphan (see Amnesty International Report 1985). In May Amnesty International urged King Bhumibol Adulyadej to exercise his prerogative of royal mercy by granting full pardons to the six prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International also called for the charges against two people then on trial for "lese majesty" to be dropped. One of these, Jak Phatcharaphathanachai, was acquitted in December. Tlie other, Sanan Wongsuthii, was still on trial at the end of 1985.
During 1985 Amnesty International began investigating the case of Phromneet Baanthip, a 24-year-old former rubber tapper who was convicted of "lese majesty" and was believed to be imprisoned in the southern province of Phathalung. It also began investigating the cases of several other people reportedly imprisoned or on trial in connection with "lese majesty" offences.
Amnesty International was concerned about extended detention
264	Amnesty International Report 1986
without trial of people arrested in connection with alleged "communistic activities". The Royal Act on the Prevention of Communistic Activities allows such people to be held for up to 480 days before being charged or to be sent for up to six months' "re-education" in what are termed "Karunyaatheep Centres". Amnesty International received reports of the existence of "Karunyaatheep Centres" in a variety of places throughout the country, and it was concerned about seven people who, after arrest in July, had been sent at the end of 1985 to undergo a reported four-months' "re-education" at one such facility. At lecist some of the 30 people mentioned in local press accounts as having been arrested during 1985 in connection with alleged "communistic activities" were at the year's end still being held without charge or trial. Amnesty International urged the government either to charge and try them in accordance with internationally recognized legal standards or to release them.
Amnesty International was concerned that people charged with "lese majesty" or "communistic activities" were being tried according to October 1976 martial law provisions that assign such cases to military tribunals, with no right of appeal to any higher judicial body. Such trials were frequently either held in camera or not conducted promptly, and defendants were in several instances held without full access to legal counsel. On various occasions during 1985 Amnesty International communicated these concerns to the authorities. It urged that the trial of six people charged in January with "communistic activities" and "insurrection" should be moved to an ordinary civilian court operating under normal procedures allowing appeal. The organization repeatedly called on the authorities to allow people held for alleged "communistic activities" full access to legal counsel and prompt trials. In December it expressed concern about a prosecution motion to hold in camera the trial of 50 people charged with "insurrection". The defendants were accused of involvement in an attempted coup on 9 September, and Amnesty International believed that holding their trial in camera could undermine the fairness of the proceedings.
The six people charged in January and the 50 charged in connection with the events of 9 September faced a possible death sentence if convicted. Amnesty International urged the authorities not to impose such sentences. Seventy-six people were reported to have been sentenced to death during 1985 for non-political offences including homicide and drug trafficking. Amnesty International called for such sentences not to be carried out, but was unable to determine whether there were any executions.
Amnesty International urged the government to investigate reports that inmates of Bang Khwang Central Prison had died due to beatings
Amnesty International Report 1986
265
and denial of medical care after being placed in special detention. They had allegedly been involved in a protest in August calling for commutation of death sentences and reductions in lengthy terms of imprisonment.
Allegations were received that govenmient armed forces operating in the northern part of the country had in two separate incidents early in 1985 killed individuals of ethnic minority origin in their custody. One of these incidents allegedly occurred in Naan province and involved people suspected of "communistic activities". The other allegedly occurred in Chiang Mai province and involved villagers suspected of complicity in the murder of two investigators working with a government program aimed at curtailing local cultivation of opium. Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to hold inquiries into these allegations.
