Kenya
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners, and the use of the death penalty.
Nineteen University of Nairobi students were arrested in Febmary in connection with protests at expulsions and the withdrawal of scholarships from students allegedly for political reasons. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the failure of the authorities to investigate ftilly allegations of torture and ill-treatment which were made in court by several of them. Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the faimess of their trial proceedings. On 8 March, 14 of the students were sentenced to six months' imprisonment for illegal use of a university vehicle. However, on 19 July, 11 days after most of them had been released with remission of sentence, the High Court quashed their sentences on the grounds that they had been denied adequate defence representation as a result of what it termed "the arbitrary and unlawful proceedings and order of the court". Five other students were arrested at a student meeting on 10 Febmary which was broken up by riot police, leaving at least one student dead and 65 injured. TTiey were tried on 11 March on charges of convening or participating in illegal meetings. One was acquitted, three were fined and released, but Julius Mwandawiro Mghanga, a former student leader and one of those expelled, was imprisoned for one year. Amnesty Intemational believed that he was a prisoner of conscience. He was released on 9 December after being granted remission.
Amnesty Intemational continued its appeals for the release of Otieno Mak'Onyango, a newspaper editor, and Raila Odinga, former deputy director of the Kenya Bureau of Standards, who were detained without charge or trial under the Preservation of Public Security Act. They had been arrested in August 1982 and charged with treason in connection with a coup attempt by members of the Kenya Air Force but the charges had been withdrawn in March 1983. By the end of 1985 the authorities had given no explanation for their indefinite detention. Amnesty Intemational adopted them as prisoners of conscience and appealed for their release, for them to be granted regular access to family and lawyers while still imprisoned, and for Otieno Mak'Onyango to receive adequate medical treatment, which was reportedly being denied. A third political detainee held
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
57	Japan
under this act since July 1982, Stephen Muriithi, former deputy director of the |X)lice Special Branch, who Amnesty Intemational believed might be a prisoner of conscience, was released in September.
Amnesty Intemational appealed for proper medical treatment for Maina wa Kinyatti, a university lecturer convicted of possessing a seditious doomient in May 1982 and sentenced to six years' imprisonment. He had an eye complaint which was reportedly deteriorating seriously. Amnesty Intemational adopted him as a prisoner of conscience and was concemed about the use of the charge of sedition to suppress non-violent criticism of the govemment. Wang'ondu wa Kariuki, a joumalist convicted of possessing a seditious document in May 1982 and sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment, who Amnesty Intemational believed might be a prisoner of conscience, was released in August 1985.
Ten university students convicted of sedition in 1982 and 1983 were serving prison sentences of between five and 10 years. Eight had been arrested in connection with anti-govemment student demonstrations during the August 1982 coup attempt, and two had been convicted of possessing seditious documents. Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate their cases.
In June Amnesty International appealed to President Daniel arap Moi to commute the death sentences imposed by courts-martial on 12 former Kenya Air Force members convicted of involvement in the August 1982 coup attempt. The sentences had all been confirmed by the High Court. Concem was also expressed that three of them — Hezekiah Ochuka, Pancras Oteyo Okumu and Robert Odhiambo Ndege — had been retumed to Kenya by the Tanzanian authorities in November 1983, despite having been granted asylum in Tanzania. Amnesty International was disturbed at reports from unofficial sources that all 12 were secretly executed on 9 July but its inquiry to President Moi on 17 July and further app>eals to the govemment for information elicited no reply. By the end of 1985 the authorities had neither denied nor acknowledged the executions, but the available evidence indicated that the executions had taken place.
Amnesty Intemational received unconfirmed reports that nine other prisoners condemned to death for murder or robbery with violence were executed on 11 July and that a further five were executed on 26 September. By the end of 1985 over 155 prisoners were reported to be held under sentence of death for murder or robbery with violence, at least 25 of whom had been convicted during 1985.
58
Amnesty International Report 1986
