Viet Nam
Amnesty Intemational's main concerns remained the detention without trial of several thousand people, including prisoners of conscience, held for "re-education" on account of their alleged political activities or beliefe in pre-1975 southem Viet Nam, and the arrest in more recent years of several dozen other political prisoners, most of whom were held without charge and some of whom were prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the use of the death penalty and about reports of deaths in custody of political detainees.
Amnesty International was further concerned that the first Code of Criminal Law of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which was adopted by the National Assembly in June and was due to come into effect on 1 January 1986, provided for people to be imprisoned for peacefully exercising their fundamental human rights and prescribed the death penalty for a wide variety of offences including non-violent political offences.
Amnesty Intemational was unable to ascertain how many of the people taken into custody for "re-education" in 1975 or 1976 remained in detention in 1985. An official figure of 7,000 could not be confirmed, and various estimates received by the organization suggested that the number was larger.
266	Amnesty International Report 1986
From May onwards Amnesty International intensified its longstanding appeals on behalf of people held in administrative detention since 1975. The organization wrote asking the government to consider releasing all those stiU detained. While acknowledging that some of those held might be brought to justice for alleged war crimes, Amnesty International's letter emphasized that any such people should immediately be charged and tried fairly and promptly, or released. It stressed the organization's belief that a review of the cases of all those held would allow many to be released immediately as the time they had spent in "re-education" already exceeded the prison sentences that might have been imposed by a court for the offences of which they were accused.
Amnesty International also raised the cases of a number of writers, journalists, artists and "third force" political figures believed to have been arrested for expressing opinions deemed contrary to the policies of the Provisional Revolutionary Government that assumed power in southern Viet Nam in 1975. They included Dr Truong Van Quynh, a physician and a junior member of the pre-1975 Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang (VNQDD), Nationalist Party of Greater Viet Nam; Truong Vi Tri, a former member of the National Assembly and publisher of the pre-1975 Chinese language weekly Dan Thanh; Professor Phan Ngo, a teacher, author and member of the VNQDD; Nguyen Viet Khanh, a journalist, professor of journalism and Secretary General of the pre-1975 Viet Nam Press Association; and Nguyen Sy Te, a teacher and writer. In its letter, Amnesty International urged the immediate and unconditional release of these prisoners of conscience. As far as the organization was aware, they were still held at the end of 1985.
Amnesty International was unable to determine how many people were released from "re-education" or prison during 1985. It did however welcome the release in 1985 of 20 people who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases it was investigating. Among these was the satirical cartoonist Nguyen Hai Chi (better known by his pen-name Choe), released in early 1985. Also released were Tran Cam Huong, Lieutenant Colonel and former head of the women members of the Army of the Republic of Viet Nam (ARVN); Phung Canh, a Roman Catholic priest and Le Van Tung, a former judge, all three of whom had been held for "re-education" since 1975. However, the organization continued to appeal for the release of the poet Nguyen Chi Thien, a prisoner of conscience who, at the age of 53, had spent 23 y&ais in various detention camps for his peaceful criticism of the policies of successive governments in northern Viet Nam.
At the end of 1985 Amnesty International was working on behalf of some 170 prisoners of conscience or people whose cases it was investigating, including 12 cases taken up during the year. The
Amnesty International Report 1986	267
organization adopted as a prisoner of conscience Ho Hieu Ha, a Protestant pastor held since 1983, and began investigating the cases of Nguyen Dong, a civil servant in pre-1975 southern Viet Nam, and Phan Van Thinh, a doctor and a major in the ARVN, both of whom had been held since 1975.
Among those arrested and held without trial in more recent years were Buddhist and Roman Catholic religious figures and intellectuals, many of whom Amnesty Intemational believed to be prisoners of conscience held on account of their peaceful dissent from government policies and practices in the religious, cultural and literary spheres. During 1985, it continued to appeal for the release of 12 Buddhist monks and nuns arrested in 1984. Three of them — Thich Tue Sy, Thich Tri Sieu and Thich nu Tri Hai — were reportedly transferred from Phan Dang Luu detention centre to Chi Hoa Prison in Ho Chi Minh City during 1985. Amnesty Intemational did not know where the other nine were held. The organization also appealed for the release of Buddhist monk Thich Due Nhuan, who was reportedly arrested in August. He had been a professor of Buddhism at Van Hanh Buddhist University, editor of the Buddhist magazine Van Hanh, and Secretary General of the Unified Buddhist Church of Viet Nam officially dissolved in 1981. He was reported to be in bad health aggravated by the lengthy interrogation sessions he was subjected to in Phan Dang Luu detention centre. The organization was also concerned about two young monks, Thich Tam Quang and novice Vinh Hien, who were believed to have been detained in Bien Hoa Prison in August on account of their alleged reluctance to join the government-sponsored Buddhist Church of Viet Nam which in 1981 officially replaced the Unified Buddhist Church. It was investigating the cases of Thich Thong Buu and Thich Thieu Hue, abbots respectively of Quang-Am and Dai-Giac pagodas in Ho Chi Minh City, who were reportedly arrested in October and placed in restricted residence in the provinces. It also received reports that two prisoners of conscience released in 1978, Thich Quang Do and Thich Huyen Quang, prominent monks and members of the Unified Buddhist Church, had been rearrested in 1982 and placed in restricted residence in the provinces.
Amnesty Intemational began investigating reports of the arrests in August of several Jesuit priests and students, including seminary student Joseph Pham Thanh Liem.
Amnesty Intemational was also seeking information about the arrests of people accused of "having specialized in writing, reciting and circulating reactionary and degenerate poems" and of having used poems "to spread counter-revolutionary propaganda, inciting rebellion and antagonism against the government". According to an
268	Amnesty International Report 1986
official news report in April, at least some of those arrested had "confessed their crimes" but as far as Amnesty International w^ aware, they had not been tried.
In January three people — Le Quoc Quan, Ho Thai Bach and Tran Van Ba — were executed, having been sentenced to death the previous month for subversion, tres^n and espionage. Amnesty International had appealed on behalf of these three and two others, Mai Van Anh and Huynh Vinh Sanh, whose sentences were commuted. The organization also appealed for the commutation of the sentence passed in May on Chu Van Tan, a peasant and former part-time typist io the office of the Senate of the pre-1975 National Assembly of the Republic of South Viet Nam, for "plotting to overthrow the government". At the end of 1985 the organization did not know whedier he had been executed. Amnesty International was concerned about official statements that "a few dozen executions a year" were being carried out, mainly for murder and economic crimes. Its concern was heightened by the provisions of the new Code of Criminal Law which defines at least 24 different types of offence as being punishable by death. Among these are offences against the national security; the life, health, dignity and honour of individuals; socialist ownership; the citizen's ri^t of ownership; economy; the obligations and responsibilities of military personnel; and peace and humanity.
