Gabon
All nine prisoners of concern to Amnesty International were released during 1985. The organization learned that a tenth prisoner whose case it was investigating had died. Amnesty Intemational welcomed these releases but was concerned about the first execution of a political prisoner since President El-Hadj Omar Bongo came to power in 1967.
Seven of those released were adopted prisoners of conscience who had been convicted of threatening state security and sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment with hard labour in November 1982. An Amnesty Intemational observer attended their trial, which the organization considered to have been unfair (see Amrtesty International Report 1983). The defendants were all alleged members of the Mouvement de redressement national (MORENA), Movement for National Recovery, a non-violent organization which advocated a multi-party system. The seven, who were the last to be freed of the 29 originally convicted, were released as a result of reductions in sentences announced by the President. Jean-Baptiste Obiang-Etoughé, a planter, and Paul Calvin Tomo, a civil servant, were released on 19 March. The remaining MORENA prisoners were released in August. They included Jean-Pierre Nzoghe-Nguema, a former rector of Omar Bongo University in Libreville. Conditions, such as restrictions on where they might Uve, were said to have been imposed on the seven after release, but were apparently not enforced by the authorities.
Two other prisoners of concem to Amnesty Intemational were also freed. Jean-Marie Mbieleu Fosso, who had been sentenced to eight years' hard labour in 1981, was released in January after benefiting from presidential clemency. Abbé Noël Ngwa-Nguema, a Catholic priest and philosophy teacher, was released in August. He had been convicted of offences arising from his activities on behalf of MORENA and had been sentenced to four years' imprisonment in 1983. Amnesty Intemational was also informed by the authorities that another prisoner whose case the organization had been
vili
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
investigating, Serge Edouard Etsine, had in fact been released in 1983 in a measure of presidential clemency.
The only execution reported during the year — in August — was the first of a political prisoner since President Bongo came to power in 1967. The victim was Captain Alexandre Mandja Ngokouta, an army officer. He had been convicted by a special military court on 2 August of plotting to overthrow the govemment. Two other soldiers who were tried with him — Adjutant Michel Nanga and Sergeant Jean-Louis Aba-Mebale — were sentenced to forced labour for life, and another to five years' hard labour. Two other soldiers were acquitted. Amnesty Intemational had appealed to President Bongo to commute the death penalty imposed on Captain Alexandre Mandja Ngokouta.
