Libya
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about renewed official calls for the "physical liquidation" of political opponents and the subsequent killing or wounding of Libyan citizens abroad and possibly within Libya. It was also
347	Amnesty International Report 1986
concerned about the continued imprisonment of 75 prisoners of conscience; the detention of political prisoners without trial or after acquittals or expiry of sentences; reports of torture and ill-treatment; and the death penalty.
Official calls for the physical liquidation of political opponents were renewed throughout 1985. On 2 March the General People's Congress reiterated the "stand of the Basic People's Congresses concerning the pursuit and physical liquidation of the stray dogs" and called for a response to states which protected the fugitives, including "backing hostile and opposition movements" within such states. Tripoli Radio reported on 3 September Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi's statement that all Libyans abroad, including those sentenced to death, "have the right to return to the Jamahiriya with total freedom and without being subjected to any punishment for acts committed against their homeland" provided that "they declare their repentance". He added, however, that "those who prefer to stay abroad and work against the interests of their homeland will be pursued and punished". Among Libyan political opponents, Colonel Gaddafi singled out members of the Muslim Brotherhood and of the Islamic Liberation Party in an address to secondary school students and teachers on 14 April, stating "you should have discovered them earlier and slaughtered them". On 21 November Tripoli's Voice of the Greater Arab Homeland broadcast a statement by the Libyan Revolutionary Officers in which they declared themselves "members of the revolutionary committees" and pledged to turn themselves into "suicide squads which will destroy everything". Among their stated aims was "the continuation of the pursuit of the stray dogs, the dogs of the CIA and their physical liquidation".
In apparent implementation of the policy of physical liquidation, there were attempts on the lives of a number of Libyan citizens living abroad. They included Ezzedin Ghadamsi, a former ambassador, who was seriously wounded in Vienna on 28 February. Ahmad Barrani, a businessman resident in Cyprus, was killed on 2 April; Yusuf 'Aqila, another businessman who left Libya in 1980, was shot and wounded in Athens on 6 October; and Gibril Denali, a student who was granted political asylum in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), was assassinated in Bonn on 6 April, having escaped a previous kidnapping attempt. He had received death threats from people reportedly connected with the Libyan People's Bureau in Bonn. On 11 November a court in the FRG sentenced a Libyan national, Fathi al-Tarhuni, to life imprisonment after convicting him of the murder of Gibril Denali. On 13 November, two days after the Egyptian authorities announced that they had foiled a new assassination attempt against former Prime Minister 'Abd
348	Amnesty International Report 1986
al-Hamid al-Bakkush (see Amnesty International Report 1985), Tripoli radio reported that a Libyan "suicide squad" had clashed with Egyptian soldiers during a mission to "liquidate" opponents in Egypt.
Ainnesty Intemational wrote to Colonel Gaddafi asking about allegations that Hassan Ishkal, a prominent Libyan official, had been summarily executed by Revolutionary Officers in Tripoli on 24 November, and that his cousin al-Burran Ishkal had also been summarily executed two days later.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of 77 prisoners of conscience and learned of the release of one of them and ¿le death of another. The released prisoner, Redwan Bu Shwesha, a short story writer, was one of a group of writers and joumalists arrested in 1978 and tried in 1980 on charges of forming a political organization. Amnesty Intemational, which observed part of the trial in 1980, remained concerned about the fate of 16 other members of this group, all prisoners of conscience believed to be still in detention. The Libyan authorities replied in April to appeals on behalf of the group stating that the events referred to in the appeals had never occurred and that the names mentioned were "unknown to the authority concemed". Amnesty Intemational learned of the death in prison in 1984 of 'Abd al-'Aziz Muhammad al-Gharabli, a prisoner of conscience serving a life sentence since 1973 for belonging to a Marxist group. The organization was seeking information on the cause of his death.
A number of political prisoners were reportedly held without trial or remained in detention after having been acquitted or after having served their sentences. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities about 18 such cases, calling for those detained without trial to be released or tried without further delay, and for those detained despite having been acquitted or beyond the expiry of their sentences to be released immediately unless new charges for recognizable criminal offences had been brought against them. No reply was received. In June Amnesty International received reports that four of the 150 detainees arrested in 1984 in Tripoli (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985) had been put on trial. The organization sought details of the trial but received no reply.
Further allegations of torture and ill-treatment were received by Amnesty Intemational during 1985. In June two students — 'Abd al-Wahid al-Zanqi and Rafiq al-Bishti — allegedly died under torture while in the custody of members of the revolutionary committees. The two students were apparently arrested with a number of others from Tripoli University. There were also allegations that many foreign workers, who were deported by the thousand in August and September, had been ill-treated in custody.
349	Amnesty International Report 1986
In July it was reported that Libya had agreed to pay US$500,000 compensation in connection with the detention in May 1984 of a Norwegian ship and the ill-treatment of crew members, and to investigate the death of one of the sailors, Bjom Pedersen (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Following Norwegian police investigations and interviews with fellow crew members, it was established that Bjom Pedersen died under torture in the custody of a revolutionary committee between 13 and 16 May 1984. Amnesty International had appealed in February for an impartial and public investigation into the death of Bjom Pedersen and had called for those responsible to be brought to justice.
Libya retained the death penalty for numerous offences, including many of a political nature. In March Amnesty International received reports that a number of detainees, including two prisoners of conscience originally sentenced to life imprisonment and four political prisoners allegedly detained without trial, were to be executed in April. Amnesty Intemational sought urgent clarification of these reports and in April received a letter fi-om the Secretary of the General People's Committee of the Peoples' Bureau for Foreign Liaison. The letter expressed "deep regret" at the fact that Amnesty Intemational had "fallen victim to a misleading campaign and to deceptive and tendentious rumours". It added that the reports were "untrue" and that the Jamahiriya respected human rights and its laws abided by intemational safeguards for their protection. Amnesty Intemational replied stressing its impartial character and its care in investigating allegations of human rights violations, and requested once more details of the situation of the people reported to be facing execution in April. No further reply was received.
