Togo
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the govemment, some of whom were prisoners of conscience. The organization was concemed also that political detainees were tortured and about reports that one political detainee, whose death in detention was attributed by the authorities to natural causes, actually died as a result of torture. No autopsy was conducted to determine the cause of death. Similarly, no autopsy was conducted in another case in which a senior army officer died while under house arrest.
Amnesty International sent three mksions to Togo during 1985.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	103	Japan
The first was in April, after Amnesty Intemational had received allegations that the death on 29 March of Colonel Koffi Kongo, a senior army officer who had been placed under house arrest some four weeks earlier, was not due to natural causes as the govemment had stated. It was alleged that he had been poisoned for political reasons. The Amnesty Intemational delegation, which included a pathologist, had informed the authorities of its wish to observe an autopsy or any other investigation into the death. However, no autopsy took place, and Amnesty Intemational was consequently unable to ascertain the cause of Colonel Kongo's death. The delegation also sought clarification of other matters of concem to Amnesty Intemational, including the legal status and whereabouts of prisoners named by the organization. The authorities promised to reply to any such inquiries which Amnesty Intemational might raise then or in future.
Amnesty International raised the cases of over 30 actual or possible prisoners of conscience, and called for the release of three adopted prisoners of conscience. One of these was Koffi Ahossey, a 60-year-old Ghanaian joumalist held without trial since 1979. The authorities informed Amnesty Intemational in April that he was susp)ected of espionage but that he had not been formally charged, in breach of Togolese law. It appeared that he was in fact detained because he had written a book criticizing govemment policy. In May the govemment informed the organization that he had been released but this had not been confirmed by the end of 1985.
Also adopted as a prisoner of conscience was Paul Komlakuma Doe, a 53-year-old businessman and president of the Gideon Bible i^sociation of Togo, who was reportedly arrested on 11 December 1984 and tortured. In April proceedings opened against him on a charge of possession of subversive literature, but by the end of the year he had not been tried. He was said to have been tortured and to be receiving hospital treatment at the end of 1985.
The third prisoner adopted by Amnesty Intemational was John Kossi Assinyo, a Ghanaian bank employee detained in December 1984 on entering Togo to go shopping. He was apparentiy suspected of friendship with opponents of the Togolese Govemment living in Ghana.
In some other cases raised by Amnesty Intemational, information provided by the authorities was contradictory. For example, in the case of Houedakor Dede — a postal worker reportedly detained in April 1984 on suspicion of criticizing the govemment — govemment ministers told Amnesty International on 20 January that she had been tried and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. On 24 January the same ministers stated that her case was unknown. In April one
104	Amnesty International Report 1986
minister stated ttiat she had been released from prison but that her present whereabouts were unknown. In some other cases reported to Amnesty Intemational by unofficial sources which the organization raised with the govemment, the authorities stated that the people named as detained were unknown to them, or had been released, or were detained on suspicion of criminal offences.
In August there were several bomb explosions in Lomé, the capital, apparently caused by opponents of the govemment of President Gnassingbé Eyadéma. No one was killed, but a civil servant, Oscar Mensah Messanvi Biova, was reported to have been injured in one explosion. He was immediately detained on suspicion of being in possession of the bomb. At least three other people were also arrested in connection with the explosions. All four were held incommunicado for more than two months without their cases being referred to a magistrate, although the maximum period of such detention according to the law was 48 hours. In October Amnesty Intemational delegates on a mission to Togo were told by govemment officials that Messanvi Biova and three others, whom they refused to name, had been held in breach of the law. They also declined to disclose where they were held or to permit Amnesty Intemational's delegates to visit them.
Amnesty International's mission in October was to inquire into the detention and treatment in custody of dozens of people who were detained in August and September. They included Emil Yawo Sémanou Dobou, a telecommunications engineer arrested on 30 September and Emmanuel Yema Gù-Konu, a university lecturer arrested on 21 September. Following their arrests Amnesty Intemational received reports that some at least of the detainees had been tortured and that one — Homère Aka Adote, a 60-year-old retired railway engineer — had died in detention apparently as a result of torture. The authorities informed Amnesty Intemational that he had died of natural causes and that 14 other people arrested at the same time had been charged with insulting the authorities, on the basis of literature alleged to have been found in their po^ssion. By the end of 1985 none of the 14 had been tried. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that they were kept in harsh conditions in the civil prison in Lomé and that several had broken limbs from beatings by the security forces. Some had reportedly also been tortured with electric shocks. During their October mission Amnesty Intemational's delegates were permitted to see, but not to speak to, the 14. At least two bore plaster casts or medical dressings and others also showed signs of ill-treatment. A 15th detainee, Aluka Kodjo Kokou, an agricultural engineer, was said by the authorities to have been in hospital at the time of this meeting.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	105	Japan
After its October mission Amnesty International on 17 October sent a preliminary report of its findings to the authorities. It observed that some of the prisoners whom its delegates had seen had been tortured. The organization urged the govemment to ensure the humane treatment of all detainees, to publish the names and places of detention of all detainees, and to enforce the 48-hour limit on police custody in accordance with the law. It also urged the govemment to establish an impartial inquiry into the torture of prisoners whom Amnesty Intemational's delegates had identified and into the death of Homère Aka Adote. In late October the authorities announced that they had established a commission of inquiry chaired by Gaba Kue Sipohon, a magistrate, and undertook to send an emissary to the organization's Intemational Secretariat to clarify its terms of reference and procedures. However, no such emissary came, nor did the organization receive any reply to repeated requests for the promised clarification. On 31 December a third Amnesty International mission went to Togo to seek information from members of the govemment's commission of inquiry. However, the delegates were detained overnight and refused entry to the country.
By the end of 1985, the commission of inquiry had not published its findings. Amnesty International received unofficial reports that it had found that some prisoners had been ill-treated or tortured. Moreover, Amnesty Intemational was disturbed to leam that the authorities had amended Article 52 of the Code of Penal Procedure so as to empower the security forces to detain anyone suspected of a serious offence indefinitely, without trial.
In July President Eyadéma announced the release of three political prisoners. Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza, Kouao Stéphan Sanvee and Kwassi Jean Savi de Tové had all been convicted of threatening state security in 1979 by a court applying procedures which fell short of intemationally recognized standards of faimess.
106
Amnesty International Report 1986
