Jordan
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, some of whom were held without charge or trial for prolonged periods, and about trials of political prisoners by the martial court which fell below international standards for fair trial. The organization was also concerned about reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and about six executions. These concerns were investigated by delegates of the organization who visited the country in March and October/November.
Under martial law provisions in force in Jordan since 1967, prisoners can be held indefinitely without trial. Arrests for political reasons are normally carried out by the intelligence services, the largest of which is the Da'irat al-Mukhabarat al-'Amma, Department of General Intelligence. Amnesty International learned of 70 such arrests during 1985. Six of those arrested were tried, 14 were released, and the others were reportedly detained without trial, many in the General Intelligence Building in Amman. The organization also received reports that 42 p>eople arrested during the previous three years were still in detention without trial at the end of 1985.
During 1985 Amnesty International worked for the release of three
339	Amnesty International Report 1986
prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 20 possible prisoners of conscience. The organization adopted as prisoners of conscience Samih Khalil and Dr Suleiman Suwais, arrested on 10 April and 9 November respectively. Samih Khalil, a translator, was sentenced in December to one and a half years' imprisonment for membership of an illegal organization. Suleiman Suwais, a sociologist and journalist, was detained in the General Intelligence Building in Amman, apparently, on similar charges. Another prisoner of conscience, Hashim Gharaibeh, was released on 17 June following a special amnesty. He was sentenced in 1978 to 10 years' imprisonment for membership of the proscribed Jordanian Communist Party. Prime Minister Zaid al-Rifai replied to a member of Amnesty Intemational who appealed for the release of Hashim Gharaibeh, stating: .. it is against the law in Jordan — as in many countries in the world — to be a member of an outlawed party — especially one which seeks to overthrow the govemment and destabilize the political order." Amnesty Intemational believed that Hashim Gharaibeh had not used or advocated violence.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of 15 prisoners sentenced by the martial court to 10 years' imprisonment for membership of the illegal Palestinian Communist Workers' Party and leamed of the release of four of them. The organization was also investigating the cases of five other prisoners, including 'Abd al-Razzaq Isa and Muhammad Qasim, two trade unionists sentenced in April by the martial court to five years' imprisonment for membership of an illegal organization. Amnesty International was also concerned that Rakkan al-Majali, former President of the Jordanian Press Association, was in June placed under town arrest in Karak. The organization leamed that the restriction was lifted in September.
Trials by the martial court, before which political prisoners are normally brought, gave cause for concem to Amnesty Intemational. According to Article 15 of the martial law provisions, the martial court . .is not bound in any of its procedures by the Code of Criminal Procedures or law of evidence". The court is comp)osed of three officers appointed by the Prime Minister in his capacity as General Military Governor and lacks basic legal safeguards such as the right of appeal. The organization leamed of seven people sentenced to prison on political charges by the martial court in 1985.
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about persistent reports that detainees in the custody of the intelligence services, who were often held incommunicado, were subjected to torture and ill-treatment. The organization learned of a special corridor in the General Intelligence Building in Amman where prisoners were
340	Amnesty International Report 1986
subjected to farruj (the prisoner is hung upside down from a perch inserted between the knees with wrists and ankles bound and is beaten intermittently). Other reported methods included falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet) and sensory deprivation. Prisoners were subjected to threats against their relatives, their livelihoods and their freedom of movement. Amnesty International also received allegations of torture and ill-treatment of ordinary criminal prisoners by the Department of Public Security, but was unable to confirm specific instances.
Jordan retained the death penalty for a number of offences, including the sale of land in territory now occupied by Israel. In March the Jordanian Cabinet ratified the death sentences passed in absentia on four people convicted of selling land in the Israeli occupied West Bank to Israelis. Sbc people, all convicted of murder, were executed by hanging during 1985. Amnesty International expressed regret at the executions.
