Switzerland
Amnesty International's principal concern was the continued imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service, whom it considered prisoners of conscience, and the lack of any alternative civilian service. Amnesty International also expressed concern to the Swiss authorities about the return of members of the Sri Lankan Tamil minority to Sri Lanka, reportedly against their will.
Article 81 of the Military Penal Code allows military tribunals to sentence people refusing military service to up to three years' imprisonment although, in practice, sentences rarely exceed one year. Where a tribunal recognizes that an individual has "a severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds a sentence of up to six months' imprisonment may be passed. This is served in the form of arrêts répressifs, a system of imprisonment which allows prescribed work to be performed outside the place of detention during the daytime.
In May a commission appointed by the Federal Military Department to study "decriminalizing" certain categories of conscientious objection to military service submitted its final report. On 15 August the Federal Military Department published its detailed proposals for amending the Military Penal Code and the Federal Law on Military Organization and invited comments from relevant bodies, including Amnesty International. The Federal Military Department stated that "a complete decriminalization of conscientious objection is not possible within the present constitutional framework" as the obligation to perform military service remained binding under Article 18 of the Constitution. Refusal to perform military service, on whatever grounds, would remain a penal offence. The proposed sanction for those recognized by the military tribunals as having conscientious objections based on religious or ethical grounds would be a period of compulsory work. The duration would be from one and a half times as long as military service, which lasts approximately 12 months, up to a maximum of two years. Upon completion, the sentence would be removed from the judicial record, thereby "decriminalizing" it. Those objecting on other, unrecognized, grounds would continue to receive prison sentences which would remain on the judicial record. In its comments Amnesty International welcomed the move to decriminalize certain categories of conscientious objection but pointed out that its major concern would remain as long as the right to refuse military
304	Amnesty International Report 1986
service on conscientious grounds was not recognized and individuals refusing such service were punished under the Military Penal Code for exercising their conscientiously held beliefs by sentences of imprisonment or compulsory work.
During 1985 Amnesty International worked for 30 people sentenced to imprisonment of between three and 12 months for refusal to perform military service. Amongst these were imprisoned individuals adopted as prisoners of conscience, people waiting to enter prison, people appealing against sentence and cases which were still under investigation.
On 13 May Amnesty International wrote to the Swiss authorities about 23 Sri Lankan Tamils who were returned to Sri Lanka apparently against their will in January. The government stated that none of the Tamils had requested asylum or claimed to be in jeopardy. The government also stated that under conditions pertaining at the time, Tamils whose request for political asylum had been refused should not be repatriated. Amnesty International pointed out that the 23 were reported to have been asylum-seekers and to have pleaded with officers not to be sent back to Sri Lanka, and asked the government to review its procedures in such cases. By the end of 1985 Amnesty International had identified 22 of the 23 Tamils involved and was trying to locate them.
