Czechoslovakia
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience under legislation explicitly restricting the non-violent exercise of human rights; the application of the Law on Protective Surveillance to place restrictions on released prisoners of conscience; and the use of the death penalty. At the end of 1985, there were 22 prisoners who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty International, although the total number of prisoners of conscience was believed to be higher. Amnesty International also learned of many people who were sentenced to short terms of imprisonment, given suspended sentences, charged without being remanded in custody or harassed in other ways for attempting to exercise human rights.
In May the Czechoslovak President proclaimed an amnesty to mark the 40th anniversary of the liberation of Czechoslovakia from German occupation by the Soviet army. Only a few prisoners of conscience, mainly those with suspended sentences, benefited from the amnesty.
Among those detained for the non-violent exercise of the right to freedom of expression was Pavel Krivka, an ecologist who had been
277	Amnesty International Report 1986
working in the District Museum in Jicin. In February, he had written to a friend in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) criticizing the Czechoslovak authorities for their neglect of ecological problems. He gave the letter to a Czech friend to post from Yugoslavia, but it was intercepted by the State Security Police. Pavel Krivka was arrested on 29 Api^ and remanded in custody on 4 May. On 21 November he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment under Article 98 of the penal code ("subversion") by the district court in Hradec Kralove. He was also accused of putting up maps pointing out places where ecological problems were neglected, inventing crosswords which vilified the government and its representatives and writing a parody on a Czech Christmas mass which defamed the President. The co-author of the parody, Pavel Skoda, was sentenced to 20 months' imprisonment under Article 100 ("incitement").
Petr Cibulka, a 35-year-old signatory of Charter 77, the unofficial Czechoslovak human rights group, was arrested on 28 March in a restaurant in Prague after allegedly making critical remarks about the socialist order of the Republic when he complained about the menu to the staff. He was charged with "defaming nation, race and conviction" under Article 198, section (b), of the penal code. He was released from custody on 29 June. After two postponements his trial took place on 27 September before the District Court in Prague 2 and he was sentenced to seven months' imprisonment under the second (stricter) prison regime. An appeal was pending at the end of 1985. Petr Cibulka had been imprisoned twice before and on both occasions was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1979 and 1981).
Amnesty International continued to receive information about the arrest, detention and prosecution of religious believers. On 11 and 12 November, the State Security Police searched the homes of at least 40 Roman Catholics in Moravia, and confiscated religious literature, typewriters and duplicating materials. Four people were accused of duplicating and disseminating writings deemed to be against the socialist order of the Republic and were remanded in custody on charges of "incitement" under Article 100 of the penal code. Jirina Bedeiova, a 34-year-old office-worker from Gottwaldov, was released in December, but Jaromir Nemec, a 50-year-old Charter 77 signatory, and Pavel Dudr, a graduate from technical high-school, were still in pretrial detention in Bmo-Bohunice Prison at the end of 1985. Augustin Navratil, a 57-year-old railway employee and Charter 77 signatory from the Kromeriz region, was also arrested, and at the end of 1985 he was being held in a psychiatric hospital in Prague. He had written and distributed an open letter presenting evidence that a clandestinely ordained priest, Father Premysl Coufal, had been
278	Amnesty International Report 1986
murdered by the State Security Police in 1981. Official reports stated that Father Coufal had committed suicide.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the arrest and imprisonment of people for peacefully seeking to exercise their right to leave their country. Among them was Julius Nejedly, a 37-year-old construction worker, who in June attempted to swim the River Danube from Czechoslovakia to Hungary in order to join his wife and daughter in Yugoslavia to travel together to the FRG. He was subsequently sentenced to two years, three months' imprisonment under Article 109 of the penal code ("leaving the Republic without official permission"). Julius Nejedly had previously served a two-year prison sentence for a similar offence. After his release, he applied several times for permission to emigrate but his applications were rejected by the Czechoslovak authorities.
Amnesty International remained concerned about restrictions imposed under the Law on Protective Surveillance on some released prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1985). These included Ladislav Lis and Jiri Gruntorad, who during 1985 were often obliged to report to the authorities daily and were frequently visited by the police at night as well as during the day. In August, Amnesty International called upon the authorities to review the Law on Protective Surveillance in order to bring it into line with Czechoslovakia's obligations under Article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights regarding freedom of movement, and urged that the restrictions on five former prisoners of conscience be lifted.
Amnesty International learned of three executions for murder during 1985 and appealed to the authorities against the retention and use of the death penalty.
