Romania
Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of prisoners of conscience imprisoned for their religious and political activities, including those who sought to exercise their right to leave their own country. The organization received allegations that political prisoners had been ill-treated in detention and their families denied access to them. It was concemed about two reported deaths of prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational leamed of the imposition of one death
sentence during 1985.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience a number of people imprisoned for their religious activity, in most cases members of Protestant evangelical sects. They included Elisiu Rusu, Cornel Mich, Levi Nicola and Hie Dociu, ail members of the Brethren Church in Bucharest, who were sentenced in September to between 10 months' and one year's "corrective labour" for distributing and possessing Bibles and other Christian literature. Another member of the Brethren Church adopted by Amnesty International, Hie Neamtu, a 49-year-old constmction foreman from Ploiesti, was reportedly arrested on 1 July after having held small evangelical meetings for his workmates. After his arrest his wife was reportedly denied access to him and was informed that no details of any charges against him would be available until his trial at a later, unspecified date.
Unauthorized crossing of the frontier is punishable under Article 245 of the criminal code by up to three years' imprisonment and Amnesty International noted that the number of such cases brought to its attention increased during 1985. Hie Savu, a 34-year-old mechanic from Bucharest, was reportedly arrested on 26 July on suspicion of planning to cross the border ¿legally while on a visit to friends and relatives close to the border with Yugoslavia. On 1 October he was sentenced under Article 245 by the Municipal Court of Bucharest Sector II to 18 months' imprisonment with an additional 31 months' reimposed from a previous sentence, also under Article 245, which had been suspended due to an amnesty in 1984. Hie Savu's lawyer was reportedly permitted to see the indictment only on the day of the trial. In another case, Nicolae Malan, aged 49 from Oradea, was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment when he was retumed in August by the Yugoslav authorities after crossing the border into Yugoslavia.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of people
Amnesty International Report 1986	299
being harassed or detained by the authorities in connection with their applications to emigrate. For example, Eugen Ciobanu was reportedly arrested on 6 September after demonstrating outside the United States Embassy in Bucharest over the continued refusal by the authorities to permit him and his wife to emigrate. He had not been brought to trial by the end of 1985.
Amnesty International also received reports of ethnic Hungarians harassed or detained for protesting about alleged discrimination against the ethnic Hungarian minority. Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of Andras Tokes, Laszlo Tokes and Erzsebet Gorgely, all from Tirgu Mures, who were arrested in May after distributing pamphlets calling on ethnic Hungarians who had suffered harassment or discrimination to complain to the appropriate legal authorities. In July three more ethnic Hungarians — Miklos Kuhn, Jozsef Felmeri and Istvan Papp — were arrested on similar charges. All six were released within a few weeks of their arrest.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of other people imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. For example, Gheorghe-Emil Ursu, a 60-year-old civil engineer from Bucharest, was arrested on 21 September. He had reportedly been under continuous investigation since 3 January after having made critical remarks about govemment policy and about President Ceausescu personally. Following a search of his home a large number of his personal diaries covering a 40-year period were taken by the authorities, who allegedly attempted to induce him to implicate people mentioned in these diaries in an anti-govemment conspiracy. On 26 October his wife was informed by the authorities that he was ill in custody and on 19 November she was told that he had died of heart failure. Gheorghe-Emil Ursu was cremated on 23 November. His wife, who has very poor eyesight, was reportedly allowed only a very brief view of the body on 22 November; his daughter was refused permission to see it. Amnesty Intemational received allegations that Gheorghe-Emil Ursu was severely ill-treated in custody and that his death was caused by this ill-treatment. On 5 December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities expressing its concern at the death and calling for a full and impartial investigation into the circumstances surrounding it. The organization had not received a reply by the end of 1985 and to its knowledge no such investigation was carried out.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities for further details concerning the death on 22 March of Dragos Oloiem. The 61-year-old former teacher, who had been adopted by the organization as a prisoner of conscience, was serving an eight-year sentence in Aiud prison for "propaganda against the Socialist State"
300
Amnesty International Report 1986
after having written to various international organizations protesting at treatment he had received from state officials. Amnesty International had not received a reply by the end of 1985.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of ill-treatment of political detainees. In May Janos Csilik, a 29-year-old Roman Catholic priest from Oradea, was allegedly ill-treated during interrogation in an attempt to make him give information about members of his congregation. Amnesty International was informed that as a result he needed hospital treatment for wounds to his hand.
Prison conditions under which prisoners of conscience were held were reported to be harsh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care. An account of Jilava prison written by a former prisoner of conscience stated that political prisoners were frequently insulted and beaten by officials and ordinary criminals acting at the instigation of the authorities.
To Amnesty International's knowledge no death sentences were reported in the Romanian press. However, it received information that a marine pilot had been sentenced to death in April or May after attempting to leave Romania without permission in a cargo ship.
