Equatorial Guinea
Amnesty Intemational was concemed > .a * '»'I about the imprisonment of two people ^	' who were probably prisoners of con-
science, both of whom were released before the end of 1985. One political prisoner convicted of plotting against the govemment in 1983 remained under sentence of death throughout the year.
The number of political prisoners detained in recent years was not known, but was believed to include former members of the government and civil servants, as well as two members of the National Assembly. Other political detainees were reported to be confined under administrative orders to remote villages. It appeared that such prisoners did not benefit from the rights in the Constitution adopted in August 1982, including the rights to be informed of the reasons for detention and to be presumed innocent until proved guilty, and to habeas corpus.
Amnesty Intemational leamed that Eduardo Ebang Masie, who represented the constituency of Aiiisok in the National Assembly, was arrested in May and charged with insulting the head of state. During a public meeting in Anisok he was alleged to have called upon the people present not to applaud every time the head of state's name was mentioned and to have criticized the head of state and government policies. A second member of the National Assembly, Antonio Ebang Mbele Abang, was charged with complicity in the same offences. Their parliamentary immunity was removed and their cases were investigated by a military procurator. They were tried on 20 June by a military court, at which the Minister of Defence was reported to have been the presiding judge. It appeared that military courts continued to have jurisdiction over all political offences in the country. Both defendants were convicted: Eduardo Ebang Masie was sentenced to eight and a half years' imprisonment and Antonio Ebang Mbele Abang was sentenced to pay a heavy fine and released. Eduardo Ebang Masie was reportedly held in harsh conditions at a prison in Bata but in October he was apparently pardoned and released by President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo. Amnesty Intemational considered that the two men may have been convicted because of their p)olitical views.
Sergeant Venancio Miko, who had been convicted in July 1983 of conspiring to overthrow the govemment, was still under sentence of death at the end of 1985 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984).
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
43	Japan
