Nigeria
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the govemment. With one exception, all known prisoners of conscience were released, as were many political detainees, after Major-General Muham-madu Buhari had been replaced as head of state by Major-General Ibrahim Babangida in a bloodless mihtary coup on 27 August. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the death penalty.
As a result of the coup in August, the Supreme Military Council (SMC) was replaced by a new military govemment, the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC). Major-General Babangida became President. Some members of the former administration were detained without charge, and in December dozens of other people were arrested after the alleged discovery of a conspiracy against Major-General Babangida's govemment.
Amnesty Intemational continued in the early part of 1985 to work for the release of 13 prisoners of conscience. All were held under decrees promulgated by the SMC during 1984. Among them were two journalists, Nduka Irabor and Tunde Thompson, sentenced in June 1984 to one year's imprisonment for writing an inaccurate article by a special tribunal established under SMC Decree No. 4, the Pubhc Officers (Protection Against False Accusation) Decree. They were released on 3 March before their sentences had expired.
All but one of the other prisoners adopted or being investigated by Amnesty International were apparently held under SMC Decree No. 2, the State Security (Detention of Persons) Decree 1984, which allows indefinite detention without trial. At the beginning of 1985 hundreds of people were detained under this decree of whom several were prisoners of conscience. For example. Amnesty International appealed for the release of Tai Solarin, a teacher and joumalist held since 12 March 1984 apparently because he had written a series of newspaper articles critical of SMC policy. He was eventually freed on 6 August, when some 85 prisoners were released by order of the SMC. Among the others released were former holders of public office (such as Alhaji Lawal Kaita, former Govemor of Kaduna State). Also detained under SMC Decree No. 2 were former President Shehu Shagari, who had been overthrown by a military coup led by Major-General Buhari on 31 December 1983, members
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	77	Japan
of former President Shagari's govemment who were suspected of misuse of public office, and other people suspected of common law offences such as embezzlement and smuggling. In Febmary the SMC detained four leading members of the Nigerian Medical Association (NMA), Edmondson Thompson-Akpabio, Beko Ransome-Kuti, G.T.N. Ajakpo and Rotimi Ola. Ilie NMA had called for its members to take industrial action over inadequate health care facilities. They were also released on 6 August by order of the SMC.
After the change of govemment on 27 August, the AFRC released hundreds of detainees. Many had been held under SMC Decree No. 2, including Mallam Haroun Adamu, a journalist, who had been held without trial since January 1984 and had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience, Lateef Jakande, former Governor of Lagos State, and Ebenezer Babatope, a former senior official of the Unity Party of Nigeria. The new govemment also released some 101 people who, it appeared, had been illegally detained under the SMC govemment at the Lagos headquarters of the National Security Organization (NSO), the main security agency. Some had apparently been held on suspicion of criminal offences and others as witnesses in criminal cases, but they also included security personnel detained as punishment for alleged misdemeanours and people detained for political reasons. Some of them were observed by joumalists, to whom they were presented by the new govemment, to be in poor health. One had a fractured skull.
The new govemment did not, however, release Fela Anikulapo Kuti, an intemationally renowned musician, who was sentenced to five years' imprisonment in November 1984 on charges of currency smuggling. His trial, before a sp>ecial tribunal, did not conform to intemationally recognized standards of faimess, and there were reasons to believe that he had been convicted for political reasons on the instmctions of senior members of the SMC. He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience and Amnesty Intemational continued to call for his release throughout 1985.
The new govemment also detained without charge some former officials or office holders associated with the SMC. At the end of 1985 Major-General Muhammadu Buhari and Major-General Tunde Idiagbon, respectively the former Chairman of the SMC and the former Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters, were reported to be under house arrest. Mohammed Rafindadi, former NSO director, was apparently still held in prison. In late December, the govemment was reported to have detained dozens of people suspected of involvement in a planned coup which was reportedly uncovered on 20 December. None of them were known to have been formally charged by the end of 1985.
78
Amnesty International Report 1986
At the time of his appointment as President, Major-General Babangida announced the abolition of SMC Decree No. 4. Subsequently, the AFRC established judicial panels to investigate several SMC decrees, including in particular those which had resulted in human rights abuses on a large scale. By the end of 1985 judicial panels were investigating the identities of people detained under SMC Decree No. 2, the cases of people convicted by special tribunals established by the SMC, and the operation of SMC Decree No. 20, the Special Tribunal (Miscellaneous Offences) Decree, which extended the application of the death penalty.
By the end of 1985 the judicial panel inquiring into SMC Decree No. 20 was examining the cases of some 180 people sentenced to death under its terms. On the panel's recommendation the govemment suspended the use of the death penalty in cases of people convicted of oil smuggling or dmg trafficking. Three people are known to have been executed during 1985 under SMC Decree No. 20. Bartholomew Azubike Owoh, Akanni Ojulope and Bernard Ogendegbe were publicly executed by firing-squad on 10 April. Of the 68 executions reported to Amnesty International, all but these three were for murder or armed robbery. Amnesty International also learned of 144 death sentences, most passed on people convicted by special tribunals.
