Burundi
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, who included detainees held without trial and five people sentenced to prison terms in December; reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners; and the death penalty.
Amnesty International received information about approximately 50 people who were detained without trial during 1985, most on account of opposition to government curbs on religious activities. These curbs, which prohibited religious meetings on days other than Sundays or Saturday afternoons, were introduced in 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985) by order of the Interior Minister. He reaffirmed the ban in February 1985 and stated that no public meetings at all were to take place without prior approval from local government officials. Youth organizations whose activities were social rather than religious were specifically affected. As in 1984, the way in which the restrictions were implemented across the country varied. In July, for example, it was mainly in Gitega province that Roman Catholic priests were imprisoned for encouraging members of the public to attend early morning religious services, although priests were reported to have engaged in similar activities elsewhere.
In March the government responded in an 11-page statement to the concern expressed by Amnesty Intemational during 1984 about the imprisonment of church members for contravening govemment-imposed restrictions on religious activities. The govemment said that, at the time of its reply, there were no prisoners of conscience or political detainees in Bumndi although it accepted that some people had been imprisoned for making "subversive" or "defamatory" remarks about state institutions or for failing to obey ministerial
28	Amnesty Intematiwial Report 1986
directives. According to the government, restrictions introduced in 1984 affected all public meetings, not only those concerned with religious activity, and were intended both to avoid people wasting their time and to increase productive work.
In July Amnesty Intemational sent an aide-mémoire explaining the organization's view that the people detained in 1984 and early 1985 in connection with the ban on meetings were prisoners of conscience. It also expressed concern that the security police and other branches of the security forces appeared to have unlimited powers to imprison suspects due to the failure to ensure that normal legal procedures for referring detainees to the judiciary were observed.
At least 10 members of a youth club organized by the Roman Catholic church at Buhonga, near the capital, Bujumbura, were arrested in January. The ban on unauthorized meetings might have been one cause of their arrest but they were also apparently suspected of attempting to organize Hutu opposition to the government, which is composed largely of members of the Tutsi community. One of the students, Jean Mbayahaga, was reportedly beaten and accused of being in contact with refugees living abroad, while another, Gervais Muja, w^ said to have been severely beaten and to have been kept in handcuffs for most of his time in prison. The parish priest of Buhonga, Magnus Ndinze, was also arrested in February. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that these and other prisoners were imprisoned on account of their non-violent political views, without charge and without having been remanded in custody by a judge.
In July and August, 13 Roman Catholic priests were arrested for holding morning services on weekdays. They were detained for between one and five weeks, but were all released uncharged by mid-August.
At least 16 other people, including four priests, were arrested between late July and September after an anonymous letter addressed to the Roman Catholic Bishop of Bujumbura urging him to defy the government's ban on weekday religious services and comparing the government to Satan, was intercepted by the authorities. One of the alleged authors of the letter, Joseph Gacukuzi, escaped arrest in late July by going to neighbouring Rwanda. There, however, he was detained until mid-August, when he was forcibly repatriated to Bumndi and arrested. Some of those arrested in connection with the letter to the Bishop of Bujumbura were subsequently released uncharged. Eleven, however, including Joseph Gacukuzi, were charged with insulting the head of state and some were also charged with assisting Joseph Gacukuzi to evade arrest. They were tried between 5 November and 7 December before the tribunal de grande instance (High Court) in Bujumbura. The trial
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
29	Japan
was conducted in camera with all but two of the defendants assisted by lawyers. Joseph Gacukuzi, Gabriel Barakana, a priest and former university rector, and three others were convicted of complicity in insulting the head of state and sentenced to between two and five years' imprisonment. Four others, all of whom had been released from prison before the trial, were each sentenced to seven days' imprisonment for helping Joseph Gacukuzi to evade arrest. The two remaining defendants were acquitted. Amnesty International adopted the five convicted defendants as pr^ners of conscience. Although most of those arrested in connection with the anonymous letter were tried or released, several people were still detained without trial at the end of 1985 apparently because they were suspected of complicity in its production. They included Philippe Minani, a former Minister of Justice, who was arrested in late July or early August 1985.
Several other people were also believed still to be in detention without trial at the end of 1985. They included Thomas Hamenyi-mana, a trader, who was arrested in early 1985 and apparently accused of criticizing the government. He had previously been detained without trial for five months in 1984. Victor Bucumi, a school teacher, and a group of farmers from Mikoni in Kayanza province were also believed still to be detained. They were reportedly arrested in February and accused of being in contact with Hutu opponents of the govemment living abroad. In another case, Simeon Nzishura, a Protestant pastor, was imprisoned when he was forcibly retumed to Burundi in October from Zaire, where he had sought political asylum in May. The Burundi authorities said that he was wanted for criminal offences but it appeared that the real reason for both his repatriation and imprisonment might be political.
At least three of the defendants in the November trial were reportedly tortured or ill-treated in pretrial custody. One, Cyprien Ndamukenanye, was reported to have been tortured in early August. Joseph Gacukuzi and another defendant, Antoine Manirakiza, were reported to have been severely beaten after their arrest when security police took them from Mpimba prison to a police interrogation centre.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the use of the death penalty. At least six people were sentenced to death for murder or attempted murder and armed robbery but there was no information about executions.
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
