Madagascar
Amnesty International was concemed about the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the govemment and about reports that five members of the Roman Catholic Church who died in 1984 or 1985 may have been victims of extrajudicial executions. There were also reports of severe overcrowding and inhuman conditions in some prisons.
On 1 August govemment security forces attacked the houses of many people in the capital, Antananarivo, suspected of belonging to illegal martial arts, or kung fu, clubs. A number of violent clashes had previously been reported between members of kung fu clubs and members of the Tanora Tonga Saina (TTS), a youth organization which supports the govemment. At least 20 people, but perhaps as many as 60, were reported to have been kiUed on 1 August. The govemment stated that 208 members of kung fu clubs were detained on that date or shortly after. By the end of 1985 none were known to have been charged or tried but some had been released. In November Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to publish the names of those detained and to release those who were not to be charged and tried with criminal offences.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	63	Japan
Amnesty International also called on the authorities in November to investigate the death of Father Sergio Sorgone, a Roman Catholic priest who was killed on 7 January near Moramanga, close to a TTS camp. Information received by Amnesty Intemational suggested that he had been killed for political reasons by members of the TTS. Amnesty Intemational also received information about four other members of the Roman Catholic Church who were alleged to have been victims of political killings. Among them was Brother Gérard Roy, a Roman Catholic brother murdered by an unknown assailant on 28 May 1984. He was administrative secretary of the Episcopal Conference of Madagascar, with responsibility for church finances. Unofficial sources alleged that he was killed because he knew of financial improprieties by govemment authorities. Amnesty Intemational had no evidence of the direct involvement of govemment officials in these killings but believed that the govemment had an obligation to investigate them and to bring to justice those responsible.
Amnesty Intemational received reports concerning overcrowding and malnutrition in prisons, esp>ecially at Antanimora and on the prison island of Nosy Lava. No political prisoners were known to be held in either prison.
The Human Rights Committee, established under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, adopted views on two communications submitted under the Optional Protocol by individuals alleging that the Govemment of Madagascar had violated their rights. It found that John Wight, a South African national held from January 1977 to February 1984, had been held in inhuman conditions, in particular at the security police headquarters at Ambohibao, in contravention of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In the ceise of Monja Jaona, a political party leader detained without trial at least twice, whom Amnesty Intemational had adopted as a prisoner of conscience, the Human Rights Committee found that he had been persecuted on account of his political opinions and should be compensated by the govemment.
64
Amnesty International Report 1986
