Morocco
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational was con-cemed about the continued imprisonment of 190 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. It was also concemed about pretrial and trial procedures for political prisoners, which did not conform to intemational standards; incommunicado detention; the torture and ill-treatment of detainees and deaths in custody; "disappearances"; and the death penalty. Amnesty Intemational was
350	Amnesty International Report 1986
also concerned about the fate of a number of individuals said to be detained by the Polisario Front, some of whom had reportedly been held since 1975.
On 24 November 1985 King Hassan II denied at a press conference Amnesty Intemational reports of human rights violations in Morocco and invited the organization to visit the country to investigate these reports. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the King accepting the invitation.
In 1985 Amnesty Intemational continued working for the release of 66 prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 124 possible prisoners of conscience. Most of the adopted prisoners of conscience had been sentenced to long prison terms in 1977 on charges including plotting against the internal security of the state and membership of various Marxist-Leninist groups. In the course of 1985 three prisoners of conscience were released upon expiry of their sentences.
In 1985 Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of four imprisoned members of the Union socialiste des forces populaires (USFP), Socialist Union of Popular Forces, and of more than 80 Saharans who allegedly "disappeared" in 1976 after being taken into custody by Moroccan security forces in the context of the dispute between Morocco and the Polisario Front for control of the Westem Sahara (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Amnesty International also continued to investigate the cases of 31 individuals, mainly students, arrested in January 1984 after riots in many cities, who were tried by the Criminal Chamber of the Court of Appeal in Marrakech on 26 May 1984. The prosecution based its case on the defendants' confessions, allegedly obtained under torture, and on leaflets of MarxKt-Leninist inspiration. The defendants admitted possessing some of the literature but said that it contained no ideas which were against the law. They also denied that some of the leaflets had been in their possession, claiming that they were written while they were in police custody. They were sentenced to prison terms of up to 15 yeare on charges including conspiracy to overthrow the monarchy. Amnesty International believed that the trial fell short of internationally recognized standards in a number of respects, including denying the defence its right to call witnesses and accepting as evidence confessions allegedly extracted under torture.
Twenty-three miners arrested following industrial action which started on 24 August 1985 were tried by the court of first instance of Oujda on 10 September. They were accused of holding unauthorized gatherings and disturbing public order and received prison terms ranging from six months to one year, plus fines. On 17 October the court of appeal of Oujda reviewed the cases, acquitted three and reduced the sentences of the remaining 20 to between one and three
Amnesty International Report 1986	351
months. On 17 October Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities for the precise charges faced, as it feared that the defendants might be prisoners of conscience. No reply had been received by the end of
1985.
In September Amnesty Intemational submitted the case of Abdelrazzak A1 Nouhaili, a student who had remained in incommunicado detention without charge or trial since February 1983, to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that the authorities have refused to disclose the reasons for his detention or his whereabouts.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned at a number of pretrial and trial procedures involving political prisoners which fell short of intemational standards. Defendants were arrested without warrant and held incommunicado for up to several months, contrary to the provisions of Moroccan law; information and confessions presented as evidence in court were reportedly extracted under torture; the courts rejected defence requests to call witnesses and refused to investigate allegations of torture and of falsification of both police records and defendants' confessions.
During October and November 1985 more than 40 individuals including students, lawyers and doctors were arrested in several cities, allegedly in connection with the distribution of a leaflet by an illegal leftist group, Ila Al Amam. Most were held in incommunicado detention exceeding the legal limits. Amnesty Intemational feared that these individuals might have been detained for their non-violent, conscientiously held beliefs, and was also concerned for their physical safety as there were frequent allegations of ill-treatment and torture of incommunicado detainees. Amnesty International appealed for further information on the circumstances surrounding their arrest and detention, and called for them to be allowed immediate access to their families and lawyers of their choice. No reply had been received by the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational leamed that a number of those arrested were later released without charge, and that those remaining in custody were presented before the juge d'instruction, examining magistrate, and reportedly charged with various offences against public order, including possession and distribution of leaflets and belonging to an illegal organization. Amnesty Intemational was still investigating their cases at the end of 1985.
Amnesty International continued to express its concern to the authorities about reports that political detainees were routinely subjected to torture and ill-treatment. According to reports, detainees were subjected to different methods of torture, including electric shocks, buming with cigarettes and suspension in different positions for long periods. Reports indicated that torture was
352	Amnesty International Report 1986
widespread, systematic and used principally during garde a vue, incommunicado detention, which was often illegally prolonged to several months, to extract information and to force detainees to sign falsified confessions which were later invoked in legal proceedings. On 6 November Tahani Amine, an engineer, died in police custody, allegedly as a result of torture, 11 days after his arrest. Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to set up an independent inquiry into the circumstances of his death and to make public its findings.
Amnesty International also continued to receive reports that political detainees were denied adequate medical treatment and subjected to conditions which the organization considered amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. A number of hunger-strikes were staged during 1985 in protest at ill-treatment. In January and June 1985 Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of two prisoners of conscience, Mohammed Laghrissi and Mohammed Kamouni, both imprisoned since 1977 and said to be suffering from serious health problems for which they had been denied medical treatment. Mohammed Laghrissi was allegedly beaten by guards and kept naked in a cold and dark cell in solitary confinement for several days. Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities to investigate these reports and to give the two prisoners medical treatment. In September Amnesty Intemational also appealed on behalf of Karim Abdel Aziz, who was reportedly not receiving the necessary treatment for a heart complaint. The authorities replied that the prisoner was receiving appropriate specialist treatment in hospital. On 25 April nine prisoners in Marrakech prison whose cases were under investigation by Amnesty Intemational went on indefinite hunger-strike, listing a number of demands including adequate medical care. Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to provide this. Later the nine were transferred to Averroes hospital and were said to be in a coma. Throughout their hunger-strike the prisoners were not allowed any visits from relatives or independent doctors.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be seriously concerned about the fate of approximately 100 military pem)nnel arrested and imprisoned after being convicted of participation in attempted coups in 1971 and 1972. Since 1973 they had been denied any outside contact. Reports indicated that they were being held in a secret detention centre in filthy, windowless cells, with inadequate food and no medical care. They were, in addition, reported to be subjected to beatings and other hareh punishments. Some were held long after their sentences had expired, and Amnesty Intemational received reports that around 20 had died because of the conditions. The authorities continued to refuse to clarify their situation or to acknowledge where they were held.
Amnesty International Report 1986	353
Amnesty Intemational also continued to be concemed about the fate of a number of Polisario Front members reportedly held by the Polisario Front since 1975 for criticizing the movement's intemal policies, and about a small number of Moroccan civilians living in the Westem Sahara area also reportedly detained since 1979. Amnesty Intemational met representatives of the Polisario Front during 1985 and reiterated its concem about allegations of human rights violations by the Front, requesting information relating to these detentions. No reply had been received by the end of 1985.
i^nesty Intemational did not leam of any executions during 1985, but was concemed about the passing in Casablanca on 2 September of 14 death sentences, nine in absentia, for plotting to overthrow the monarchy. On 11 December 1985, Jacques Gouraud was sentenced to death after being found guilty of murder. In all cases Amnesty Intemational appealed urgently for the sentences to be commuted, but without receiving any reply.

