Kuwait
Amnesty International's major concern during the year was the increase in the number of allegatk)ns of torture, in some cases leading to death, and the apparent government endorsement of a torture method known as falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet). The organization was also concerned about the fairness of trials before the State Security Court of political prisoners, some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience; the increase in the number of offences punishable by death; and the continued deportation of foreign nationals who mi^t be in danger of becoming prisoners of conscience or of facing torture or execution if returned to their own countries.
Amnesty International was concerned about an increasing number of reports of torture and ill-treatment, indicating that the use of such practices against prisoners by security forces was common. Reported methods of torture included beatings on all parts of the body, falaqa, extraction of nails, use of electricity and sexual assaults. It was reported in one instance that 11 individuals arrested in March in connection with the murder of an Iraqi diplomat and his son were tortured while detained. At the end of 1985 Amnesty International
341	Amnesty International Report 1986
received information suggesting tímt two of them, Rikan al-Fadhli and Sa'ud Matar, had in fact died in March following severe beating, although it was also alleged that they had been poisoned. Of the remaining nine, Juda Ba'nun Qatqut was said to have suffered anal injuries and collapse of the kidneys after having been forced to sit on a stick. Amnesty Intemational also learned in December that six other prisoners, five Iranians and one Iraqi, had died, reportedly under torture. Little information was available about these cases and the organization was seeking further details.
Amnesty Intemational was disturbed by a statement made on 2 July to the National Assembly by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs denying the use of electric shock torture in Kuwait but admitting and defending the use of falaqa. He was reported in the Kuwaiti press as stating that "it is our right as a govemment" to adopt such a practice and that it would continue as long as the security and stability of Kuwait required it. Amnesty Intemational, which considers falaqa to be torture and as such prohibited by intemational human rights standards, asked for clarification of the govemment's position but received no response.
Amnesty Intemational learned of three trials before the State Security Court during 1985, all held in camera. They resulted in prison sentences for five individuals, some of whom might be prisoners of conscience. One, KamU Husayn 'Ali Dashti, was sentenced in November to five years' imprisonment for having written a leaflet calling for the overthrow of the govemment. He was allegedly held incommunicado and tortured following his arrest in June. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the secrecy of the proceedings and the lack of appeal against the court's verdicts.
Amnesty Intemational regretted the extension in July of the death penalty to crimes previously punishable by imprisonment. The new legislation covered offences such as bomb attacks on individuals and public places and was adopted following an assassination attempt on the Amir of Kuwait on 25 May and bomb attacks on two cafés on 11 July in which a number of people were killed. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities and to members of the National i-^sembly not to pass such legislation as it was incompatible with UN Resolution 32/61 of 8 December 1977 which calls for a progressive restriction of the number of offences pun^hable by death. The organization also resetted the passing of two death sentences and the execution of four prisoners, all convicted of murder, and continued to appeal for the commutation of any outstanding death sentences.
The deportation of foreign nationals continued in 1985, as in previous years. Several thousand individuals, the majority of them Iranians and Iraqis, were deported. Amnesty Intemational continued
342	Amnesty International Report 1986
to seek assurances that such individuals would not be forcibly retumed to countries where they might become prisoners of conscience, or face torture or execution.
