Egypt
Amnesty International was concerned about the arrest and detention of possible prisoners of conscience, including people calling for the implementation of the Shari'a (Islamic law) and participants in demonstrations against Egypt's foreign policy. Insufficient safeguards against torture or ill-treatment of detainees and moves to extend the death penalty by making it mandatory for drug-trafficking offences were also of concern to the organization. Reports were received of 24 death sentences (13 of which were passed in absentia) and one execution during the year.
In May Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial of 47 people charged in connection with the banned Egyptian Communist Party (Supreme State Security Case No. 207 of 1981 — see Amnesty International Report 1983). None of the defendants was in custody at the time of Amnesty International's mission, and the trial was still in progress before the (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court in Cairo at the end of 1985.
In early January Amnesty International learned of the release of Pope Shenouda III, who had been physically restricted to a monastery in Wadi Natroun since September 1981. Amnesty International wrote to the government welcoming the news that the Coptic Pope, whom it had adopted as a prisoner of conscience, had been released, and sought assurances that all physical restrictions previously imf)osed on him had been lifted.
During 1985 the organization received reports of hundreds of arrests on political and religious grounds. Among those arrested were alleged members of banned poOtical organizations and people who had taken part in protests against Israel's participation in the Cairo
Amnesty International Report 1986	325
bookfair. Also arrested were people alleged to have planned or participated in other anti-Israeli or anti-US demonstrations, members of the Baha'i faith and individuals who distributed pamphlets in mosques and elsewhere calling for the full implementation of the Islamic Shari'a in Egypt. Among those arrested were two prominent religious leaders, Sheikh Hafez Salama and Dr Omar Abdul Rahman. Dr Abdul Rahman, a blind teacher of theology, had previously been acquitted of offences relating to the banned Jihad organization. Arrested in July and released on 5 November, Dr Abdul Rahman had spent more than three of the previous four years in prison, without having been convicted of any offence.
The majority of those arrested during 1985 were held under legislation related to the state of emergency for periods ranging from several days to four months. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities several times during 1985, expressing concem about the continuing arrests and urging the release of any prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational called on the authorities to make public the names and whereabouts of all those detained and asked to be informed of the charges against them. The organization sought assurances that all detainees were allowed regular access to a lawyer of their choice, to a doctor when necessary, and to relatives. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that state of emergency provisions and related legislation were being applied to detain without charge political or religious opponents of govemment policies, in contravention of Article 9(2) of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In addition, these prov^ions were being applied to imprison individuals, sometimes repeatedly, for peaceful opposition to government policies, in contravention of Article 19 guaranteeing the right to freedom of expression. Egypt ratified the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1982.
On 1 March Amnesty Intemational published Egypt: Evidence of Torture 1981-1983. The document had been sent to the Egyptian Govemment for comment in December 1984 and on 12 June 1985 the organization received a memorandum from the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs in response. The government's memorandum referred to constitutional and other legislative guarantees of personal and social liberty, as well as provisions safeguarding detainees from torture, and reaffirmed Egypt's commitment to intemational human rights instruments. It added that the state of emergency legislation included "several guarantees for suspects and those arrested". In response to an earlier request from Amnesty Intemational for information about several reported deaths in custody it noted that in one case the victim was killed in "an armed clash between the police and a group of extremists". Other cases were stiU under investigation.
326	Amnesty International Report 1986
Amnesty International subsequently published the two documents together, on 1 August, under the title Torture in Egypt 1981-1983: Amnesty International's Evidence and the Government's Response.
Amnesty International wrote to Egypt's Ambassador in London welcoming the government's response, but also expressing the hope that the Egyptian Government would give serious consideration to implementing Amnesty International's specific recommendations for safeguards against torture and ill-treatment of detainees. These included more fi^equent visits to inspect prisons where untried detainees are held by niyaba (State Prosecutor's Department) personnel, who should be instructed to investigate immediately prisoners' complaints of torture or ill-treatment. Amnesty International recommended that a thorough report of each visit be submitted to a central authority and made available to lawyers and other relevant parties. At the same time Amnesty International reiterated its request to be informed of the results and procedures of an investigation which was reportedly opened in 1984 into torture allegations dating back to October 1981, and of any measures taken to compensate the victims and bring to justice those responsible.
Amnesty International continued to receive occasional reports of torture or ill-treatment of detainees during 1985, and was concerned about the reported deaths in custody of five people arrested in separate cases of a non-political nature. AH were held in police stations where they were allegedly tortured or ill-treated.
On 10 January the (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court in Cairo acquitted 10 people accused of belonging to a banned communist group {Al-Haraka Ash-Sha'abiya) and sentenced six others to terms of three and five years' imprisonment. In reaching its verdict, the court held that the defendants' confessions were null and void since they were made in "an atmosphere of torture and coercion" and that the defendants' oral testimony about their treatment was supported by forensic medical examinations.
During 1985 Amnesty International learned of 24 death sentences and one execution. Four of the death sentences, and the execution, were for murder and other offences. Five men were sentenced to death by a Cairo court in April, convicted of kidnapping and rape, and Egyptian press reports stated that 12 people had been sentenced to death in absentia for communicating with Libya and for attacks on Egyptian soldiers on the Egypt/Libya border in 1977. In November a Lebanese national was reportedly sentenced to death in absentia on charges related to drug smuggling, and in December a Somali and a Sri Lankan national received death sentences on similar charges. Amnesty International urged President Muhammad Hosni Mubarak to commute the death sentences in all cases.
Amnesty International Report 1986	327
On 21 November Amnesty International wrote to the government following reports that there were plans to introduce legislation providing mandatory death sentences for drug traffickers. Amnesty International explained its unconditional opposition to the use of the death penalty, and said that while it appreciated "the need to find effective measures to eradicate the destructive practice of illicit drug traffic, . . . there is no scientific evidence that the death penalty deters any type of crime more effectively than other punishments".
