Cuba
Amnesty International's concerns centred on prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, and on the prison conditions of long-term political prisoners.lt leamed of the release of a number of political prisoners during 1985, including
144	Amnesty International Report 1986
several prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the death penalty remained in force.
By the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was working on the cases of seven prisoners, either because it considered them to be prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience, or because it was trying to clarify the circumstances and judicial procedures of their trials.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the unconditional release of Edmigio López Castillo, a former Communist Party member, arrested in March 1980 and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for attempting to send abroad drawings considered to be defamatory to the govemment. Reportedly in poor health, he apparently received medical treatment. He was in Combinado del Este prison in Havana and was allowed visits only every six months.
Ariel Hidalgo Guillen was another prisoner of conscience on whose behalf Amnesty International appealed. He was detained in August 1981, reportedly by members of the Seguridad del Estado, State Security Police. Very little information was available about his trial but he was believed to have been charged with "enemy propaganda" and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment under Article 108.1 of the Cuban Penal Code, which states, inter alia: "A sanction of one to eight years' loss of liberty is applicable to anyone who a) incites against social order, international solidarity or the socialist state, by means of oral, written or any other kind of propaganda; b) prepares, distributes or possesses [such] propaganda". According to reports, the main evidence presented against him consisted of testimonies of members of the local Comité de Defensa de la Revolución (CDR), Committee for the Defence of the Revolution. Amnesty International, however, believed that, although apparently not mentioned during the trial, the real reason for his conviction was the fact that the police had reportedly found in his home an unpublished manuscript entitled Cuba, the Marxist State and the New Class which criticized the political system in Cuba and other socialist countries from a Marxist point of view. After his trial Ariel Hidalgo was imprisoned in Combinado del Este prison and reportedly held in solitary confinement for 14 months. He was then moved to a regular cell, where his wife was able to visit him once a month for two hours and take him food but no writing or reading material. In August 1984 the visits were reportedly cut to three per year.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of Raúl Pérez Ribalta, arrested in January 1979 and sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment for espionage; Amado Rodriguez Fernández, arrested in July 1984 and sentenced to 15 years for "rebellion" and "enemy
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	145	Japan
propaganda"; and Felix José Agudo Escudero, arrested on 17 October 1983 and sentenced to 10 years for sabotage. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the lack of concrete evidence that the court transcripts revealed, suggesting that the sentences might have been passed on account of the defendants' political views. For example, while it appeared that the sugar mill in which Felix José Agudo Escudero was a technician had been damaged, possibly as a result of his negligence, Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the accusation of politically motivated sabotage had not been substantiated. No suggestion was made, for example, that he belonged to, or had contact with, opposition groups. The basis for his conviction seemed to be that he had a previous conviction for counter-revolutionary activities and was considered to be "hostile to the revolutionary process".
In the case of Raúl Pérez Ribalta, sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment for espionage on behalf of China, the provisional conclusions of the public prosecutor list the written material found on Raúl Pérez Ribalta as: "Maoist books, news bulletins and information from Xin Jua'' (the official Chinese news agency). It then accuses him of "maintenance of a Maoist, pro-China, anti-Soviet and non-Cuban attitude, detrimental to the intemational solidarity practised by Cuba".
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of Orestes Bautista González and Gustavo Arcos Bergnes, the latter a former ambassador to Belgium (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985), but no new information was obtained.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational, Juan Luis Orlando Ruiz González (known as Luis Ruiz) and Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz, were released in November and December 1985 respectively. They had both been arrested in April 1980 and sentenced to six years and five years nine months' imprisonment respectively. Another prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational, Ricardo BofiU Pagés, was released on 8 August 1985. He had been arrested in September 1983 after having been interviewed by two French joumalists (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). After his release he again applied to leave the country and join his wife in the USA, but had not succeeded by the end of 1985.
At the end of the year Amnesty Intemational received information on three Jehovah's Witnesses serving eight-year prison sentences, reportedly for their religious activities. According to the reports Juan del Rio Vargas and Luis Felipe Santos were released in May 1983, and Felipe Hemández Martínez had died in prison as a result of illness in 1981. No further details were available and Amnesty
146	Amnesty International Report 1986
Intemational was unable to confimi reports of arrests of other Jehovah's Witnesses.
Amnesty Intemational continued to monitor the situation of the group of long-term political prisoners known as plantados, a number of whom were released during 1985. By November 1985, according to one of those released, 51 plantados were in Boniato prison in Santiago in the eastern province of Oriente and 43 in Combinado del Este prison in Havana. Among those released were Silvino Rodriguez Barrientos, Guillermo Casasús Toledo, Santos Mirabal Rodriguez and José Soca Domínguez (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Amnesty Intemational had addressed the Cuban Govemment on behalf of Silvino Rodriguez and Guillermo Casasús because of allegations that they had been ill-treated and taken from the prison to an unknown detention centre, and on behalf of Santos Mirabal Rodriguez and José Soca because they were believed to be in detention after the expiry of their sentences. Towards the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational received conflicting reports about the transfer of some 75 plantados from Boniato to Combinado del Este prison apparently in a move towards their eventual release. Reports indicated that the strict detention regime to which many plantados had been subjected over the years (that is, long periods — sometimes years at a time — without visitors or correspondence, as punishment for their refusal to comply with prison regulations such as wearing uniform) had been progressively relaxed. However, no details were available as to whether this relaxation affected all prisoners.
Amnesty International was aware of the existence of some 200 other prisoners apparently held for politically related offences, but knew of no reliable estimate of the number of political prisoners in Cuba.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the death penalty remained in force but no new reports of executions were received during 1985. No response was received from the government to inquiries on the subject.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	147	Japan
