Kampuchea (Cambodia)
Amnesty International was con-œmed about violations of the human rights of people under the administrative authority of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK), and under the administrative authority of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK). Amnesty International's concerns regarding the PRK included rep)orts that at least some of the hundreds of people officially stated to have been arrested on political grounds during 1985 were imprisoned without trial and tortured or ill-treated. Hie organization believed that some may have been prisoners of conscience. Thousands of people officially described as "misled persons" were stated to have surrendered themselves to PRK government authorities during 1985, and Amnesty International was concerned that some had reportedly been detained without trial for "re-education". Amnesty International's concerns regarding the CGDK included reports that some of its com|X)nent parties had committed extrajudicial executions, had held prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners without trial, and had subjected individuals in their custody to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
Political and military strife continued in Kampuchea (Cambodia) throughout 1985. Vietnamese troops and advisory experts remained in significant numbers in the PRK. Fighting along the country's border with Thailand that began in late 1984 and ended in early 1985 resulted in the relocation of the overwhelming majority of the civilian population under the control of the CGDK to "evacuation sites" in Thailand. There they remained under the administrative authority of the CGDK's three component elements: the Partie of Democratic Kampuchea (PDK), the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) and the National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC). The CGDK continued to be recognized by the UN.
In 1985 Amnesty International received new information corroborating earlier reports (see Amnesty International Report 1985) that during 1984 and in previous years, PRK and Vietnamese security and military personnel grossly and consistently violated the human rights of Kampucheans subject to their authority. Among these violations was the long-term detention without charge or trial of many people, including prisoners of conscience, suspected of dissenting fi*om PRK policies or of being involved with opposition activities of the three
231	Amnesty International Report 1986
components of the CGDK or other groups. Numerous reports were also received that in 1984 and earlier years people held on account of suspected political activities were systematically tortured and routinely held shackled in lightless solitary confinement cells for long periods, and that political detainees had died as a result of ill-treatment and lack of medical care and food.
The information available to Amnesty International during 1985 was insufficient to allow it to ascertain the precise extent to which such human rights violations continued. Amnesty International did, however, receive reports indicating that political arrests remained commonplace and that some political detainees were held without charge or trial, tortured and placed in completely lightless cells.
The PRK's official news media confirmed that numerous political arrests took place during 1985. In one of the PRK's 20 provinces and municipalities, Kampung Cham, 112 "implanted enemies" were stated to have been arrested between January and June 1985, while in a second, Siem Reap-Utdar Meanchey, 111 "enemy elements" were stated to have been arrested. Other official statements mentioned political arrests in Batdambang, Kracheh, Kampot, Kampung Thom and Phnom Penh. However, to Amnesty International's knowledge, the official news media broadcast no accounts of political trials during 1985.
Amnesty International wrote in June to the PRK Vice Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Minister of Defence, Bou Thang, and in November to the PRK First Vice Minister of the Interior requesting information about any charges against those arrested, whether or when they were due to be tried, and whether they were being allowed access to legal counsel and family. It also asked for assurances that they would be treated in accordance with internationally recognized human rights standards.
In these letters. Amnesty International also expressed concern about the detention or restriction for "re-education" without charge or trial of those who are officially termed "misled persons". These are understood to be defined as people who voluntarily surrender themselves to the custody of the PRK authorities to take advantage of an officially proclaimed "policy of clemency" that offers them exemption from formal prosecution for activities they may have carried out on behalf of the CGDK or other opposition groups, provided they demonstrate loyalty to the PRK. Official reports stated that 3,314 "misled persons" had turned themselves in between October 1984 and June 1985, and that several hundred such people had surrendered themselves each month after June. Some "misled persons" were alleged to have been threatened by local authorities with indefinite extension of their detention. Amnesty International
232	Amnesty International Report 1986
expressed concern that "misled persons" were not offered any legal safeguards against arbitrary detention and urged the PRK to promulgate such safeguards. In July, Amnesty International wrote also to the PRK Minister of Justice to ask for his assistance in obtaining information about recent developments in the PRK legal and judicial systems. As of the end of 1985, Amnesty International had received no replies to any of its letters.
With regard to the CGDK, Amnesty International was concerned about reports that PDK soldiers had killed several Kampuchean civilians in May at a PDK-administered reftigee evacuation site after they had refused to perform military labour service and had expressed their political support for FUNCINPEC and CGDK President Prince Norodom Sihanouk. Other FUNCINPEC supporters were reported to have been detained without charge or tri^ at a PDK military base where they were beaten or compelled to work in areas where there were known to be mines. In a letter to the PDK Minister of National Defence, Son Sen, the organization urged the PDK to investigate these reports and to release all individuals detained because of their conscientious objection to military labour service and their non-violent political views. In response, the CGDK Vice President Khieu Samphan acknowledged that the reported deaths and detentions might have occurred, but disclaimed any PDK responsibility for them. Amnesty International subsequently received reports that at least some of those detained during the original incident were still in custody.
Amnesty International's concerns with regard to the KPNLF included the detention without charge or trial of alleged political dissidents by KPNLF soldiers at refugee evacuation sites and military bases. It was also concerned about reports that at one military base they had raped Vietnamese and other refugee women taken into their custody, and that at another they had extrajudicially killed alleged political opponents and suspected common criminal offenders. These concerns were communicated to CGDK Prime Minister and KPNLF President Son Sann in a December letter following a meeting between him and Amnesty International. In this meeting, he had acknowledged abuses committed by the KPNLF in 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985) and had asked Amnesty International to recommend ways of remedying the human rights ix)licies and practices of the CGDK and KPNLF. In its letter Ajnnesty International called for an investigation into the abuses reportedly committed during 1985, and for the release of all prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International also expressed concern that people under CGDK and KPNLF administrative authority were effectively denied legal protection for their internationally recognized
233	Amnesty International Report 1986
human rights. It urged the CGDK and KPNLF to put into effect such guarantees.
Amnesty International had no information about the human rights situation in areas under the administrative authority of the FUNCIN-PEC. It did, however, communicate to CGDK and FUNCINPEC President Prince Norodom Sihanouk its concern that the FUNCINPEC had also failed to estabhsh effective legal guarantees for the human rights of those under its administrative authority, and urged it to do so.
Korea (Democratic People s Republic of)
Amnesty International's work on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) continued to be seriously hampered by the authorities' refusal to divulge information about arrests, political imprisonment, trials or the death penalty. The only exception known to Amnesty International was the announcement of arrests of people allegedly entering the DPRK to carry out espionage.
However, a range of sources continued to report human rights violations of potential concern to Amnesty International. In May the organization published a review of its concerns in the DPRK. These included the detention of political prisoners, trial procedures and the death penalty.
Amnesty International continued to investigate reports of political imprisonment, including the cases of four prominent political figures reportedly arrested between 1967 and 1977 — Pak Kum-chol, Kim Chang-bong, Ryu Chang-shik and Li Yong-mu (see Amnesty International Report 1985) — but remained unable to confirm whether they were still in detention.
Amnesty International has received no information about trials of political prisoners since the account of Ali Lameda, a Venezuelan working for the Government of the DPRK who was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 1968 (see Ali Lameda: A Personal Account of the Experience of a Prisoner of Conscience in the DPRK, Amnesty International 1979). This trial did not conform to internationally recognized standards of fairness.
234	Amnesty International Report 1986
The death penalty is provided for a range of criminal and political offences in the penal code. However, Amnesty International had no information indicating whether or not any death sentences were imposed or executions carried out during 1985.
