Bangladesh
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were arrested during 1985, some of whom were held in preventive detention for several months. A few were sentenced to up to one year's imprisonment. Martial law courts employing procedures incompatible with intemational legal standards were briefly withdrawn in early 1985, but were subsequently reinstated and functioned for much of the year. Some political prisoners were reported to have been tortured, particularly in army custody, and allegations persisted that criminal suspects had died as a result of police torture. Both army and police were rep>ortedly responsible for torturing suspected govemment opponents in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and there were continuing reports of extrajudicial executions there. More death sentences were imposed, mostly by martial law courts, and one person was executed.
On 15 January special martial law courts were withdrawn (summary martial law courts had been withdrawn in August 1984), and certain constitutional rights were restored. However articles of the Constitution guaranteeing such fundamental rights as freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention, suspended since the imposition of martial law in March 1982, remained in abeyance.
Both types of martial law court were revived on 1 March, when President Hossain Mohammad Ershad reimposed martial law provisions banning all political activities which had been relaxed during 1984. Parliamentary elections intended for April were again postponed in the face of an opposition boycott, based on the government's refusal to lift martial law before the poll. The President instead announced that a referendum would be held on 21 March to approve his development policies and continuation in office.
All criticism of the referendum was made an offence under martial law. The leaders of the two major opposition parties - Sheikh Hasina Wajed, of the Awami League (AL), and Begum Khaleda Zia, of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) - were immediately put under
210	Amnesty International Report 1986
house arrest. In the following weeks, several hundred govemment opponents including politicians, party activists, students and trade union leaders were arrested throughout the country, the vast majority solely because of their pohtical behefs or non-violent but prohibited poUtical activities. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem about these arrests on 18 March, calhng for the immediate release of aU those arrested because of their non-violent political opinions or activities. Most of those arrested were held under the Special Powers Act (SPA), which permits indefinite detention without trial under renewable detention orders which are not subject to judicial review. Although within the first 170 days of detention under the SPA the detainee is entitled to appear in person before an Advisory Board constituted to examine detention orders, this provision was clearly not fully adhered to.
Following local elections on 16 and 20 May, President Ershad announced that political leaders would shortly be released. Sheikh Hasina and Begum Zia were freed on 25 May; during June at least 64 SPA detainees were released and in the foUowing weeks there were further releases. An additional 43 SPA detainees were released in the second half of August. By the end of 1985 very few of these SPA detainees were still held. However, a small number of people, mainly trade union leaders, were detained for short periods in the last quarter of the year during industrial disputes.
Although most political prisoners were held under the SPA, at least 12 government opponents were charged under martial law regulations and provisions of the penal code with non-violent political offences. Among such prisoners of conscience were a former member of parUament representing the BNP, Abu Mohammad Zahid, who was arrested on 14 May for having in his possession leaflets calling for a boycott of the local elections. Charged under section 17 of Martial Law Regulation (MLR) 1, he was awaiting trial before a summary martial law court at the end of 1985. Aminul Huq Babul, a joumalist and member of the Communist Party of Bangladesh (CPB), was sentenced to one year's impr^nment by a summary martial law court in August, reportedly for writing articles criticizing the martial law govemment. In Sylhet, Tapesh Bhattacharya, a student supporter of the CPB, was similarly sentenced to one year's imprisonment plus a fine for leading a pubUc protest against the reimposition of martial law provisions on 1 March. Two other poUtical activists in Sylhet were also sentenced to shorter periods for possessing anti-government pamphlets. The summary martial law courts which tried these defendants, whom Amnesty Intemational considered prisoners of conscience, did not allow defence lawyers nor the right of appeal to a higher court.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	211	Japan
In recent years Amnesty Intemational has received increasingly frequent reports of torture of political prisoners held in the custody of the Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI), the armed forces intelligence unit. The organization believed this practice persisted in different parts of the country during 1985. Prisoners taken into DGFI custody for interrogation were held incommunicado for up to several weeks and generally kept blindfold while in transit and under interrogation. In June Amnesty Intemational raised its concem about Manzuml Hoque Tinku, the younger brother of a leader of the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal (JSD), National Socialist Party, then being sought by the authorities. Manzuml Hoque Tinku was arrested in early March in Dhaka and reportedly "kept for two days in DGFI custody, badly beaten and given electric shocks. He was subsequently transferred to jail where he was held for some months. In Chittagong and Sylhet respectively Awami League student activists Kaisemddin Chowdhury and Mohammed Misbahuddin Siraj were understood to have been held in DGFI custody after being arrested in April. Kaisemddin Chowdhury was reportedly tortured by electric shocks and Mohammed Misbahuddin Siraj was beaten with a long mbber implement, causing injuries requiring medical treatment.
Allegations of torture of criminal suspects by police persisted and several criminal suspects reportedly died as a result. In September Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of Shamsher Ali, an organizer for the Khetmajoor Samity, landless peasants' front, in Phulpur, who was arrested on 9 September and reportedly beaten by the Phulpur police. In addition to calling for an investigation into his treatment. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem that Shamsher Ali may have been falsely accused of criminal activities to deter him from his activities on behalf of landless peasants. During 1985 other political activists were also charged with criminal offences by the police, allegedly to deter them from political activity.
Members of the tribal population of the Chittagong Hill Tracts were reportedly subjected to continuing arbitrary arrest, torture and unlawful killing. Following an amnesty for tribal opponents announced by the Bangladesh Govemment in 1983 some Shanti Bahini, Peace Force, members had surrendered and several dozen others had been released from jail. However, fighting between one faction of the Shanti Bahini and law enforcement personnel continued. In September Amnesty Intemational publicized its appeal to the Bangladesh Govemment for an inquiry into human rights violations in the Hill Tracts, citing killings and torture which had reportedly occurred in 1984. For example, Amnesty Intemational had received information that several young women had been arbitrarily killed during operations conducted by the security forces in
212	Amnesty International Report 1986
Barkalak, Harinhatchara and Hotyalchara, in the Zurochari area, in September 1984. Tribal villagers were reported to have been tortured in police camps at Mohalchari, Ranga Panichara and Bakchari, and in army camps at Bhaibhonchara and Thalchara in the same period. Amnesty Intemational was also investigating persistent reports that army operations during 1985 resulted in dozens of villagers being beaten and, in some cases, arrested, especially in the Khagrachari area where the Shanti Bahini had engaged in clashes with law enforcement personnel. Tribal villagers in the Panchari area were said to have been arbitrarily arrested and ill-treated in late November and early December.
According to press reports, 35 people were sentenced to death, 25 of whom were convicted by special martial law courts with no right to judicial appeal. This was a marked increase over the two previous years. One person tried by a special martial law court was laiown to have been executed in Chittagong in November. Causing injury by throwing acid, an increasingly frequent offence, was made a capital crime in September; President Ershad later increased the sentence on one person convicted of this from life imprisonment to death. Among those sentenced to death by special martial law courts was Mohiuddin, Organizing Secretary of the Avoynagar branch of the Chhatra League, a students' organization affiliated to the Awami League. He was convicted in early November of murder. The trial was reportedly held in closed session and his relatives were denied access. Other aspects of the court's procedure were also of concern to the organization. In another case, Mohammad Selim was sentenced to death by a special martial law court in June for a murder commited when he was 16 years old, in violation of the internationally recognised standard that people under 18 at the time of a crime should not be sentenced to death. By December his death sentence had been confirmed and Mohammad Selim was awaiting the outcome of a clemency petition submitted to the President. The cases of both these prisoners were submitted by Amnesty Intemational to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
VII	213	Japan
