Ecuador
Amnesty International's concerns included the unacknowledged detention of political prisoners in secret detention centres, "disappearances", torture, and death in custody as an apparent consequence of torture or ill-treatment.
A pattern of detention procedures not previously observed in Ecuador emerged in the course of 1985. Political suspects were detained without warrant, detentions were initially denied, and, during sometimes prolonged periods of unacknowledged detention, habeas corpus failed to establish the legal status and location of detainees or to protect them. While prisoners generally "disappeared" for no more than 24 hours to a week during interrogation, some were held for longer before their detentions were formally acknowledged. Three detainees reported to Amnesty Intemational remained unaccounted for at the end of 1985, months after their reported arrests.
Those detained included student and trade union activists, supporters of left-wing political opposition groups and refugees from neighbouring Colombia. Many were detained on suspicion of involvement with a guerrilla group responsible since September 1983 for a series of bank robberies and other armed assaults, and for a number of kidnappings in 1985. Called Alfaro Vive, Carajo (AVC), Alfaro Lives, the group was named after a 19th century Liberal Party leader. General Eloy Alfaro.
Although initial interrogations of political prisoners were sometimes carried out in National Police establishments, some prisoners suspected of links to AVC were transferred to military custody for more prolonged interrogation. These captives were frequently blindfolded, sometimes with adhesive tape, and taken to an interrogation centre outside the capital. A number of former prisoners believed the centre to be located at an army barracks in Conocoto, in the Valle de los Chillos. Suspects were interrogated and many were then retumed to the Quito area and left on the city's outskirts, without their arrests ever having been acknowledged or charges brought. Systematic torture, including the use of electric shocks, near-drowning and beatings, was reported to be practised by both National Police and military intelligence interrogators.
Most political suspects were reported to have been detained by the National Police Servicio de Investigación Criminal (SIC), Criminal
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	149	Japan
Investigation Service, and initially interrogated at SIC headquarters in the capital, Quito, or other major cities. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem about reports early in 1985 of the unacknowledged detention and torture of a number of young people from Quito. According to his subsequent testimony, Central University of Ecuador medical student Ahmet Femando Vasconez was detained in Quito on 14 April by plainclothes police, blindfolded, and taken to a detention centre he could not identify. There he reported being interrogated about suspected links with AVC, while being subjected to beatings, electric shocks, near drowning, and death threats made with a gun-barrel in his mouth. He was subsequently transferred to the National Police headquarters for Pichincha department, in Quito, where on 23 April he was examined by doctors of the university medical service. The medical report, a copy of which was provided to Amnesty Intemational, indicated injuries on several parts of his body "probably caused" by electric shocks, as well as "perforation of the left eardrum fracture of ribs and deformation of the bridge of his nose caused by a direct blow". No official investigation of Ahmet Vasconcez' treatment in SIC custody was known to have been carried out.
In a similar case, medical students Femando Chavez Bermudez and Alfredo Davila were detained without warrant in Quito at midnight on 12 March by some 30 armed men believed to have been members of the armed forces. They subsequently said their eyes had been masked with adhesive tape, and their heads covered with hoods before they were taken to a secret military interrogation centre or "safe-house". After some three hours of questioning Alfredo Davila was left on the outskirts of Quito. He said he had been interrogated about AVC and Femando Chavez' political activities. Femando Chavez was himself released on 15 March and stated that he had been interrogated by military intelligence officers. He said he had been doused with cold water, beaten about the head, burned with cigarettes, and subjected to electric shocks to several parts of the body, including the genitals. A medical examination reportedly confirmed that he had been beaten and bumed on his face and body. During his three days of interrogation the authorities consistently denied that he was in detention. No response was received to Amnesty Intemational appeals that the reports of torture be investigated.
Amnesty International also inquired into the cases of Fausto Basantes and Luis Vaca, who were detained on 20 Febmary by a SIC squad in Quito's Villa Flora neighbourhood. According to their own subsequent testimonies, they were taken directly to the SIC headquarters, beaten and interrogated there for about eight hours concerning AVC. That night, they were taken to a military
150	Amnesty International Report 1986
interrogation centre where they maintain they were stripped, beaten with blunt instruments, nearly drowned and given electric shocks. After two days the interrogation was halted, and they were fed, permitted to bathe and given medical treatment. Two days later they were left on the outsorts of Quito. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the detention was never acknowledged and the allegations of torture were not investigated.
Luis Vaca was reportedly detained again with Susana Cajas Lara and Javier Jarrin Sánchez on 10 November by military personnel in the coastal province of Esmeraldas. According to later statements by Jarrin Sánchez and Susana Cajas Lara, the three were sent to the Quito area to a secret military centre where they were interrogated under torture. Susana Cajas Lara described being held incommunicado there for two weeks naked, in a small, wet cell. During interrogation she was beaten, given electric shocks, nearly suffocated with a wet towel, sexually abused, and forced to sign a statement she was not allowed to read. On 25 November she and Javier Jarrin Sánchez were handed over to the National Police and taken to the Quito Provisional Detention Centre. Javier Jarrin Sánchez was released without charge. Susana Cajas Lara reportedly remained in custody, facing charges of possession of falsified documents. Luis Vaca, however, had "disappeared" and was stiU unaccounted for at the end of 1985. The Foreign Ministry, in a letter dated 23 December, told Amnesty Intemational that "Luis Vaca has not been detained by any authority of the the Government of Ecuador". However, the Minister of the Interior, in a letter of 27 December, included Luis Vaca's name in a list of 13 Ecuadorians who he said had been "detained for the commission of common crimes and tumed over to the jurisdiction of the competent courts, or were fugitives from justice". He also stated that there were "no clandestine places of detention" in Ecuador. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that none of the three detentions in Esmeraldas had been acknowledged, and that each of the three had effectively "disappeared". Javier Jarrin Sánchez' and Susana Cajas Lara's detentions had been formally acknowledged only after their transfer to the custody of the National Police in Quito on 25 November.
On 7 August businessman Nahim Isaias Barquet, a close friend of President León Febres Cordero, was kidnapped in Guayaquil by members of AVC and the Colombian M-19 guerrilla group. He was subsequently killed when the army raided the building in which he was held. In the weeks after the kidnapping numerous suspects were detained. Juan Carlos Acosta Coloma was detained on 26 August with two other suspects, and shot in the leg. He was reportedly systematically beaten during interrogation immediately after the
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	151	Japan
arrest and denied medical attention until his family intervened — his father is a former foreign minister. He was then hospitalized, but died on 28 August. His family saw him shortly before his death and said he had described his interrogation. They attributed his death to torture, an allegation reportedly substantiated by an autopsy report.
Torture of criminal suspects was also reported. Amnesty Intemational sought information on the death in custody of Luis Femando García, a porter at Guayaquil cdrport, who was arrested with five others on 18 November on suspicion of theft. The six were held for questioning at the Guayaquil Air Force base. Five were released on 25 November but Luis Femando García's family was officially informed that he had "died of a heart attack" whüe in detention. Those released, however, said that they had all been tortured with electric shocks, beatings, and submersion in water. An air force medical service autopsy reportedly confirmed that the body was severely bruised and bore marks which could have been caused by electric shocks.
Amnesty Intemational also addressed the authorities in a number of cases involving refugees. Hemán Calvo Ospina was one of several Colombians with long-standing refugee status in Ecuador who were detained without warrant, held for a time in unacknowledged detention, and subsequentiy believed to have been interrogated under torture about suspected political activities. A journalist on the Quito-based newsletter La Berraquera, Hernán Calvo Ospina "disappeared" on 24 September, and was not acknowledged to in police custody until 4 October. He was then held in administrative detention, without charge or trial, on the order of the Minister of Interior under the Ley de Extranjería, Immigration Law, until his deportation to Pern on 30 December.
Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem about the detention and "disappearance" of Spanish citizen Alfonso Echegaray Achirica on his arrival at Quito airport on 27 July. Of Basque origin and a resident of France, Alfonso Echegaray Achirica was summarily expelled to Ecuador by the Govemment of France. Until 2 August, the Ecuadorian authorities denied holding him. The Foreign Minister responded to Amnesty International's inquiries on 2 September stating that Echegaray Achirica was "interned under the Immigration Law, Article 19, at the request of the Spanish Govemment". On 4 December a second Basque, Angel Aldana, was summarily expelled to Ecuador from France and placed under administrative detention: both were still being held at the end of 1985.
On 4 Febmary 1985 the Govemment of Ecuador signed the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
152	Amnesty International Report 1986
