Peru
Amnesty International's primary concern was evidence of an armed forces policy of "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution as a measure to combat the guerrilla group Sendero Luminoso, Shining Path. Although significant steps to check abuses by the armed forces were taken by the Government of President Alan Garcia Pérez, which took office in July, extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" continued to be reported in areas administered by armed forces counter-guerriUa commands. Further concerns included reports of the routine use of torture in political and common criminal cases; the detention of prisoners of conscience on false charges of terrorism; extreme delays in trials of political detainees, and poor prison conditions.
Amnesty International also received frequent reports of execution-style killings, sometimes after torture, by Shining Path guerrillas. The
Amnesty International Report 1966	189
victims, sometimes beaten to death or beheaded before assembled peasant villagers, included leaders of peasant communities, labour organizations, and evangelical Protestant churches; supporters of legal left-wing parties which had rejected Shining Path's aims and methods; local government officials; and peasants serving in the army's compulsory Civil Defence patrols.
On 23 January Amnesty Intemational published Peru Briefing: "Disappearances" and political killings by govemment forces in the Andean Emergency Zone, summarizing its concems in a 13-province area administered since 26 December 1982 by a military command in the city of Ayacucho. Since then new arrest procedures involving "disappearance" had become the norm: the authorities routinely denied knowledge of detentions and refused access to prisoners even to civil officials. Amnesty Intemational also received widespread reports of extrajudicial executions, as the bodies of many people previously reported detciined were discovered. The report included a list of some 1,000 cases of "disappearance" after detention in the zone since its creation, but said the full number of unresolved "disappearances" there could be far higher. Most of the cases were backed by documentation from the government's own public prosecutors who serve as human rights ombudsmen under the auspices of the Ministerio Publico, Public Ministry. The scale of extrajudicial executions could be gauged in part by the ma^ graves discovered — sometimes with 50 or more corpses — and the regular appearance of victims' bodies at dumping grounds near roads close to major towns. Although the cases of 420 individuals reportedly detained and found later to have been killed had at that time been documented, other evidence, including military communiques, suggested the tme toll of victims was far higher.
Amnesty Intemational sent memoranda to Prime Minister Luis Percovich on 18 Febmary and 30 April to press for information on an additional 104 individuals whose reported "disappearance" in the emergency zone had come to the organization's attention since the preparation of the Peru Briefing. On 15 May Amnesty Intemational published a 42-page document providing details of the new cases, including sample facsimiles of swom depositions. In July 1985 an updated list of over 1,100 "disappearances" was published.
On 5 August Amnesty Intemational received a document from the office of outgoing Prime Minister Percovich conceming the "disappearances" cited in the January Peru Briefing. The document made no reference to any review of arrest records or records on file in the Public Ministry, but maintained that all but a few of the cases had been resolved through the records of the National Electoral Registry. It said voter registration records for 348 of the "disappeared" had
190	Amnesty International Report 1986
been located which were filed after the date of reported arrest, and were evidence that the "disappearances" never took place. It also said records for 579 of the "disappeared" could not be found, by which it was presumed the reports were based on falsified names. In summary, the document concluded that "only 21 cases remained to be clarified".
Amnesty International believed that the absence of voter records was of little relevance but analysed carefully the photocopies of registration forms included with the document. Amnesty Intemational found, however, that 83 of the forms were of people whose names in no way resembled those listed by the organization, while 71 bore names simüar or identical to those reported to have "disappeared", but gave personal details, photographs and other information clearly distinguishing them from the individuals reported "disappeared". For some, multiple forms were provided: nine, for example, were for different individuals named Carlos Matos, none of whom appeared to be the Carlos Matos who was reported detained on 13 September 1983. In over 100 cases in which there was some basis to believe that "disappeared" prisoners may have reappeared, Amnesty International provided copies of the registration forms to Pemvian human rights organizations and, where possible, the relatives of the "disappeared".
On 29 August, one month after President Garcia Pérez took office, reports reached the capital that seven bodies, each with two gunshots to the head, had been exhumed from a mass grave discovered at Pucayacu, Huanta, and had been identified as people detained by the army on 4 August. Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Garcia on 6 September to investigate the killings, to halt the ongoing "disappearances" and to investigate past "disappearances" in the region.
Shortly afterwards, residents of Ayacucho's Accomarca district reached Lima with an account of the detention and killing of 69 people there, including 23 children, on 14 August. On 12 September President Garcia publicly demanded full reports from the armed forces on Pucayacu — within 72 hours — and within seven days on Accomarca. Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman General César Enrico Praeli informed the President on 15 September that the dead at Pucayacu had been detained and executed. He was invited to resign and did so.
On 17 September the Joint Chiefs' new Chairman, General Luis Abram Caballerino, issued a communique reporting the dismissal of Ayacucho Commander General Wilfredo Mori and Second Military Region Commander General Sinesio Jarama, who earlier that day had told congress that the only dead at Accomarca had been
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	191	Japan
guerrillas killed in armed clashes. The communique said that it had been established that an army patrol had detained and killed some 40 villagers, and that the officers responsible would be tried by the military courts.
A Senate Commission of Inquiry travelled to Accomarca on 18 September. Its report concluded that on 14 August the army patrol had detained the men, women, and children there, interrogated them, and killed them and burned their bodies. The report cited the Commission's interview with the lieutenant who commanded the patrol. He stressed that even the children had been "dangerous": "They begin to indoctrinate them from age two, three, four years old . . . little kids have told all of the things they have them do." The report also stated that the lieutenant responded "Yes" when asked whether his orders permitted him to determine to "eliminate" prisoners on his own authority.
A report from the army Second Region's Inspector General, released to the Senate Commission, gave further insight into op>erational norms in the emergency zone. It summarized operations reports before the massacre, citing repeated cases in which peasants were shot dead having been identified as "Communist Terrorists" — often abbreviated as "TC" or "TTCC". The victims were said to be unarmed, and according to survivors interviewed by the Senate Commission, some had first been detained and interrogated. The army report outlined criteria by which it had been determined that the patrol commander had been right to conclude that the Accomarca victims were in fact "Communist Terrorists". These included the reftisal of residents to agree to form a Civil Defence patrol and identification by a local guide "provided by G-2" (mihtary intelU-gence), who during the interrogations asserted "that the great majority were terrorists". In conclusion, the Inspector General sentenced the patrol commander to 10 days' arrest for disciphnary offences, ordered his prosecution for "abuse of authority and neghgence" under the mihtary code of justice, and ordered psychiatric tests. At the end of 1985 a ruling by the Supreme Court on whether the military or ordinary courts would have jurisdiction in the case was pending.
After the September measures, which included the creation of a presidential Peace Commission incorporating individual experts and representatives of human rights organizations and the clergy, some improvement in the emergency zone was observed. However, allegations of a second massacre in the Accomarca area, in which troops were said to have killed some 50 people in the conununities of Umaru and Bellavista on 24 August, were to Amnesty International's knowledge never seriously investigated. Some "disappearances" also
192	Amnesty International Report 1986
continued to be reported, although significantly fewer, and some prisoners were released from military barracks after their detention had been denied by the authorities, sometimes for more than 14 days.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 11 people reportedly detained in Huanta province on 24 November. Despite initial denials that the prisoners had ever been detained, between 10 and 21 December nine of the 11, including two 15-year-olds, were released from military custody.
Amnesty Intemational received copies of official reports from the Ayacucho public prosecutor's office listing 40 cases of detention and "disappearance" reported in July, August and September, and a total of 29 unresolved denunciations of "disappearance" reported since the 28 July change of government. The Attorney General's office estimated in November 1985 that it had received over 1,900 formal denunciations of "disappearance" in the emergency zone since January 1983. Amnesty International had records on 1,700 of these cases.
Virtually all political prisoners in Pern were held on charges under Decree 046 of March 1982 which defined a broad range of acts to constitute terrorism. At the end of 1985 there were some 1,000 prisoners indicted for terrorism, including both professed adherents of the Shining Path organization, and nearly 200 prisoners associated with legal organizations affiliated to the United Left coalition. Although many had been in custody since 1982, by the end of 1985 only 16 had been tried and convicted. The Peace Commission in November 1985 stated that over 60 per cent of the 1,000 facing trial had been held for more than two years with their trials frozen, and that it had identified 160 prisoners it believed should be released. Among them were most of those prisoners Amnesty Intemational considered to be prisoners of conscience.
Since 1983 most prisoners charged with terrorism had been transferred to prisons in Lima, the capital, on security grounds, and the cases against them remitted to Lima courts for trials. The Lima "San Pedro" prison, formerly Lurigancho prison, held some 400 men on terrorism charges, including 190 associated with the United Left coalition. Some 400 men were held in the island prison "El Fronton" near the Lima port of Callao. Most women prisoners were held at the Chorrillos women's prison. The new "Canto Grande" prison, to house 1,500 top security prisoners, including some charged with terrorism, was to open in Lima in early 1986.
Conditions in aU of the Lima prisons were extremely poor, with inadequate food, water supplies and sanitary facilities, endemic intestinal diseases, hepatitis and tuberculosis, and little medical treatment available. These conditions, combined with severe over-
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	193	Japan
crowding, were factors in several prison mutinies in the course of 1985, leading to many unexplained deaths. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about repeated protests at the "San Pedro" prison, where in recent years deaths have regularly been reported as a consequence of indiscriminate use of firearms against prisoners, and severe overcrowding has been a contributing factor in deaths of iimiates in fires.
Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of 80 prisoners of conscience, or possible prisoners of conscience, all charged with terrorism. Twenty-five were released in the course of 1985, among them teacher and father of six Juan Quispe Asto. He was a local leader of the United Left coalition and the elected mayor of the Ayacucho district of Carmen Alto at the time of his arrest, under Decree 046, on 22 Febmary 1982. The Supreme Court ordered his release on 19 March 1985 after reviewing his case. Other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational who were released in the course of 1985 included teacher Nicolás Bobadilla, held since June 1983; peasants and artisans from Andahuaylas, held since June 1981; and eight peasant community leaders from Erapata, Cusco department, held since October 1982. Those still in custody included 14 peasant fanners detained in Cajamarca department in 1983. Most reported having been tortured during interrogation by Civil Guard and Pemvian Investigative Police interrogators.
St Christopher and Nevis
There was an execution in St Christopher and Nevis on 11 May 1985: the first for 11 years. Simeon Abel was hanged for the murder of a pregnant woman in 1981. Since Amnesty International did not receive this information until after the execution had taken place, it could not appeal against it in advance.
194
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
