Saudi Arabia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial, often incommunicado, of political prisoners including possible prisoners of conscience; allegations of torture and ill-treatment; the imposition of floggings and the increased use of amputations and the death penalty as judicial punishments.
During 1985, as in previous years, alleged political opponents of the govemment were reportedly arrested. Most of the arrests were reported to have taken place in the eastem provinces of Saihat, al-Hasa, al-Qatif and Safwa, and those arrested were said to be mainly followers of the Shi'a sect of Islam. Among them were students, teachers, religious scholars, merchants, engineers, doctors and employees at oil installations. Many of the arrests were reported to have taken place on or after Yom al-'Ashura (10 Muharrani/25 September) when participants in processions commemorating the death of the Imam Husayn, grandson of the prophet Muhammad, demonstrated for the release of untried political prisoners. The demonstrations were broken up by riot police and the National Guard and many arrests followed.
Those detained were reportedly held incommunicado, without
354	Amnesty International Report 1986
charge or trial, and in most cases their whereabouts were not known. By the end of 1985 Amnesty International had received the names of over 100 such detainees and was seeking the reasons for their arrest and their exact whereabouts. They included 'Abd Allah Sa'id 'Abd al-Karim, a 25-year-old ARAMCO employee from Safwa arrested on 13 September; Muhammad Yusuf al-Zaki, a 21-year-old religious studies student from Saihat, arrested at Dhahran airport on 17 October; and 'Alawi Muhammad Makki, a 32-year-old Saudi international swimmer who was detained while taking part in the Haj (Holy Pilgrimage). In recent years Amnesty International's requests to the authorities for information on arrests have remained unanswered. (See Amnesty International Report 1983 to 1985).
On 9 January the French newspaper Le Monde published an article by the Committee for the Defence of Political Prisoners in Saudi Arabia, located outside the country, listing the names of 69 political prisoners which the committee maintained were then held without charge. On 23 January Le Monde published a response from the Saudi Ambassador to France in which he criticized the newspaper for publishing without checking its facts and stated: "it is easy, as regards disinformation, to invent names, to prop them up with fictitious addresses and support them with imaginary dates". Le Monde replied by inquiring why an organization "such as Amnesty International" had not been invited to "investigate on the spot in order to verify whether the list of prisoners is fictitious or real?" In December 1984 Amnesty International had written to the authorities about many of the prisoners on the published list but had received no response.
Amnesty International received a number of reports of torture or ill-treatment of detainees, some dating back to 1983 and 1984. They included first-hand accounts by former detainees as well as reports from relatives and friends. The majority alleged that torture or ill-treatment occurred most often during the period immediately after arrest. Among the practices described were beating on the soles of the feet or all over the body with sticks, rubber hoses or electric cables; suspension by the wrists or ankles from a hook in the ceiling, the cell window or a rotating fan; submersion in cold water for lengthy periods; prolonged forced standing; and sleep deprivation. Amnesty International w^ unable fully to investigate these allegations but was disquieted by the increasing number of consistent reports from a variety of sources which appeared to indicate a pattern of torture and ill-treatment.
Amnesty International was also concerned that cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment, in the form of the flogging of prisoners, continued to be judicially imposed. During 1985 Amnesty International did not receive reports of public floggings but was aware that
Amnesty International Report 1986	355
several prisoners, mainly foreigners serving sentences of imprisonment in addition to flogging, were expected to receive a number of lashes at intervals during their term of imprisonment. Sentences which have come to Amnesty International's attention in the past few years have ranged from 30 to 300 lashes, usually to be carried out over a period of several months or years. One such case was that of John Kelly, a 43-year-old British engineer, sentenced in May to 250 lashes in addition to a two-and-a-half-year prison term on charges connected with manufacturing alcohol. Reports received by Amnesty Intemational suggested that John Kelly would be receiving his punishment 50 lashes at a time at six-monthly intervals while serving his prison term.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational leamed of 10 amputations imposed on four Saudi citizens, three Pakistanis, a Filipino, a Palestinian and a Syrian. Islamic law {Shaifa) as practised in Saudi Arabia prescribes amputations as the punishment for repeated theft when there are no mitigating circumstances. In the above cases the offences included theft, robbery and burglary. During 1985 Amnesty Intemational issued several urgent appeals asking the govemment to stop this form of punishment. Amnesty Intemational holds amputation to be a cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment and, as such, prohibited by intemational human rights standards. In addition, the use of medical skills by doctors to assist in the infliction of any form of cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment is clearly contrary to intemational codes of medical ethics. Amnesty Intemational had no precise information on the training received by those who performed amputations, although the organization believed that some prior medical instmction may have been given.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational leamed of 45 public executions, a disturbing increase over previous years (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 and Î984). The 45 included 28 Saudi citizens, 10 Yemenis, four Filipinos, one Ethiopian, an Iraqi and a Somali national. Most of the executions followed convictions for murder by Shari'a courts, and were carried out only after the relative of the victim had demanded Qisas (retribution). Under Islamic law the relatives may demand Qisas in the form of the death of the murderer, or by financial settlement, or they may waive such a claim.
One such case involved a Yemeni national, Muhammad bin Mahdi bin 'Abd Allah Mahyub, who was convicted of murdering a fellow national 12 years previously. The conviction was upheld by the Court of Cassation but die sentence was held in abeyance until the murder victim's minor heirs had reached the age of consent. Once their approval had been obtained the permanent committee of the Supreme Judicial Council approved the sentence and it was ratified
356
Amnesty International Report 1986
by Royal Decree on 4 October and carried out on 16 November. During 1985 Amnesty International appealed to the Minister of the Interior on many occasions urging that death sentences be commuted. On 7 August Amnesty Intemational wrote to King Fahd bin 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Saud stating that the organization continued to monitor with over the use of the death penalty in Saudi Arabia and reiterating the organization's opposition to the death penalty in all cases as a violation of the right to life. In the letter Amnesty Intemational drew the attention of the King to the UN General Assembly Resolution 32/61 of 8 December 1977 which reaffirms that "The main objective to be pursued in the field of capital punishment is that of progressively restricting the number of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed with a view to the desirability of abolishing this punishment."
