Sudan
Until 6 April, when President Gaafar Mohamed Nimeiri's government was overthrown, Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the detention without trial of other alleged opponents of the government, the use of torture, judicial punishments of amputation and flogging, and the death penalty. There was particular concern in January when Mahmoud Mohamed Taha, a prisoner of conscience, was publicly executed.
The Transitional Military Council, which took power on 6 April, immediately declared a state of emergency, suspended the constitution, dissolved parliament and disbanded the State Security Service. It appointed a Council of Ministers, most of whom were civilians, and announced elections for a new government in April 1986.
Many improvements occurred following the change of government. All prisoners of conscience and all other political prisoners were released, the infliction of amputations was suspended and five former security officials accused of torture were prosecuted and imprisoned. Tlie new government undertook to respect human rights. An Amnesty International mission visited Sudan in November to discuss further improvements. However, a number of people were detained without charge or trial, apparendy on political grounds, several further sentences of amputation were passed, and the use of flogging continued.
Armed conflict persisted throughout 1985 between government forces and the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) in several parts of the country. Unconfirmed reports were received of extrajudicial executions of civilians by government forces in the areas of armed conflict. At least 14 civilians were detained by the SPLA. Six foreign nationals held since February 1984 were released by the SPLA in January and February and eight Sudanese civilians were released in June.
On 5 January five members of the Republican Brotherhood, an Islamic political organization, were arrested and accused of distributing pamphlets advocating the repeal of the 1983 penal code based on Islamic law and a peaceful solution to the armed conflict. The five, who included Mahmoud Mohamed Taha, the 76-year-oid leader of the Republican Brotherhood, were charged with subversion and brought to trial two days later. On 8 January, after two short
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	95	Japan
hearings, they were convicted and sentenced to death. On 17 January the court of appeal, in an automatic review of the trial, upheld the convictions. In addition, this court ruled that the defendants were also guilty of apostasy (breaking away from Islam), although apostasy was not a specified criminal offence. The court cited the Basic Judgments Act of 1983, which empowered judges to apply Islamic law in cases where the offence was not specified in the penal code. Although the defendants had not been charged with apostasy they were convicted and sentenced to death on this charge without any hearing. The court gave Mahmoud Mohamed Taha's four co-defendants a month in which to repent of apostasy or be executed. However, the next day President Nimeiri cut the repentance f>eriod to three days when confirming their death sentences. On 18 January Mahmoud Mohamed Taha was pubUcly hanged at Kober prison in Khartoum North in the presence of his four co-defendants. T^ey then signed declarations of repentance and were fireed. Amnesty Intemational had appealed repeatedly for the unconditional release of all the defendants as prisoners of conscience. It expressed deep regret at the execution of a prisoner of conscience and condemned this use of the death penalty to suppress peaceful political and rehgious dissent.
Four members of the banned Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party (ABSP) were also charged with subversion and apostasy in January. Osman el-Sheikh el-Zein, a pharmacist, Bashir Hamad Ibrahim, a student, and two others had been arrested in 1984 and accused of distributing ABSP pamphlets calhng for a civil disobedience campaign to overthrow the govemment. They were tried in November 1984 on charges of sedition and membership of an illegal organization. In late January 1985 the judge added the charges of subversion and apostasy which both carried the death penalty. Amnesty Intemational criticized this use of capital charges and called for their release as prisoners of conscience. On 24 Febmary the four were acquitted of subversion and apostasy but were convicted of sedition. Bashir Hamad Ibrahim was sentenced to five years' imprisonment, another defendant was imprisoned for two years, while Osman el-Sheikh el-Zein and the fourth defendant were fined. All four were also sentenced to floggings of 80 lashes, which were inflicted in the courtroom immediately.
A small number of political detainees held under the State Security Act, which permits detention without charge for indefinitely renewable periods of three months, were freed early in 1985. The Reverend Phihp Abbas Gabboush, a former member of parhament, and about 200 others who had been arrested in October 1984 and accused of a conspiracy to undermine security and prepare for a foreign intervention, were released on 5 January just before their trial was to OF>en.
96	Amnesty International Report 1986
On 10 March many members of the Muslim Brotherhood were detained under the State Security Act. Among them were Hassan al-Turabi, a presidential adviser, and Yassin Omar al-Imam, chairman of the Sudanese Socialist Union, the only political party permitted. President Nimeiri accused them of seeking to overthrow the government by violent means and of illegal economic activities. Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities for details of the grounds for their detention. It also inquired about the detention in Juba on 16 March of Hilary Logali, a former southern region minister, and several members of the Equatoria regional parliament, reportedly for criticizing the government.
Opposition to President Nimeiri's government intensified in March with demonstrations and rioting against increases in food prices caused by the removal of government subsidies. Over 2,500 people were arrested in Khartoum and many were flogged and imprisoned after summary trials by special courts. On 31 March, over 30 leaders of professional organizations and trade unions were arrested and accused of organizing anti-government activities and a general strike. They included El-Gizouli Dafaala, President of the doctors' union, Mirghani el-Nasri, President of the Bar Association, and many other doctors, lawyers, engineers, lecturers and students. The strikes and non-violent demonstrations continued with more arrests. Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of all those arrested for non-violent opposition to the government.
On 6 April, while President Nimeiri was abroad, the government Wcis overthrown when the army assumed power. All political prisoners were freed on the demand of people demonstrating at the prisons where they were held. A general amnesty for all refugees and political prisoners of the former government was later issued by the new ruling Transitional Military Council. All prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were freed, together with several hundred political opponents detained without trial over the previous six years and large numbers arrested in the recent demonstrations and strikes. The prisoners of conscience included members of banned political parties such as the Sudan Communist Party and Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party.
Between January and the change of government in April, 20 or more amputations were inflicted under the 1983 penal code, which provided for amputation of the right hand, or the right hand and the left foot (cross-limb amputation), for theft, robbery with violence or habitual theft. Several hundred people were also reported to have been flogged. Amnesty International appealed for the penalties of amputation and flogging to be removed from the penal code as they were cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	97	Japan
After the change of govemment Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release of political prisoners and appealed to the new govemment headed by General Abdel Rahman Swaraddahab to give sp)ecial attention to human rights issues. It urged early ratification of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other human rights treaties. The govemment replied on 27 May that "a fundamental aim of the 6 April uprising is the restoration of freedom and basic human rights for all in Sudan". In the following months, formerly banned political parties, as well as newly formed parties, were allowed to organize and to disseminate their opinions. A new Transitional Constitution was enacted on 10 October.
Many officials of President Nimeiri's administration were detained when the army took power. Some were later released but about 90 were still detained at the end of 1985. By that time, only two had been charged and brought to trial. One was convicted of cormption and the trial of the other, former Vice-President Omar Mohamed El-Tayeeb, was continuing. He faced charges of treason, subversion, espionage and abuse of power.
On 27 September the Reverend Philip Gabboush, leader of the Sudanese National Party, and over 160 others were arrested and publicly accused of conspiring to overthrow the government. By the end of the year most were released without having been charged but the Reverend Philip Gabboush and 26 others were still detained. Amnesty Intemational urged that they be either charged and brought to trial or released, and was investigating their cases.
On 17 December, 21 members of a newly formed political party, the National Socialist Alliance for the Salvation of the Country, were detained without charge under the State Security Act, allegedly because of their links with the former govemment. Amnesty International urged their release if they were not be charged with a recognized criminal offence.
In November an Amnesty Intemational mission visited Khartoum to discuss human rights with the govemment and non-governmental organizations. Concern was expressed about the retention of laws allowing the imprisonment or even execution of prisoners of conscience, detention without trial, judicial penalties of amputation and flogging, and the death penalty. The Attomey-General informed the delegation that several of these laws were being reviewed and that many of their harsh effects had already been reduced through political and administrative decisions and judicial reforms. The delegation requested an independent inquiry into the trial and execution of Mahmoud Mohamed Taha. It expressed concern about the detention without trial of the Reverend Philip Gabboush and othei^ arrested with him, and the continued detention without trial of
98
Amnesty International Report 1986
former officials.
The delegation welcomed improved safeguards against torture, including disbanding the State Security Service. Five State Security Service officers had been charged with the torture of Bashir Hamad Ibrahim in May 1984 (see above) and were convicted on 31 August and sentenced to five years' imprisonment. The delegation discussed with the authorities the judicial penalties of amputation and flogging. The Minister of the Interior stated that under the former govemment % amputations (including 17 cross-limb amputations) had been inflicted and that a further 10 sentences of amputation had been imposed but not carried out as of 6 April. Of these, five had been confirmed by the Supreme Court, while five others, as well as 15 sentences imposed since 6 April, were awaiting review by the Supreme Court. No amputations were carried out between 6 April and the end of 1985. The use of flogging, however, was continuing, although to a lesser extent than before.
