Iran
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing large-scale executions of prisoners for both political and non-political offences, following summary trials with no defence counsel and no right of appeal. The organization learned of 470 executions during 1985, but believed the actual figure to be considerably higher. Reports of political arrests continued to be received, but it was impossible to estimate the number of prisoners of conscience involved. Numerous and consistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees were received, and flogging and amputation continued to be imposed as judicial punishments for certain offences.
Since death sentences and executions on political grounds were rarely made public in Iran, Amnesty International believed that the actual number of executions was considerably higher than the 470 of which it was informed. Amnesty International did not usually learn of death sentences until after the execution had taken place. However, it was able to intervene on behalf of more than 30 individuals believed to be under sentence of death at various times during 1985. They included members of the following opposition organizations: various factions of the People's Fedayan Organization, the People's Mojahe-dine Organization, Peykar, Razmandegan, the Tudeh (Communist) Party, and the Union of Communists.
In a letter to the President, Hojjatoleslam Seyed Ali Khamenei, dated 27 June, Amnesty International repeated its concern about the continuing large number of executions. The Prosecutor of the Revolutionary Anti-Narcotics Court stated in April that 140 people had been executed during the Iranian year 1363 ending in March for
28	Amnesty International Report 1986
drug-related offences, and that 197 people had been executed for drug-related offences during the four-week period since 21 March. Amnesty Intemational explained its opposition in all cases to the death penalty cis the most extreme form of cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment and a denial of the right to life. It asked what the charges had been against each of those executed during the first half of 1985. No response was received. According to reports of a statement made in April 1985 by a member of the Supreme Judicial Council, two people had been sentenced to death by stoning for adultery in the nine-month period ending in January, but Amnesty Intemational did not know whether these sentences were carried out.
Political arrests continued throughout 1985. Some of these were in connection with bomb attacl^ or other politically motivated acts of violence. Others arrested were accused of being members or supporters of various opposition movements. Amnesty Intemational was unable to estimate how many prisoners of conscience were being held. On 14 June Amnesty Intemational wrote to the then Minister of the Interior about reported arrests of people taking part in anti-war and other political demonstrations in Tehran and elsewhere. According to official reports, 300 were arrested in Tehran on 10 April, and opposition sources claimed that the number of arrests ran into thousands. Amnesty International asked how many people had been arrested for taking part in demonstrations since the beginning of 1985 and how many were still in detention, what were the charges against them and the scheduled date or outcome of their trials. Amnesty Intemational sought assurances that all necessary measures would be taken to safeguard detainees from torture and ill-treatment. It urged the immediate and unconditional release of any individuals detained solely for the non-violent expression of their beliefs and urged that all others be granted a fair and prompt trial in accordance with Article 14 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Iran is a party.
In April Amnesty Intemational published a File on Torture on Iran. The document described physical and psychological torture and said that "... the number of reports of torture and ill-treatment received . . . , their persistence and consistency make it clear that these violations of human rights are continuing, widespread and, in some places, systematic". Amnesty Intemational said that the most common methods of physical torture and ill-treatment were beating and flogging, but also described cases of sexual abuse and burning with cigarettes and electricity reported between 1981 and 1984. According to many testimonies obtained by the organization, physical and psychological torture were frequently altemated and detainees subjected to mock execution, threats to arrest or execute relatives, or
Amnesty International Report 1986	329
being forced to watch the execution of other prisoners. Amnesty Intemational reproduced extracts from the testimonies of several torture victims whom it had interviewed outside Iran. Some had been members of political opposition movements, one was a member of the Baha'i faith, and two, a female volunteer social worker and a male teacher, had not been politically active in Iran at the time of their arrest. None was identified by name in Amnesty Intemational's publication for fear of reprisals against relatives remaining in Iran.
Amnesty Intemational believed that torture was often inflicted to extract confessions about political activities, names and addresses of political activists and safe houses, despite the fact that Article 38 of Iran's Constitution specifically proscribes the use of torture for such ends. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the continuing use of amputation and flogging as judicial punishments.
Amnesty Intemational's File on Torture concluded that vital safeguards against torture were lacking in Iran and recommended limits on incommunicado detention, prompt presentation of detainees before a judicial authority and prompt and regular access to lawyers, doctors and relatives. Amnesty Intemational further proposed that detainees be held only in publicly recognized places of detention, that procedures for detention and interrogation be reviewed as a matter of urgency, and called on the authorities to initiate a thorough and impartial investigation into allegations of torture and ill-treatment and to make pubOc both its finding and its procedures.
Amnesty Intemational drew attention to Iran's obligations under intemational human rights agreements to prevent the use of torture. In June 1975 Iran ratified the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in February 1978 reaffirmed its support for the UN Declaration Against Torture.
Amnesty Intemational submitted a written statement on 15 Febmary to the 41st session of the UN Commission on Human Rights summarizing the organization's concems in Iran and appealing to the Commission "to take all measures which it deems appropriate to redress the extensive violations of human rights in Iran". Amnesty Intemational also submitted information to the UN Special Representative on Iran, who was mandated to establish contacts with the govemment and to make a thorough study of the human rights situation in Iran, following which the Commission voted to extend his mandate for one year. In November the Special Representative submitted a further report and on 13 December the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution expressing deep concern about alleged violations of human rights in Iran and regretting that the Special Representative had not been allowed to visit the country.
330	Amnesty International Report 1986
On 28 November Amnesty Intemational submitted a written statement to the Political y^airs Committee of the European Parliament during a public hearing on "Respect for Himian Rights in Iran". Amnesty Intemational described its concerns, and called on the Govemment of Iran "to put an end to human rights abuses . . . and to honour those human rights which it has committed itself to uphold". At the same time Amnesty Intemational called on the institutions of the European Community and the govemments of its member states "to impress upon the Iranian authorities their obligation to adhere to intemational legal human rights standards".
During 1985 Amnesty International's concerns were the arbitrary arrest and detention of hundreds of suspected govemment opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience; prolonged detention without trial, or after summary trial, of political prisoners; the routine torture and ill-treatment of detainees in the custody of the security forces; and the large number of judicial and extrajudicial executions.
In Febmary Amnesty Intemational received the govemment's comments on the entry on Iraq in the Amnesty International Report 1984. The govemment acknowledged the execution of six members of the Hakim family and of some army deserters, stating that "desertion from military service during wartime is a crime dangerous to the security and well-being of the country and is punishable by death in accordance with current legislation. Some of those who had committed this crime repeatedly and did not avail themselves of several amnesties were indeed executed." The letter denied all other allegations mentioned in the report, including those concerning torture, arrests, extrajudicial executions and "disappearances".
Despite these assurances Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of widespread arbitrary arrests of suspected govemment opponents, and their detention for long periods without trial or imprisonment after summary trials by the Revolutionary Court following procedures which fell short of international standards. In a letter received on 8 July, the govemment stated that "... as soon as
Amnesty International Report 1986	331
the authorities leam of the commission of a crime by a person, the judicial authorities start collecting evidence. The accused is then interrogated and referred to the competent court if there is sufficient evidence . . . The accused is entitled to retain a lawyer and can be visited by a doctor and his family." However, Amnesty International believed that such procedures were often not followed, and prisoners' relatives have consistently testified over a number of years that they remained unaware of the fate and whereabouts of detained family members until they had either been released or executed. In many cases, families refrained from inquiring after detained relatives for fear of reprisals by the authorities.
Among those who continued to be detained during 1985 were suspected members or supporters of banned political parties, army deserters, draft resisters and student demonstrators. Many of them may have been prisoners of conscience detained for their non-violent political views or activities.
Relatives of people being sought by the government were also reportedly arrested as hostages. In one case, about 300 children aged between 10 and 14 were arrested in the town of Sulaimaniya in northern Iraq between late September and mid-October. They were apparently arrested in retaliation for the political activities of their relatives, said to be either army deserters or members of the Pesh Merga forces (armed Kurdish units). Some were reportedly being held as hostages to force their relatives to give themselves up to the authorities, and others to act as informers. They were said to have been held initially in a detention centre in Sulaimaniya, where some were allegedly beaten to extract information from them on the activides of the Pesh Merga forces and their supporters in the city. Three children reportedly died in custody as a result. Amnesty International was seeking further information at the end of 1985.
In April Amnesty International published a report. Torture in Iraq 1982-1984, a copy of which was sent to the government. The report listed 30 different methods of torture said to be used in Iraq, and contained extracts from five selected testimonies alleging torture between 1982 and 1984. One was from Neji Bennour, a Tunisian national (see Amnesty International Report 1985) and another from Robert Spurling, an American national. Both alleged that they had been tortured at the hands of the security forces in Baghdad. In both cases the findings of medical examinations were consistent with the torture alleged. The report also contained recommendations to the government for the prevention of torture. On 25 November the government replied, stating that Neji Bennour and Robert Spuriing "had been arrested in accordance with regulations [and] were not subjected to any form of torture during their detention". Other
332	Amnesty International Report 1986
allegations contained in the report were also denied. "We take this opportunity to confirm what we have demonstrated before, that there is no torture in Iraq." Amnesty International's recommendations were said to be "applied in Iraq on both legislative and practical levels. There is administrative and judicial supervision responsible for ensuring that these are properly implemented."
During 1985, Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of the routine torture and ill-treatment of detainees at all stages of their detention. Relatives of political prisoners were also allegedly tortured in their presence in order to force them into signing "confessions" or renouncing their political affiliations. A political prisoner released in April stated in his testimony to Amnesty International: "Members of my family, mother (73 years old), three sisters and three brothers with five children aged between five and 13 were arrested and brought in front of me. They were subjected to falaqa beatings and electric shoclœ. Also my sister and mother were undressed and insulted in front of me."
After learning of the death in June of Sayyid Muhammad al-Sayyid Muhammad 'Ali al-Hakim, Amnesty International expressed its concern at allegations that he may have died under torture. His family had allegedly been told by official sources that he had fallen ill in prison and been transferred to hospital for treatment where he died. However, the body was reportedly not returned to his family although the victim's father was allowed to see it before it w^ removed for burial. Neither death certificates nor records of the alleged illness and medical treatment were reportedly made available to the family. Amnesty International submitted a report on the case to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions in July. On 25 November the government replied to Amnesty International, stating that there was no truth in the allegations.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports that hundreds of people were executed in 1985. However, it had insufficient information to ascertain the exact number since many of the executions were said to have been carried out secretly in prisons and the victims' bodies subsequently buried by the authorities. When the victims' families were notified of executions, the bodies were usually returned to them with strict instructions not to mourn publicly and to bury them immediately. Some families were reportedly threatened with arrest or execution if they failed to obey these instructions.
Amnesty International received several reports of the mass execution of prisoners without prior legal proceedings or following summary tri^s with no right of defence or appeal. Among the reported victims were army deserters and government opponents, including members of the Iraqi Communist Party (ICP), Kurdistan
Amnesty International Report 1986	333
Democratic Party (KDP), Kurdistan Popular Democratic Party (KPDP), Kurdistan Socialist Party-Iraq (KSP-I), Assyrian Democratic Movement (ADM) and al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya (Islamic Call). It also learned of political prisoners who were reportedly executed after having been sentenced to terms of imprisonment. On 31 March, 13 KPDP members were reportedly executed after having been sentenced by a revolutionary court in 1984 to 15 years' imprisonment each.
Amnesty Intemational sent several urgent appeals to the govemment following the reported execution of 28 political prisoners in February and March. They were 15 KDP members, three ADM members and 10 members of the Hakim family. The organization submitted a report on these executions to the UN Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions in April. The govemment acknowledged in a letter to Amnesty Intemational received on 25 July that 19 of these prisoners had been executed for committing, among other things, acts of sabotage and for carrying weapons and explosives. On 31 December Amnesty Intemational once again appealed to the govemment after receiving reports that many political prisoner and army deserters had been executed between August and November, including 60 prisoners reportedly executed in Abu Ghraib Prison in the first week of November. Among them were said to be members of the KSP-I, KDP, ICP and al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya.
On 20 December Amnesty Intemational urgently appealed to the govemment following reports that some 300 people had been killed in northern Iraq in the second half of October. According to the organization's information, 10 people were executed in Sulaimaniya on 14 October after two airforce officers were killed by Kurdish fighters in the area the same day. They were reportedly arrested, lined up outside a public bath and shot. The next day a curfew was imposed in the city and govemment troops, estimated at about 20,000, reportedly carried out house-to-house searches seeking army deserters, draft resisters, members of the Pesh Merga and other suspected opponents. Thirteen of those arrested on that day were also reportedly lined up and shot in a residential area of the city. Eight others were allegedly buried alive by security forces in the city's cemetery. Student demonstrations in Sulaimaniya and other cities protesting against these events were allegedly violently suppressed, with troops firing directly into the crowds. Unconfirmed estimates put the number of people killed in demonstrations and executed by firing-squad in Sulaimaniya at about 200. In Arbil, about 80 people were said to have died when the Citadel, where some of those being sought by troops were said to be hiding, was destroyed by aerial bombardment. Hundreds of others were reported to have been
334	Amnesty Intema^onal Report 1986
arrested in the same period, including whole families and a large number of army deserters. Their fate and whereabouts were not known.
