Laos
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the restriction without charge, trial or sentence of many thousands of people taken into custody for "reeducation" at the time of the change of government in 1975. Amnesty International also continued to receive reports of the administrative restriction or detention of several government officials arrested in recent years, possibly on political grounds, and remained concerned about the lack of proper legal safeguards for political detainees.
Information gathered by Amnesty International during 1985 corroborated reports received earlier (see Amnesty International Report 1985) that the government had institutionalized a modified system of "re-education" for people taken into custody in 1975 on account of their alleged political activities or official positions under a previous government or because of political beliefs imputed to them. Amnesty International was unable to ascertain the total nimiber of people still being held, but it learned of an internal government estimate that some 5,000 people remained in "re-education". Most of those held had been members of the armed forces, police or civil service of a previous government. Official statements appeared to confirm claims by those held that most were still kept in restriction or detention not because of any offences they might have committed before 1975, but on account of the authorities' suspicions that they were opposed to policies and practices of the present government. Amnesty International believed that many of them were prisoners of conscience.
According to information available to Amnesty International, people held for continuing "re-education" were restricted or detained in remote districts in at least seven provinces — Houa Phanh, Xieng Khouang, Khammouan, Savannakhet, Salavan, Xekong and Attapeu — and probably in others as well. Under the modified system of "re-education" evidently institutionalized throughout the country, most were no longer kept, as they had been initiaUy, in
239	Amnesty International Report 1986
high-security camp facilities heavily guarded by national armed forces detachments. Many were scattered into small and generally mobile "road construction units" performing hard labour at sites where they were sent by the provincial administration and where they were kept under surveillance by local militia. Others were working either as menial or semi-skilled labourers for the provincial administration and its armed forces or doing farm work in local agricultural nikhom (settlements).
Amnesty Intemational learned of some releases from "reeducation" during 1985. Several dozen people were officially released in June from the Sop Pan Road Constmction Headquarters in Houa Phanh Province. They were transported home to the capital, Vientiane, where in July some of them attended a welcoming ceremony organized by the Ministry of the Interior. Many others who had hoped to be released were, however, disappointed, and Amnesty Intemational received a report of one suicide that was said to have resulted. It also received reporte of escape attempts, some of which succeeded, but some of which were said to have ended in death or imprisonment.
In April Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of all those held since 1975 for "re-education": it called for the immediate release of those who were prisoners of conscience and for the rest either to be promptly charged and fairly tried or released. In August it submitted to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Secretary General of the ruling Revolutionary People's Party of Laos, Kaysone Phomvi-han, a list of some 2,632 people believed to be among those still held, and reiterated its recommendations.
Having received no resp)onse to any of its earlier appeals, Amnesty Intemational in early November again wrote to Chairman and Secretary General Kaysone, stating that if these recommendations were implemented, such a demonstration of adherence to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights would contribute positively to the celebrations marking the 10th founding anniversary of the Democratic People's Republic of Laos, which fell on 2 December.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of almost 40 people in "re-education". Two of these, Tiao Sisouphan Manoreth, a dental surgeon, and Tenh Teso, Director of the pre-1975 Institute of Law and Admin^tration, were reportedly released during 1985. Two others, Tiao Souk Bouavong, a Vice-Chairman of the pre-1975 National Assembly, and Khamsouk Singaraj, a high-ranking official of the pre-1975 Ministry of National Economy, were reported during the year to have died, apparently of natural causes. Among those reportedly stiU held were Khamkhing Souvanlasy, the former Secretary General of the Laos National Commission for Unesco,
240	Amnesty International Report 1986
Samlith Ratsaphung, a former Ministry of Information official, and Pane Rassavong, Director of the pre-i975 General Planning Commission.
Amnesty International also received reports that some of the government officials arrested during 1983 and 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985) remained imprisoned after unfair trial procedures or were detained or kept under house arrest without charge or trial. Most of them had been accused of "corruption", but these accusations were reported to be in at least some instances politically motivated. One person on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed, Chanpheng Bounnaphon, was reported to have been released during 1985 and reinstated to his previous post as a Vice-Minister of Commerce. Others, however, were believed still to be imprisoned or under house arrest. These included Sengkham Phinit, a Vice-Minister of Construction at the time of his arrest in 1983, and Oudone Phonsena, a Vice-Minister of Finance and the local governor of the World Bank at the time of his arrest in 1984.
As in previous years. Amnesty International was concerned about the lack of legal safeguards for people accused of political offences. In the absence of a constitution and of formally promulgated penal and criminal procedure codes, citizens of Laos were effectively denied proper legal guarantees of their internationally recognized human rights, among them the rights not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile. While welcoming official statements that a draft constitution guaranteeing "the fundamental rights of the people" would be completed by the end of 1985, Amnesty International urged the government to incorporate into it the human rights proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and also to proceed rapidly to the promulgation of penal and criminal procedure codes guaranteeing such rights. By the end of 1985, however, no draft constitution had been published, and the country remained without penal and criminal procedure codes.
241	Amnesty International Report 1986
