CZECH REPUBLIC
CZECH REPUBLIC
Head of state: Vaclav Havel
Head of government: Miles Zeman
Capital: Prague
Population: 10 million
Official language: Czech
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict
Police arbitrarily detained and ill-treated dozens of people suspected of participating in protests against the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in September. A number of Roma who were subjected to racist violence were inadequately protected by police officers. Poor conditions in prisons led to widespread peaceful protests.
Arbitrary detention and ill-treatment
Around 850 peopie were detained in Prague following protests organized to coincide with the annual meeting of the World Bank and the IMF. The demonstrations attracted between 10,000 and 12,000 activists from around the world. Violence erupted when 400 people attempted to break through a police cordon guarding the conference centre where the meeting was being held. Sporadic acts of violence continued into the evening as dozens of activists smashed shop windows in Wenceslas Square. However, the vast majority of those detained had engaged in non-violent protests. A number of those detained were not involved in any unauthorized protest activity and a smal ler number were simply incidentally present at the scene of the police action to apprehend protesters. The decision to detain them appears to have been arbitrary.
Many detainees complained about police ill-treatment and submitted medical evidence of injuries caused by the beatings. The police apparently systematically refused detainees the rights to inform a member of their family or a third person of their whereabouts, to be informed about the charges in a language which they could understand, and to contact a lawyer. Detainees were not medically examined after being apprehended and there were reports that some were denied adequate medical care. The vast majority of detainees also appeared to have been detained in the first 24 to 48 hours in overcrowded conditions, without receiving adequate food or water. In several police stations detainees were forced to pass between two lines of police officers who hit many of them,
Roma
A new law on the residence of aliens, which came into force in January, was severely criticized for giving police arbitrary powers. Article 5 lists documents
which the police, at their discretion, can demand of an alien applying for residence; it was feared that the power to demand a full list of documents would be used in a discriminatory manner, especially against Roma, In addition. Article 65 gives foreign spouses of Czech nationals the right to permanent residence, but denies this right to spouses of foreigners with permanent residence. Since many benefits and basic social services are linked to permanent residence, many families of foreigners could be denied social benefit or the right to work. Many Roma who were denied Czech citizenship in 1993 when the Czechoslovak Federation was dissolved, and have not acquired it since, were particularly affected by the legislation.
There were reports of racist violence against Roma and allegations that the authorities apparently failed to investigate some incidents effectively. Q In February in a bar in Nachod, around 15 skinheads shouted racist insults and attacked five Roma and one other man who was punched in the head, breaking one of his teeth. Gabriela Farkasova, Romani Advisor to the District Government Office and a witness to the attack, managed to leave the bar and call the police. Although the Romani victims identified some of the attackers, the police allegedly failed to detain or even properly register their identities at that time. Subsequently, all of the victims were questioned about the incident and helped to identify one of the attackers from the documentation concerning local skinheads. However, the majority of the skinheads were not local and the police did not show the victims photos of any skinheads from outside the locality. Apparently the police treated the incident as a bar brawl rather than a racist attack.
In August the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed concern about the increasing number of racially motivated attacks against minority groups, particularly Roma, and noted that many such attaci« may not even be reported. The Committee also expressed concern about the lack of effectiveness of and confidence in the criminal justice system in preventingand combating racial crimes and the ineffective implementation of existing legislation to prosecute perpetrators of incitement to racial hatred. Concern was also expressed about the degrading treatment minority groups were subjected to by members of the police force. The Committee recommended that the Czech government strengthen measures to improve the enforcement of criminal laws against racially motivated ' crimes, and continue and strengthen training programs for police and officials in charge of implementing the law on issues related to racially motivated crime.
Prison conditions
In January around 6,000 inmates of several Czech prisons, including Kufim, Rynovice, Vinafice, Ostrava-Hefmanice, Valdice, and Pardubice prisons, were involved in hunger strikes and other protests over prison conditions. Their complaints focused on serious overcrowding; some facilities were holding almost twice as many prisoners as they should. This had
Amnesty International Report 2001
87
DOM
repercussions on sanitation, and on educational and work opportunities. Although detainees' demands for staffing changes were rejected by the Prison Service and the Ministry of Justice, improvements did take place following the protests.
