MAL
REPUBLIC OF MALI
Head of state: Alpha OumarKonar6
Head of government: MandeSidibe (replaced Ibrahim
BoubacarKeita in February)
Capital: Bamako
Population: 11.2 million
Official language: French
Death penalty: abolitionist in practice
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvementof children in armed conflict; Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court
At least 14 people were sentenced to death. No executions were carried out. The work of a commission of inquiry set up by the government to investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment was hampered by lack of funding.
Background
In February, President Alpha Oumar Konare appointed former presidential adviser Mande Sidibe as Prime Minister following the resignation of his predecessor, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita.
Death penalty
At least 14 people were sentenced to death during the year, most of them following convictions for offences including murder and armed robbery. In July the Assize Court in Bamako convicted Cheick Ibrahim Khalil Kanoute, the founder of a religious group known as the Pieds nus (the Barefooted), and two of his supporters of murdering a judge in August 1998.
No executions have been carried out in the last decade. On several occasions. President Konare has stated his opposition to the death penalty.
Commission of inquiry
In December 1999 the government named a commission of inquiry to investigate allegations by opposition party supporters arrested in Niamakoro in May 1997. They alleged that they had been tortured and ill-treated in the presence of senior police officers. In January 2000 the commission requested financial support to enable it to carry out its work but received no response. A commission of inquiry set up to investigate allegations oftorture and ill-treatment was unable to carry out its work because of lack of funding. Al action
Following meetings with government officials by an Al delegation in December 1999, the organization urged the government in February 2060 to give the commission sufficient resources to enable it to fulfil its functions in accordance with international standards for human rights investigations. No response was received to this appeal.
166
Amnesty International Report 2001	166
