SLO
SLOVAKIA
SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Head of state: Rudolf Schuster
Head of government: Mikulds Dzurinda
Capital: Bratislava
Population: 5.4 million
Official language: Slovak
Death penalty: abolitionist forall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
There were reports of ill-treatment of Roma by police officers, and of the authorities failing to protect Roma from violence by skinhead gangs. Conscientious objectors to military service faced imprisonment.
Violence against Roma
Roma continued to face poverty, social discrimination and racist violence. For example, in March residents of Hlohovec town collected signatures to oppose plans by municipal authorities to move Roma into a house in a predominantly non-Romani neighbourhood. In August Vitazoslav Moric, a member of the National Council (parliament), staled in a radio broadcast that reservations for Roma should be established. In September the National Council stripped Vitazoslav MoriC of his immunity from prosecution, allowing him to be charged with incitement to racial hatred, but no charges had been brought by the end of 2000. Q In August, three men broke into a home in Zilina and beat Anastazia Balazova and her daughters with baseball bats. Anastazia Balazova, mother of eight, died three days later. Two of her children were treated for injuries. Prime Minister Dzurinda promised to ensure "that this criminal act is investigated as soon as possible". In October the police charged four suspects with crimes including racially motivated infliction of bodily harm, resulting in death. Q In April a group of around 15 skinheads attacked three Roma in Poprad, hitting one on the head with an iron bar. Two police officers who arrived at the scene physically assaulted Romani witnesses of the skinhead attack. After another police patrol arrived, Emil Mirga and his sons Robert, Maros and Milan were taken into custody for allegedly assaulting the police. All four were reportedly beaten in the police station. Another man, L'ubomir ^rissky, had been shot and killed in the same police station in August 1999. The police officer responsible for that shooting was sentenced in October to a suspended one-year prison sentence. Violent police raids
There were further reports of violent police raids on entire Romani communities, ostensibly in order to arrest criminal suspects.
Q In September, in the Romani neighbourhood of Plavecky Stvrtok, masked police officers broke into houses and reportedly beat and kicked women.
children and men. The police were allegedly looking for three Romani men. Nadezda Huberova was awoken by seven masked officers who kicked open the door of her house. Her lo-year-old daughter reportedly suffered an epileptic fit when they pushed her out of her bed.
International organizations
In August, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed concern at the "persistence of acts of violence by groups, particularly skinheads, directed towards Roma and other ethnic minorities". The Committee recommended that Slovakia should strengthen procedures for timely and thorough investigations and effective prosecutions against racist organizations.
In June the Council of Europe's European Commission against Racism and Intolerance published a report detailing problems facing the Romani community in Slovakia. The report highlighted racial violence and harassment and the apparent lack of police response to such incidents.
Conscientious objection
In July an amended Law on Civilian Service came into force which obliges the military authorities to inform recruits about their right to apply for alternative service. Al expressed concern about the time limits that were retained in the amended law, which effectively disqualify people who develop a conscientious objection to military service after being conscripted.
Al country report
• Slovakia: Conscientious objector Milan Kobolka - a possible prisoner of conscience (Al Index: EUR 71/001/2000)
214
Amnesty International Report 2001	214
