SWEDEN
KINGDOM OF SWEDEN
Head of state: King Carl XVI Gustaf Head of government: Goran Persson Capital: Stockholm Population: 8.9 million Official language: Swedish Death penalty: abolitionist forall crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict
At least two unarmed people were shot dead by police, and at least two people died in custody in disputed circumstances. More than five years after the death in custody of OsmoVallo, no one had been held accountable.
OsmoVallo
More than five years after the death in custody in disputed circumstances of Osmo Vallo, the government established a commission of inquiry into the authorities' handling of the case; no one had been held accountable.
Osmo Vallo died shortly after his arrest on 30 May '995- A police officer had stamped on his back as he lay face down on the ground. After he appeared to have
collapsed, no attempt was made to assist or resuscitate him. Instead, police officers transported him, still handcuffed and lying face downwards, to the hospital.
in closing the investigation into the case on 30 March 2000, the Prosecutor General acknowledged that Osmo Vallo may have died from being stamped on the back by a police officer. The Prosecutor General also acknowledged that there had been flaws in the investigation and urged that a further investigation be carried out into how the authorities had handled the different aspects of the case.
There was concern that Osmo Vallo's death was not an isolated incident; a pattern of similar deaths in custody had been reported in which the manner of restraint or excessive use of force by law enforcement officials may have caused asphyxia. The inadequacy of many of the investigations into these deaths led AI to call for a totally independent body such as a commission of inquiry, possibly including experts from other countries, to investigate the handling of Osmo Vallo's case by the different authorities, as well as other cases of deaths in custody since 1992.
In a letter to AI in June, the Minister of Justice stated that the 21 June report of the Chancellor of Justice was critical of actions taken by various authorities involved in the handling of the Osmo Vallo case and indicated flaws within the criminal justice system. The Chancellor of Justice's report called for further consideration of certain questions.
The Chancellor of Justice's report was immediately followed by a report by the Parliamentary Ombudsperson who stated that the current procedure for dealing with complaints against the police was inadequate and proposed that an independent system be established. The Ombudsperson was particularly critical of the local prosecutors' failure to initiate preliminary investigations into some cases of alleged police misconduct even though such investigations would have been justified. The Minister of Justice established a commission of inquiry in December to look into past deaths in custody in order to propose preventive measures for the future. The commission was scheduled to report in one year's time.
Shootings by police
At least two unarmed people were shot dead by police. O Magnus Carlsson, aged 19, was shot dead in Kalmar on 13 May after a car chase and a struggle with police officers. A police officer was accused of causing the death of another person or breach of duty, but was acquitted in October, after the court accepted that he had acted in self-defence. Q Mikael Pettersson, aged 31, was shot dead on 13 March at Vikbolandet near Norrkoping after he crashed his car while being chased by the police and then tried to run away. The police officer reportedly fired a warning shot, then shot Mikael Pettersson because he was convinced that he was armed. No weapon was found at the scene. In October the police officer was convicted of breach of duty, aggravated assault and causing the death of another person through grave carelessness and sentenced to 18 months'
230
Amnesty International Report 2001
SWI
Imprisonment. The officer lodged an appeal which was pending at the end of the year.
Death in prison
In June Bruce Joel Jason Hulthen, a 28-year-old prisoner, died after being restrained by four prison guards. He had attempted to escape from the Storboda Institution in Stockholm. The prison authorities were immediately alerted to his escape and he was chased and caught by four prison guards. The prison guards restrained him, including reportedly by sitting on him as he lay on the ground. It was also reported that one guard grabbed the back of Bruce Joel Jason Hulthen's head and neck, which may have caused his death. When the police arrived on the scene shortly afterwards, the prisoner was apparently already unconscious. The Regional Director of Prison and Probation Services told the media that the prisoner "went blue in the face and stopped breathing". Prison guards reportedly tried to resuscitate him, but he was dead on arrival at the hospital. The prison guards were suspended pending the police investigation into the death, in October, one of the prison guards was charged with manslaughter; he was awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Death in police custody
On 3 November, Peter Andersson, a 35-year-old suspected burglar, died after being arrested and restrained by four police officers in Orebro, The preliminary report of a post-mortem examination indicated signs of violence on his face, arms^ legs and body as well as symptoms of death from asphyxia.
Forcible return
In November the UN Committee against Torture concluded that the decisions of the Swedish immigration authorities in connection with the case of an Iranian woman had constituted a violation of Sweden's obligations under the UN Convention against Torture. The woman feared that she might be sentenced to death by stoning for adultery if she was returned to Iran.
Al country report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Sweden (Al Index: EUROl/003/2000)
