SWAZILAND
KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND
Head of state: King Mswati III
Head of government: BarnabusSibusiso DIamini
Capital: Mbabane
Population: 1 million
Official languages: English, Swazi
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: UN Refugee
Convention
Rights of association, assembly and expression continued to be denied. Opposition protests led to arbitrary detentions and ill-treatment by the security forces. Government opponents faced arrest and politically motivated charges in the courts. At least 12 death sentences were passed.
Background
The Constitutional Review Commission (CRC), appointed by King Mswati 111 in 1996, presented its recommendations for a new constitution to the King in November. Its findings and recommendations were not made public. The CRC was criticized for limiting public access to its proceedings.
There were a number of incidents of political violence. They included the petrol bombing in December of magistrates' courts in Mbabane. There was also a bomb explosion at a security force encampment in the Macetjeni area in December.
Violations of freedoms of association, assembly and expression
Journalists faced harassment in reporting political or human rights issues. In February the government closed the state-owned Swazi Observer newspaper
after journalists refused to disclose the sources of an article about a 1998 bomb explosion. In July a case against journalist Bheki Makhuba for criminal defamation was struck off the court rol I when the prosecution failed to appear in court. He had been briefly detained and charged in 1999 in connection with a newspaper article about King Mswati.
Protests over restrictions on fundamental freedoms intensified towards the end of 2000. Members of banned political parties, students and trade union members held demonstrations and meetings. They called for an end to the 1973 suspension of freedoms of association and assembly, the repeal of legal restrictions on trade union rights and a new government.
In October the government banned meetings of the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions (SFTU) and the Swaziland National Association of Teachers (SNAT), and threatened civil servants with arrest if they participated in strikes and boycotts deemed political. The government obtained an Industrial Court order declaring illegal a proposed strike by the SFTU. Following the visit of a delegation from the International Labour Organisation in November, King Mswati signed into law an amended Industrial Relations Act which restored some trade union freedoms.
Detentions, restrictions and political trials
Opposition leaders were prosecuted on the basis of politically motivated charges. Journalists and other critics were briefly detained without charge or trial. Al appealed to the government to respect the rights of its citizens to non-violent political association and assembly, and to freedom of expression. Q A number of local and foreign journalists reporting political protests in October and November were briefly detained and had film footage confiscated. Foreign journalists were ordered to leave the country. Q On 7 November SFTU officials were briefly held at a security force roadblock outside Mbabane to prevent them joining protesters seeking to hand a petition calling for political reforms to the Prime Minister. Jan Sithole, SFTU Secretary General, was subsequently held under extra-legal house arrest for several days and his communication with others was restricted by the security forces.
Q On 7 November members of the banned opposition party, the People's United Democratic Movement (PUDEMO), were prevented by the security forces from delivering a petition to the Prime Minister. Mario Masuku, President of PUDEMO, was arrested by police on io November and held incommunicado. On 15 November he was charged in the High Court with sedition for allegedly criticizing the King and released under restrictive bail conditions to await trial. The presiding Judge, the Chief Justice, was later questioned by government ministers about his decision to grant bail.
Torture/ ill-treatment
The security forces ill-treated and used excessive force against political activists and protesters.
Amnesty International Report 2001
229
SWE
Q In February delegates to a Swaziland Youth Congress conference required hospital treatment for injuries sustained when police forcibly broke up the gathering. Q In October some 200 villagers in Macetjeni and KaMkhweli were evicted from their homes at gunpoint by soldiers, apparently because they refused to accept the King's brother. Prince Maguga, as chief. They were left in the countryside without shelter or other basic necessities. After a petrol bomb attack in December on Prince Maguga's home, Dumisa Ndhlandhla was arrested and charged with arson. He was allegedly beaten and subjected to suffocation torture by police during interrogation.
Q During protests and strikes in October and November a number of trade union officials and other protesters were assaulted by the security forces. Musa Dlamini. SNAT Secretary General, was allegedly beaten at police regional headquarters in Manzini, and Bongihlanhla Gama, another SNAT official, was shot and wounded by police. They both required treatment in hospital.
Death penalty
At least 12 death sentences were imposed by the High Court in separate murder trials. No executions were known to have taken place.
