NAM
NAMIBIA
REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
Head of state: DrSamuel Nujoma Head of government: HageCeingob Capital: Windhoek Population: 1.6 million Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
There was a sharp rise in human rights violations in the northeastern Kavangoand Caprivi provinces, particularly early in 2000, following Namibian involvement in the Angolan civil war. Human rights violations were reportedly committed by the Angolan and Namibian armies, as well as by the Namibian police's Special Field Forces (SFF), including extrajudicial executions and torture. There were also concerns regarding freedom of expression and association.
Background
From December 1999 onwards, the Namibian government permitted the Angolan army to mount -attacks into Angola from Kavango and Caprivi provinces against the forces of the Uniao Nacionalpara a Independencia TotaldeAn§ola{\}WJA). National Union for the Total Independence of Angola.
Kavango and Caprivi provinces
Extrajudicial executions
Human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions, by the Angolan and Namibian armies, as well as by the SFF, were reported throughout 2000. Q Angolan soldiers reportedly shot dead Thaddeus Mubili, a villager from western Caprivi, on 22 January, after one of their number was injured by a landmine. Thaddeus Mubili had been helping the soldiers track suspected UNITA members who had attacked a village the previous day.
Q A group of Angolans and Namibians, apparently members of a family group who live on both sides of the border river, reportedly crossed into Namibia west of the Kavango provincial capital, Rundu, on 10 January. The presence of the group aroused suspicion and Namibian soldiers arrived and started shooting. A six-year-old girl was shot dead and a man was shot in the buttocks. Torture/ill-treatment
There were reports of torture and excessive use of force by Angolan and Namibian armed forces, as well as the SFF. Early in 2000 there were reports of Angolan soldiers torturing young women by raping them. There were also reports of soldiers based in Angola abducting girls from Namibia and taking them to Angola. Q Erkki Fiderato was arrested on 7 January at his home in eastern Kavango by SFF officers. During arrest
he was reportedly kicked and beaten with rifle butts. Villagers heard him screaming throughout the night. Q Muyeva Thaddeus Munango was shot and wounded in the hand and leg on 4 February, He had been fishing in a river east of Rundu when an SFF officer reportedly ordered him to leave the river, then shot him and left him for dead. He regained consciousness and managed to reach his home, where villagers took him to hospital. Forcible returns
Some refugees who fled the Angolan conflict after November 1999 were forcibly returned. Accounts of the way the authorities dealt with the population in the northeast suggested a pattern of cooperation between the Namibian police and members of the Angolan army.
Angolan women in Osire refugee camp in January reported that they had been separated from their husbands and that they feared the men may have been handed over to the Angolan army. The missing men were mostly from Angola's central highlands where UNITA drew much of its support. The authorities did not respond to inquiries by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) about 50 men reported missing in November and December 1999.
Torture/ill-treatment
More than 100 people remained in custody throughout 2000 after an armed secessionist uprising in Katima Mulilo, the provincial capital of Caprivi, in August 1999. About 300 people were initially arrested and others were arrested in the following months. All of those initially arrested were reportedly tortured during their arrests. More than 130 of those released without charge filed complaints of torture during 2000 and sought compensation. Their cases were still pending at the end of the year. Three police officers named by many detainees as perpetrators of torture remained on duty.
Freedom of expression and association
Many of those still detained following the uprising in Katima Mulilo appeared to be possible prisoners of conscience. They were accused of sedition and treason because of their opinions or the organizations they belonged to, even though they did not participate in or advocate any violence.
There was growing criticism by government ministers and government party officials of the press, the judiciary and non-governmental organizations. Officials threatened to withdraw residence permits from foreign judges and encouraged the police to "eliminate gays and lesbians from the face of Namibia".
Al country report and visit
Report
• Namibia: Human rights abuses in the border area
{Al Index: AFR 03/001 /2000) Visit
Al delegates visited Namibia in January to investigate the situation in the border area with Angola.
Amnesty International Report 2001
177
