GUINEA-BISSAU
REPUBLIC OFGUINEA-BISSAU
Head of state: Kumba lala
Head of government: Caetano NTchama
Capital: Bissau
Population: 1.2 million
Official language: Portuguese
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its two
Optional Protocols; UN Convention against Racism; UN
Convention against Torture; Optional Protocol to the UN
Children's Convention on the involvement of children in
armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's
Convention; Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court
Following elections in November 1999 a coalition government was appointed which announced its commitment to human rights protection and to ending impunity. Security officers were convicted of human rights violations committed during the armed conflict of 1998-1999 and sentenced to prison terms. Political prisoners were released, some pending trial. Seven political leaders and about 200 soldiers were arrested following an army rebellion. There were reports of human rights abuses by soldiers. The mandate of the UN Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) was extended for one year.
Background
Kumba lala, president of the Partido da Renovafao SociaKPRS), Social Renewal Party, won the second round of presidential elections in January, and in February he was sworn in as President. Caetano N'Tchama of the PRS became Prime Minister and formed a coalition government with the second largest party, the Resistencia da Guine-Bissau-Movimento Ba/afa(RGB-MB), Guinea-Bissau Resistance-Bafata Movement. The new government stated that its priorities were to promote reconciliation following the 1998-1999 civil war, to strengthen democracy, the rule of law, good governance and respect for human rights, and to combat corruption and poverty. It also
116
Amnesty International Report 2001	116
GUI
announced plans to depoliticize the armed forces and to demobilize 6,000 soldiers by the end of 2001. The salary of soldiers was increased but about 50 soldiers arrested at the end of 1999 in connection with a strike over salaries remained in prison without charge.
There was tension between civil and military authorities and the government was increasingly confronted with indiscipline by senior military officers. Efforts were under way to redefine the role of the military in the new democratic Guinea-Bissau. Negotiations between the new government and the former Junta Militar, Military Junta, were led by a group of mediators from civil society, with assistance from the Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau. In February, the leader of the former Military Junta, General Ansumane Mané, turned down President Kumba lala's offer of the post of special defence adviser to the government, stating that the army had pledged political neutrality. However, the military continued to maintain a high public profile and to perform police functions, as police were constrained by lack of resources and appropriate training. Tension increased in April when Lamine Sanha, the navy commander, was dismissed but refused to leave his post, arguing that he was accountable only to General Ansumane Mané. The case was resolved after negotiations involving the goodwill commission of religious and community leaders set up during the conflict. Tension was further heightened in November after General Ansumane Mané rejected the government's promotion of army officers. Fighting briefly erupted in Bissau between army factions loyal to the government and supporters of General Ansumane Mané, who proclaimed himself chief of staff of the armed forces after placing the then chief of staff under arrest.
After a few days at large. General Ansumane Mané was captured and killed, reportedly in a shoot-out with soldiers loyal to the government, in Quinhamel, some 30 kilometres north of Bissau. Some reports, however, suggested that he had been captured alive, tortured and then shot. By the end of 2000 no investigation into his death had been carried out.
At least 200 soldiers who supported General Ansumane Mané were arrested and accused of attempting to overthrow the government. None had beeo tried or formally charged by the end of 2000.
In March the mandate of UNOGBIS, which had helped with the transition process, was extended for another year. UNOGBIS monitored prison conditions and releases of political prisoners. It provided support to the Supreme Court by training a further 20 magistrates, including in human rights issues.
In August the International Committee of the Red Cross ran a seminar on humanitarian law which was attended by 370 soldiers and officers. The Liga Guineense deDireitosHumanosdGDH), Guinean (Bissau) Human Rights League, held several seminars on human rights for 50 police officers and Judicial officials.
Relations between Senegal and Guinea-Bissau were strained. In April Guinea-Bissau accused Senegal of bombing its territory while it denied accusations that
its territory was being used by rebels of the Mouvement des forces démocratiques de Casamance (MFDC), Democratic Forces of Casamance Movement, to attack Senegal. Relations deteriorated in August when, following attacks by armed groups, Senegalese villagers closed the border between the countries, causing shortages of food and fuel in Guinea-Bissau.
Steps to end impunity
The new government repeatedly stated its commitment to overcome impunity and important steps were taken to that end.
Q In August, three security officers were tried on charges of human rights violations committed during the armed conflict, including arbitrary arrest, torture and extrajudicial executions. They were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from seven to 15 years and ordered to pay large sums in compensation to the victims and their families. One was convicted of killing Lai Antonio Lopes Pereira, who was shot dead at his home in July 1998, and of the arbitrary arrest and torture of Bitchofola Na Fafé and Ansumane Fati. He was sentenced to iç years' imprisonment and ordered to compensate the victims and their families.
Human rights defenders
in May, InácioTavares, president of the LGDH, was threatened with reprisals after denouncing the beating by soldiers of electricity company workers following a power cut at a military air base. General Ansumane Mané reportedly ordered the arrest of a radio journalist who reported the beatings, alleging that the story was false. In another incident in May, television news reader Issufe Queta and news editor Paula Melo were detained for 48 hours after reading a press statement by Fernando Gomes, president of the AHança Socialista Gt//neense(ASG), Socialist Alliance of Guinea (Bissau), who was himself detained for 36 hours. He had criticized the political situation in the country. The three were released on bail and faced charges of slander and defamation. They had not been tried by the end of 2000. Fernando Gomes was arrested again in November and detained for over a week, accused of supporting the military rebellion. He was severely beaten at the time of the arrest.
Arrests of political opponents
Several leading members of opposition political parties were arrested in the wake of the military rebellion. Among them were several members of the Uniàopara Mudança (UM), Union for Change, including Aminé Saad, former Procurator General, Caramba Turé, a member of parliament, who was held for two days, and Agnelo Regalia, the director of Bombolón Radio. Also arrested were Fernando Gomes (see above) and Francisco Benante, president of the Partido Africano para a Independência da Guiñé e Cabo VerdeiPA]GO. African Party for the Independence of Guinea (Bissau). Those arrested were held for over a week at the main police station and placed under house arrest where they remained, uncharged, at the end of 2000.
116	Amnesty International Report 2001
117
CUY
Abuses by soldiers
Soldiers continued to abuse their power and to ill-treat civilians. None was brought to justice. Most of the incidents involved General Ansumane Mané's bodyguards.
O In May, bodyguards of General Ansumane Mané detained and beat human rights activist Marcelino Víctor. He had gone to the General's house to get his niece and two other girls who had been detained there for several hours after they dumped rubbish outside the house. He was detained there overnight and beaten. He complained to the authorities but no action was taken.
Political trials
Most of the 270 people still in detention at the beginning of 2000 in connection with crimes committed during the conflict were released, some pending trial. Others had the charges against them dropped. Seven were in prison at the end of the year, three serving sentences (see above) and four awaiting trial.
Q Avito da Silva and Manuel dos Santos "Manecas", two civilian former ministers in the government of ousted President Joao Bernardo Vieira, were acquitted in February of charges of treason, giving financial support to the former President, incitement to war and collaboration with foreign troops. The prosecution failed to present evidence to sustain the charges. Their acquittal led to the dismissal of the Attorney General in March.
