JAPAN
JAPAN
Head of state: EmperorAkihito
Head of government: Mori Yoshiro (replaced Obuchi
Keizo in June)
Capital: Tokyo
Population: 126.1 million
Official language: Japanese
Death penalty: retentionist_
Three people were executed in 2000 and more than 100 prisoners remained under sentence of death. There were no reforms in the Da¡yo Kangokusystem of pre-trial detention. There were further reports of ill-treatment by immigration officials during interrogation of foreign nationals, and reports of ill-treatment and extortion by private security staff attached to a detention facility known as the Landing Prevention Facility atNarita Airport.The refugee recognition system remained secretive, arbitrary and harsh.
Background
The death of Prime Minister Obuchi Keizo in May led to general elections in June, which saw the return to power of the ruling coalition of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), the Komeito Party and the Conservative Party, but with a reduced majority. The vulnerable position of Prime Minister Mori Yoshiro of the LDP was
Amnesty International Report 2001
141
JAP
further weakened by the resignation of his closest aide, Chief Cabinet Secretary Nakagawa Hidenao, in October, and by a no-confidence motion initiated by one of the LDP factions in November, which the government narrowly survived. In early December there was a cabinet reshuffle.
In May and in December, the National Assembly passed a number of anti-crime laws, including a bill (in December) that lowered the age of criminal responsibility from i6 to 14.
The July G-8 summit held in Okinawa was dominated by the improvement in North-South Korean relations. Talks between Japanese and North Korean officials resumed for the first time since 1998. Japan gave food aid to North Korea, ignoring domestic protests over alleged abductions of Japanese nationals by North Koreans.
Death penalty
There were three executions on 30 November 2000. About 1Ç death sentences were passed, including five on members of the religious cult formerly known as Aum Shinrikyo. Execution is by hanging. The prisoner is informed that the execution will take place just hours in advance, denying the prisoner the chance to inform relatives or lawyers.
At the end of December, more than 100 prisoners were under sentence of death and about 52 of them had had their sentence of death confirmed by the Supreme Court. Prison conditions on death row amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Many prisoners had been held in solitary confinement for a decade or more. They had limited contact with the outside world and no contact with other prisoners.
Q Govinda Prasad Mainali, a Nepalese national who was charged with murder in March 1997, was acquitted in April 2000 by the Tokyo District Court. He continued to be detained after being acquitted. The acquittal was overturned by the Tokyo High Court following appeals from the prosecution, and he was sentenced to life imprisonment on 22 December. Al publicly expressed concern at his continued detention after acquittal and at the trend of prosecution appeals to the High Court against acquittals by lower courts, particularly in death penalty cases.
Torture/ ill-treatment
The DaiyoKangoku system of pre-trial detention continued despite criticisms from the UN Human Rights Committee. Suspects may be held for up to 23 days in police detention cells during which time they are closely monitored, and are questioned for long periods by several police interrogators. There are no legal regulations governing police interrogation procedures and no provision for court-appointed lawyers for criminal suspects prior to indictment. Interrogations are not recorded or videotaped nor are defence lawyers allowed to be present during the interrogations. Many detainees confess during this initial detention period. Some have reportedly been beaten and many have alleged that they were tricked into believing that if they confessed the detention
would end. The forced confessions have been used in court as evidence.
Q It was reported in December that a suspect detained on charges of rape and murder had been held under the Daiyo Kangoku system repeatedly for more than two months. This prolonged period of detention, surveillance and interrogation was made possible by police charging him with different, allegedly unrelated crimes. There were allegations that the suspect was being coerced to confess to an unrelated crime.
Abuses, including beatings, were reportedly committed by private security staff attached to a detention centre, the Landing Prevention Facility at Narita International Airport, against individuals refused entry to Japan. Money was reportedly extorted from detainees to pay for "room and board" at the detention centre, and those who did comply were strip-searched or beaten. Despite being under the jurisdiction of the immigration authorities, there was no reported action against the guards responsible or the private company that employed them, â In June, two Tunisian men, Thameur Mouez and Thameur Hichm, were reportedly hit on the face, held down, kicked and denied medical attention at the Landing Prevention Facility. Q A Chinese national was reportedly beaten until his skull was fractured by an immigration official, during interrogation in August. The official, who spoke no Chinese, conducted the interrogation alone, although the Chinese man did not speak Japanese. Requirements under the UN Convention against Torture Japan was due to submit its initial report to the UN Committee against Torture in July 2000, having acceded to the UN Convention against Torture in 1999. However, the report had not been submitted by the end of 2000.
Asylum-seekers
Some 216 asylum-seekers applied for refugee status in 2000, About 138 were rejected and about 22 asylum-seekers were recognized as refugees. The process is very secretive, and rejections are never fully explained and do not take into account the risk the asylum-seeker could face if deported. Many asylum-seekers were detained in immigration detention centres for long periods. There were reports of ill-treatment of detainees in immigration detention centres, including inadequate medical facilities.
There were fears that tens of potential asylum-seekers were deported after being detained in facilities where they were denied access to lawyers and to information about refugee detemination procedures.
Revisions to Juvenile Law
A juvenile Revision Bill was passed by the Diet (Parliament) which includes provisions to lower the minimum age at which suspects can be held criminally responsible for their actions from 16 to [4. These revisions constitute the first major amendment to the Juvenile Law since it came into effect in 1949. Under the amendments, family courts would have the option of sending children as young as 14 to face criminal trials as adults. Already, juvenile offenders have to undergo
142
Amnesty International Report 2001	142
JOR
long hours of questioning for up to 23 days under the Daiyo Kangokusystem with hmited access to family members and lawyers.
Al visits
An Al delegation visited Japan in March. In early December a high-level Al delegation visited Japan and discussed Al's long-standing concerns with government ministersand representativesofleading political parties.
