CHAD
REPUBLICOFCHAD
Head of state: Idriss Deby
Head of government: NagoumYamassoum
Capital: N'Djamena
Population: 7.6 million
Official languages: French, Arabic
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
Despite moves towards negotiation, the armed conflict in northern Chad continued to threaten the government of Idriss Déby. Independent information on human rights abuses in the area was difficult to obtain. However, there were several reports of the use of forcibly recruited child soldiers. A brief resurgence of armed conflict in southern Chad led to a serious increase in human rights abuses in the region, in particular a number of reported cases of extrajudicial execution and ill-treatment.
Impunity
No one has been brought to justice for serious human rights violations, including thousands of extrajudicial executions, which occurred under the government of Hissein Habré (1982-1990). in 1992 a government Commission of Inquiry identified the Direction delà documentation et de la sécurítéiDDS), Directorate for Documentation and Security, which was directly responsible to Hissein Habré, as one of the main units responsible for violations. In October 2000, a coalition of national and international human rights groups assisted in filing 17 cases against members of the DDS
for crimes of torture, murder and "disappearances" under Hissein Habré. Further cases were filed subsequently calling for investigations and compensation. In November, the investigating judge ruled that he did not have jurisdiction to try the cases because a special court to try Hissein Habré and his collaborators, provided for in a 1993 law, had never been established. An appeal against this ruling was lodged. Hissein Habré himself was charged with complicity in acts of torture in Senegal, but the charges were later ruled to be inadmissible (see Senegal entry).
Torture and extrajudicial executions
Torture continued to be routine during interrogation and as a form of intimidation. <3 Ali Hadji Garondé Djarma was badly beaten by members of the judicial police after his arrest in November. He was charged with defamation following publication in the independent newspaper N'Djaména Hebdo of his opinion piece criticizing relations between the Chadian and Libyan governments. He was convicted of the lesser offence of "insult" and received a two-year suspended sentence and a fine. He had also alleged that the serving Libyan ambassador to Chad was responsible for the "disappearance" in 1984 of a Chadian national. The director of N'Djaména Hebdo. Oulatar Bégoto, was acquitted of "complicity to defame through the press".
In March, two prisoners who were reportedly attempting to escape from Abéché prison were shot and killed, although their feet were chained and they posed no threat. On 3 April a soldier, Yogeurna, was shot shortly after his arrest by police officers in Koumra, Moyen Chari region. Yogeurna had apparently been arrested for trying to steal branches from a mango tree. On 15 May, Sylvain Laohoye was extrajudicially executed in gendarmerie detention in Bessao, Logone oriental region.
Human rights abuses in the south
The Comité na tional du salut pour la paix et la démocratie (ŒSPD). National Salvation Committee for Peace and Democracy, which had been brought into the government in 1994, took up arms again in April after its leader. Moïse Kette, lost his position as director of national intelligence. The re-emergence of the CNSPD prompted a large military counter-insurgency and intelligence-gathering operation in the south. The military operation and fears of a return to conflict caused large population displacements. Extrajudicial executions and ill-treatment of people suspected of supporting Moïse Kette were documented by Chadian human rights groups. A number of women were allegedly raped.
Q On 13 August Raphaël Mbeurdé and Robtol Nadji, a village chief, were arrested by soldiers in Bendho, taken to a neighbouring village, and shot. The killings followed fighting between government forces and the CNSPD in the area.
Q Paul Mbaitidem, Joseph Nadjiadoumdom and Martin Djimta, all relatives of Moïse Kette, were reportedly extrajudicially executed by soldiers in the Béboto region in August.
Amnesty International Report 2001
67
CHI
Q Adolphe Soulabé was arrested in Moundou in September and transferred to Béboto where he was executed. His wife was also arrested. Her fate was not known.
Moïse Kette himself was killed in September. According to official sources he was killed in a clash with government soldiers. However, other evidence, including a photograph which appeared to show that his throat had been cut, suggested that he may have been summarily executed after capture.
In May, villagers from Békoura, Béboto and Manga were ill-treated by soldiers who believed they had information on the whereabouts of Moïse Kette.
Some CNSPD combatants also reportedly ill-treated civilians. In July, a vehicle was ambushed and six people were injured in the Goré area by armed men reportedly belonging to the CNSPD. In August, the CNSPD reportedly kidnapped Justin Nadjibeye, whom they suspected of passing information to the government. His fate was not known.
Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders continued to be at risk. Q Tiglao Mbayki, of the Ligue tchadienne des droits de l'homme iLTDH), Chadian Human Rights League, was briefly detained and beaten in Pala. Other members of the LTDH were threatened in Kélo, In September, the house of Dobian Assingar, president of the LTDH, was attacked by four men in military uniform. He had been attacked before, and had received death threats.
The Chad/Cameroon pipeline
In June the World Bank agreed to finance the Chad/Cameroon oil development and pipeline project. Human rights organizations in Chad and international environmental organizations have criticized the pipeline on environmental, social and economic grounds. Representatives of civil society bodies, including human rights groups, were included in a government body to monitor the project. In 1999 a number of civil society members who had spoken out against the pipeline or who had sought to raise awareness of the rights issues involved were intimidated or detained. President Idriss Déby acknowledged in October 2000 that part of the international finance received for the project had been allocated to the defence budget Military equipment including helicopters and jeeps used in counter-insurgency operations were reported to have been purchased.
Intergovernmental organizations
In January, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child considered Chad's initial report. Questions were raised on the measures taken by the government to prevent gender discrimination and to protect girls from rape, and on juvenile Justice. The government acknowledged that rape and other abuses had occurred in conflict areas, but denied that such violations were systematic. It also acknowledged that street children were victims of police brutality, but denied that minors were used in the armed forces. It acknowledged, however, that there was no age limit on recruitment to the government
armed forces and that rehabilitation programs for child combatants from former armed opposition groups were inadequate. A project to support human rights through technical cooperation between the UN Development Programme, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the government began in February.
