BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Head of state: three-member rotating presidency-Alija Izetbegovic, Zivl<o Radisic and Ante Jelavid President of the Muslim/Croat Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina: EjupGanic
President of Republika Srpska: vacant until December Heads of national government: rotating premiership-
SpasojeTusevijak, Martin Raguz, Capital: Sarajevo Population: 3.97 million Official languages: Bosnian, Croatian, Serbian Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty; Optional Protocol tothe UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court
Overwhelming international involvementln political and administrative matters in Bosnia-Herzegovina continued to contribute to the stabilization and normalization ofthe countryduring 2000. There was a substantial increase in the numberof refugees and displaced persons returning to their pre-war communities, now administered and mostly inhabited by members of another ethnic group (minority returns) - such returns had been disappointingly few in past years despite considerable efforts by the international community. However, there remained serious concerns about the overall human rights situation, in particular the lack of genuine commitment by local authorities to protect human rights and address past violations. Most perpetrators ofthe massive and grave abuses of human rights committed during and in the wake ofthe civil war continued to enjoy impunity. Tens of thousands of people remained unaccounted for; many had "disappeared" during the war.Trials of political prisoners'often failed to meet internationally recognized standards of fairness. Ill-treatment of people in police custody persisted, especially of socially marginalized groups such as the Roma.
Background
Bosnia-Herzegovina consists of two entities — the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina (Federation) and the Republika Srpska (RS)—and the autonomous multiethnic district of Briko. Both entities and the Brtko district have their own government, legislature, judicial system, police and armed forces. The central government, composed of representatives of the three constituent peoples—Serbs, Croats and Bosniacs—was too weak and internally divided to carry out its
functions effectively, A political and governmental crisis continued in the RS for a second year; there was no president and the caretaker government was subjected to repeated no-confidence votes by the RS parliament.
Municipal elections took place in March, which resulted in a general consolidation of the power of the main nationalist parties, although the opposition Social Democratic Party (SDP) made considerable gains in some urban areas in the Federation. In November, general elections took place, as well as presidential elections in the RS, in which results reflected the outcome of the municipal elections. Mirko Sarovic was elected president of the RS.
in July the Constitutional Court of Bosnia-Herzegovina—comprising four judges from the Federation, two judges from the RS, and three international jurists—ruled that the Bosniac, Serb and Croatian peoples were entitled to enjoy equal rights throughout the country. The ruling meant that the Constitutions of the Federation and the RS needed to be amended, as neither recognized the equal rights of all three nationalities. However, by the end of the year no such amendments had been made. In February the RS parliament adopted a law establishing a multi-ethnic ombudsperson institution. InJune a new Criminal Code was passed by the RS parliament which no longer provided for the death penalty.
Minority returns
According to figures published by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), more than 6o,ooo registered minority returns took place during 2000. Following a comprehensive registration exercise in the Federation and RS, the number of internally displaced people and refugees at the end of 2000 was placed at around 500,000 and 700,000 respectively, as compared to around 830,000 and 60,000 at the end of 1999.
This significant increase in the number of returns was primarily caused by the massive and spontaneous return of displaced people to destroyed housing, mostly outside urban areas. International monitors remained concerned that returns to town and city centres were proceeding slowly, if at all, primarily as a result of the failure to implement property legislation. Statistics on the implementation of property legislation compiled by various international organizations on the basis of information provided by local authorities, showed that by the end of 2000, 50 per cent of claims in the Federation had been resolved but in only 21 per cent of cases had the property been repossessed by the prewar owner or occupant. Statistics for the RS were even worse; only 24 per cent of claims had been resolved and only nine per cent had resulted in repossession. In September, the High Representative, appointed by the UN Security Council to oversee the civilian implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement, removed 15 government officials from office for their obstruction to the return process.
Many of the spontaneous returns proved unsustainable because of a lack of funding for the reconstruction of housing and infrastructure.
Amnesty International Report 2001
51
BOS
In addition to social and economic obstacles, returnees also continued to face violence in many areas of the country.
Q In Bijeljina andjanja municipalities in the RS, Bosniac returnees and residents had explosives and stones thrown at their houses and were subjected to physical assaults in February and June. PoHce reportedly failed to protect them and although investigations against suspected perpetrators were launched, international observers noted that these were not conducted diligently or thoroughly and that the charges which were eventually brought did not reflect the seriousness of the attacks. Further attacks took place in October and November. Q In Srebrenica, also in the RS, several houses of Bosniac returnees were set on fire in May, June and July. Q A very tense situation developed in BrCko town in October, after a demonstration by Serb secondary school students protesting against sharing education facilities with Bosniac students turned violent. Bosniac houses and shops in the town were reportedly vandalized following the demonstrations which then led to counter-demonstrations by Bosniac students. District police officers allegedly did not take appropriate action to prevent and respond to the violence, which to a large degree appeared to be organized.
Prosecutions for war crimes
International CriminalTribunal for the formerYugoslavia
A number of trials before the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (Tribunal) were concluded.
Q In January, five Bosnian Croats were convicted of crimes against humanity in connection with the killing of over 100 Bosniac civilians in the central Bosnian village of Ahmici in 1993. They received sentences ranging from six to 25 years' imprisonment. Q In March, another Bosnian Croat, General Tihomir Blaskic, the highest-ranking army commander tried by the Tribunal to date, was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in the Lasva River valley in central Bosnia. He was sentenced to 45 years' imprisonment, the longest sentence handed down so far.
A number of trials before the Tribunal were continuing at the end of the year. Q In March Bosnian Serb General Radislav Krstic — accused of planning and ordering the killing of thousands of Bosniac men and boys after the fall of the former UN protected enclave of Srebrenica—became the first person to go on trial before the Tribunal on charges of genocide.
Q Also in March the trial began of three Bosnian Serb paramilitary commanders accused of crimes against humanity in FoCa (now renamed Srbinje and in the RS). This trial was expected to set legal precedents in prosecutions for sexual crimes against women. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic were accused, along with five other Bosnian Serbs, of the rape and sexual enslavement of Bosniac women and girls who were held in detention in Foia or nearby towns.
O In October Bosnian Serb Milorad Krnojelac went on trial on charges of war crimes committed in Foca prison.
O The trial of Bosnian Croats Dario Kordic and Mario Cerkez continued for a second year. Both stand accused of war crimes against the Bosniac population in the Lasva River valley and were originally included in a larger indictment together with Tihomir Blaskic and Zlatko Aleksovski, who eventually went on trial separately. Arrests
Stabilization Forces (SFOR) arrested four war crimes suspects during the year, including the former RS presidency member Momiilo Krajisnik, who had been secretly indicted for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in a large number of municipalities throughout Bosnia-Herzegovina. The arrest of Bosnian Serb Mitar Vasiljevic in January in Visegrad in the eastern RS revealed the existence of a previously sealed indictment for crimes under international law committed in that town. In November the Tribunal's Prosecutor revealed that two other Bosnian Serbs, Milan and Sredoje Lukic, were included in the same indictment.
A fifth arrest attempt by SFOR in October in FoCa/SrbinJe resulted in the death of Janko JanJic, who, after SFOR soldiers had entered his flat, reportedly detonated a hand grenade and killed himself. He had been charged Jointly with Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic.
In March, Croatia transferred Mladen Naletilic, a Bosnian Croat indicted for war crimes in Mostar. to the Tribunal's custody, following lengthy judicial proceedings to establish his fitness to travel. Domestic prosecutions
In the Federation there were a number of domestic criminal proceedings against people accused of war crimes, following clearance to proceed from the Tribunal's Prosecutor under the "Rules of the Road" procedure which was established to ensure that domestic prosecutions would not be brought on an arbitrary basis. Some of these trials posed significant challenges for local courts which were required to impartially and independently prosecute members of their own ethnic group for crimes committed during the war.
S In January, the public prosecutor for Herzegovina-Neretva Canton indicted five Bosnian Croats for war crimes including the "disappearances" of Bosniac soldiers in 1993. However, even though the Office of the High Representative had urged the arrest of the five suspects, who reportedly appeared in public in Mostar regulariy, the police failed to arrest them. In August and October, three of them gave themselves up to the police. In November trial proceedings began, with two of the accused being tried in absentia.
Other criminal trials revealed that the authorities were aware of human rights violations committed by groups under their control but failed to investigate them adequately or to prosecute the perpetrators. Q In October and November appeal hearings were conducted in the case of Edin Garaplija, a former officer
52
Amnesty International Report 2001	52
BOS
in the Bosnian secret police. In November he was convicted after the charges against him were changed to ill-treatment in the course of duty and his sentence was reduced to seven years' imprisonment. He had been sentenced in 19971013 years' imprisonment for abduction and attempted murder of another police officer. In 1996 Edin Garaplija had been ordered by his superior officer to detain and question a member of a paramilitary unit known as the Éeve. After several days of questioning the suspect made an attempt to escape during which Edin Garaplija reportedly shot and wounded him. During subsequent investigations and trial proceedings into the incident in 1997, Edin Garaplija claimed that he was instructed by his superiors to remain silent about his investigation or he would lose his life. He had not been allowed to be present when his appeal was heard by the Federation Supreme Court in
1998,	in breach of international fair trial standards.
The Human Rights Chamber—which together with the Ombudsperson's Office forms the national Commission on Human Rights, created under the Dayton Peace Agreement ~ ruled in july 2000 that appeal proceedings in the case of Edin Garaplija should be renewed so he could present new evidence to the Supreme Court in person. During appeal hearings in October and November Edin Garaplija presented the Supreme Court with a detailed account of the findings of his investigations in 1996, which implicated various former members of the feve and serving government officials in criminal activities, including human rights violations. However, no criminal investigations had been launched into these allegations by the end of 2000.
Attacks on the independent media
Journalists critical of the government and leading political officials or those connected with them were attacked, threatened with death and prosecuted for libel. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) reported in April that since the end of
1999,	65 cases had been registered where journalists' civil rights had been violated, many in March and April during the period running up to municipal elections. By August an OSCE helpline, established in May for journalists subjected to such persecution, was reported to have registered some 39 new incidents in both the Federation and the RS.
Q In June Edin Avdic, a reporter for the Sarajevo-based independent weekly Slobodna Bosna, was beaten by two unidentified men in front of his house in Sarajevo, Edin Avdic had been threatened a week earlier by a local businessman affiliated with the governing Bosniac political party, the Party of Democratic Action, because he had criticized the cultural policies of that party. The assailants reportedly repeated the earlier message and also delivered a death threat. A police investigation into the attacks was launched immediately but had not been concluded by the end of the year.
Q In June RS police arrested five men thought to have been involved in the attack on Zeljko Kopanja, editor of the Bosnian Serb independent newspaper Nezavisne novine, who lost both legs in a car bomb attack in
October 1999. All five were released within days without charge.
'Disappearances'
According to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) more than 17,500 people remained unaccounted for, including 280 detained prisoners registered by ICRC during the war who subsequently "disappeared".
Exhumations continued by both Federation and RS government commissions on missing persons, especially in eastern RS. The Federation commission exhumed more than 4,000 remains, half of whom were identified. The RS exhumed several hundred bodies. Serious problems persisted with the identification and storage of bodies and as a result the RS authorities buried more than 400 unidentified bodies in October.
Some local authorities actively obstructed the preservation of sites thought to contain mass graves. Q In Sultanovici, eastern RS, a plot of land holding four mass graves and containing 360 bodies was used by nearby Zvornik municipality as a rubbish dump for more than six months. Although the authorities eventually stopped dumping their rubbish there, they failed to clear up the waste already accumulated, which had reportedly seeped into the soil and damaged the bodies buried there.
AI country report and visits Report
• Bosnia-Herzegovina: Waiting on the doorstep -minority returns to eastern Republika Srpska (Al Index: EUR 63/007/2000) Visits
Al visited Bosnia-Herzegovina in March and April to carry out research into minority returns.
Amnesty International Report 2001
53
