CEORCIA
GEORGIA
Head of state and government: Eduard Shevardnadze
CapitahTbilisi
Population: 4.9 million
Official language: Georgian
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Protocol No. 6 to
the European Convention on Human Rights concerning
the abolition ofthe death penalty
Reports of torture and ill-treatment in custody continued in 2000. Among the victims were children and members of non-traditional religious groups. At least one man was reported to have died in custody as a result of police ill-treatment. In the disputed region of Abkhazia, at least one man was sentenced to death; no executions were reported. Ethnic Georgians displaced by the conflict continued to face obstacles to their return.
Background
President Eduard Shevardnadze won a second term of office in elections held in April. Also in April, parliament adopted a program of national reconciliation aimed at healing divisions dating back to the armed ousting of former President Zviad Gamsakhurdia in 1992. Scores of his imprisoned supporters were subsequently pardoned and released. In July parliament appointed Nana Devdariani as the second Public Defender (Ombudsperson) of Georgia, a post that had been vacant since the previous September- Rising concern at widespread corruption led the authorities to set up a special commission to combat the practice. There was little progress in talks aimed at regulating the status ofthe disputed regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which remained outside the control of the Georgian authorities.
Torture/ill-treatment
As in previous years there were persistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement officials, and reports that many official investigations instigated in such cases were not pursued impartially and with vigour.
There were also continuing complaints that officials obstructed access to defence lawyers and to an independent forensic medical expert seeking to examine prisoners who had made allegations of torture. This expert reported in September that she had been routinely denied permission to visit prisoners while they were held in police custody. When access was granted, after a prisoner had been transferred to a remand facility under the control of the Ministry of Justice, it was often weeks after the initial allegations had been made and correspondingly much more difficult to determine the nature and cause of any injury sustained.
Elene Tevdoradze, the chairwoman of the parliamentary Human Rights Committee, was among those who reported extremely poor prison conditions, including cases in which officials attempted to extort bribes before transferring a sick prisoner to appropriate medical facilities, Q An ii-year-old boy was reportedly beaten while kept for three days in a juvenile holding facility. Sergey (not his real name) was detained by police in Tbilisi on 18 August while trying to sell a sheet of aluminium, and taken to the city's facility for holding juveniles while officials trace their parents or guardians. He reported that one of his teeth was knocked out during a beating by officials on the second day of his stay there, and that he saw other children, boys and girls, also being ill-treated, including by being punched around the head and shoulders and hit with a bunch of keys. It is also alleged that Sergey's parents more than once rang the local police station after their son failed to return home the first day, but that the police failed to reveal his location in the hopes of extorting a bribe from the family. Sergey was released the evening of his third day in detention after his parents and neighbours held a protest demonstration.
Q Jehovah's Witness communities around the country were subjected to a number of attacks throughout the year by supporters of an unfrocked Georgian Orthodox priest. Father Basil Mkalavishvili, violently opposed to non-traditional religions. In most cases the attackers were said to have been allowed to act with impunity by the police, and in at least one instance police officers were alleged to have joined in the assault.
On 16 September a number of buses carrying Jehovah's Witnesses were reportedly stoned and passengers assaulted outside of the town of Marnueli. The Jehovah's Witnesses had planned to hold a convention there that day. However, police at roadblocks set up that morning were said to have turned back ail vehicles carrying Jehovah's Witnesses, while giving free passage and a police escort to busloads of Father Mkalavishvili's supporters. In the light of this, the convention was cancelled, and delegates on buses were told to return home. At one roadblock, however, some buses returning to Tbilisi were reportedly attacked by a stone-throwing crowd. Windows were broken, and one woman passenger was said to have been struck on the head by a rock. According to the Jehovah's Witnesses, Orthodox supporters also stopped another bus, dragged out three' male passengers and beat them. The attackers also entered the bus, shouted insults, and robbed passengers. Police at the scene were said to have supported and participated in the beatings, and also to have joined in the looting and destruction of the site of the cancelled convention. Death in custody
As in previous years, there were allegations that torture in police custody led to the death of a detainee. Q Mamuka Rizhamadze was detained by police on 24 May in Tkibuli, and transferred the following day to preliminary detention facilities in Kutaisi. On 31 May he
Amnesty International Report 2001
107
GER
was found hanged in his cell by a noose made from a blanket. A post-mortem carried out by the state forensic service concluded that he had committed suicide. However, an independent forensic expert carried out a second post-mortem at the request of the family on 5 June. She found two wounds to Mamuka Rizhamadze's head, inflicted in her opinion while he was still alive and caused by a blunt heavy object. She concluded that these injuries were the cause of death. Investigation of the skin on Mamuka Rizhamadze's neck also indicated to her that he was dead before the noose was applied. It was not known whether any investigation had been initiated into the death following the post-mortem.
Q Criminal proceedings began against a traffic police officer in connection with the 1999 death of Davit Vashaqmadze. Davit Vashaqmadze had been stopped by officers in November 1999 in Tbilisi and reportedly beaten so severely by them that he died in hospital two days later. In July the officer was convicted of "exceeding his authority" and sentenced to two years' imprisonment
Abkhazia
The situation in Abkhazia remained relatively calm although unstable, especially in the southern district of Oali. Widespread, organized crime along the cease-fire line and the lack of effective law enforcement on both sides were major contributors to the poor security situation, hampering the return of refugees and displaced people. In November the UN Security Council called on both sides to take concrete steps to guarantee the security of those wishing to return, and to address urgently the undefined and insecure status of those who had returned spontaneously.
During the year the UN Human Rights Office in Abkhazia reported that it had raised cases of human rights violations with the de facto authorities, including incidents of harassment on ethnic and gender grounds, and the monitoring of places of detention. Prisoners of conscience
According to reports at least two men were imprisoned for refusing on religious grounds to perform compulsory military service. No civilian alternatives to military service were available during 2000, although a draft law providing for such alternative service was reportedly under consideration by the Abkhaz authorities-
Q In October, 18-year-old ElgudzhaTsulaya was sentenced to four years' imprisonment by the Military Court. He had been charged with desertion, reportedly in connection with the steps he had taken eariier in the year to avoid forcible conscription on the grounds that military service was incompatible with his religious beliefs. His appeal was turned down by the Supreme Court in November. ZurabAchba
Zurab Achba, a legal assistant to the UN Human Rights Office in Abkhazia, a human rights defender and a leading opposition figure, was shot and killed in Sukhumi in August. Despite assurances from the Abkhaz authorities, the UN was not kept informed of developments in the investigation into the killing-
Death penalty
In October the Abkhaz Supreme Court sentenced Albert Tarba to death for the 1995 murder of Abkhaz Deputy Prime Minister Yury Voronov. Press reports stated that Albert Tarba, who had been in hiding, had been seized in March in the KrasnodarTerritory of Russia, but it was not clear by whom or through which channels he had been transferred to Abkhazia. A second man, Sayed Itslayev, from the Chechen Republic in the Russian Federation, had been sentenced to death in Abkhazia in 1997 for his role in the murder.
At least 15 death sentences were believed to have been passed in Abkhazia since it declared independence; no judicial executions had been reported.
Al country report and visit
Reports
• Georgia: Continuing allegations of torture and ill-
treatment (Al Index: EUR 56/001 /2000) Visit
Al delegates visited Georgia in September and met various officials.
