GUINEA
REPUBLIC OF GUINEA
Head of state: Lansanna Conté Head of government: Lamine Sidimé Capital: Conakry Population: 7.4 million Official language: French Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
There were reports of human rights abuses in border areas, In the context of cross-border Incursions by armed groups from neighbouring countries. Several prisoners of conscience, including prominent opposition leader Alpha Cond^, were sentenced to prison terms after an unfair trial by the State Security Court Torture of detainees to extract confessions or intimidate suspects continued to be reported on a regular basis.
Background
Armed clashes between the security forces and armed groups from neighbouring countries intensified from September onwards in the southern border areas. The Guinean authorities accused the Sierra Leonean opposition force, the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), and the Liberian authorities of backing the cross-border attackers, who included Guinean army deserters. Liberia accused Guinea of harbouring dissidents who had been fighting government troops in northern Liberia since early July (See Liberia entry.)
The fighting forced thousands of people to flee from the area. In December, the heads of state of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), meeting in Mali, decided to send an intervention force to police the borders of Guinea. The ECOWAS summit also recommended an "urgent meeting" between the leaders of the three countries (Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone) under the auspices of ECOWAS and the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
Municipal elections were held in June, but were marred by violence and allegations of vote-rigging. Official sources confirmed that five people were killed and others wounded when they protested against delays in announcing the elections results. The elections were won by the ruling Parti de l'unité et du progrès. Party of Unity and Progress, The opposition alleged that the results were invalid. Parliamentary elections originally scheduled for June 1999 were postponed and had not been held by the end of 2000,
Prisoners of conscience
In April Alpha Condé, president of the Rassemblement du peuple de Guinée (RPG), Guinean People's Rally, and 47 others were tried on charges of threatening the security of the state. Their trial before the State Security Court did not meet international standards for fair trial. In September Alpha Condé was sentenced to five years' imprisonment and 10 other defendants were given sentences ranging from a suspended one-year prison term to three years' imprisonment. Four others were convicted in absentia.
Al sent an observer to the early hearings of this trial, which lasted from April to September. A! concluded that all those convicted who were still in detention were prisoners of conscience, held solely because of their political affiliations, without any evidence of involvement in or advocacy of violence. Al was particularly concerned by the fact that the defendants were detained incommunicado for months and that most of them were tortured in order to extract confessions. These confessions were accepted by the Court, despite evidence of torture. The right to a fair hearing was not respected during the investigation phase. Lawyers did not have access to their clients' files until five days before the trial started, and during the trial one defence lawyer was subjected to serious intimidation by the Minister of Justice.
The State Security Court, a special court, was composed of magistrates appointed directly by the President, even though Alpha Condé was a leading opposition figure and a former presidential candidate.
116	Amnesty International Report 2001
115
GUI
Furthermore, contrary to international standards, the verdict of this special court was not open to appeal. The only possible appeal, the pourvoi en cassation (appeal on points of law), prohibited any re-examination of the facts. AI called, therefore, not only for the immediate and unconditional release of the prisoners of conscience, but also for the abolition of the State Security Court if its procedures were not brought in line with international standards for fair trial.
Torture/ ¡ll-treatment
Torture of detainees to extract confessions or intimidate suspects continued to be reported on a regular basis. The majority of those tried with Alpha Condé were subjected to ill-treatment or tonure at the time of their arrest in 1999, to extract confessions or to make them sign statements incriminating the RPG leader. During a factfinding mission in April 2000, AI delegates collected testimony from a number of them. They described torture techniques used by the security forces, including: blows all over the body; slaps, punches and kicks; suffocation under water at sea; starvation; and death threats. The victims stated that people close to the Presidency were present when they were tortured.
There were also reports of arbitrary arrests followed by torture and ill-treatment, and of women accused of supporting the opposition being subjected to sexual violence while in detention in 1998.
Death in custody
At least one person died in custody as a result of torture.
Q Sergeant Guey Keita died during the night of 15 January, after reportedly having been starved for eight days. The evening before his death, he was tortured in an attempt to make him admit that he had received money from Alpha Condé.
Reprisal attacks against refugees.
In September, following incursions by armed groups from Liberia and Sierra Leone, the President of Guinea called on the security forces to search everywhere so that suspects could be arrested. He urged the international community to "rid" Guinea of its thousands of refugees from these two countries and called on Guinean "civilians and members of the armed forces" to "crush the invaders". After this statement, several hundred refugees from Sierra Leone and Liberia were arbitrarily arrested in Conakry. AI publicly appealed to the government to protect the fundamental rights of refugees.
In mid-September, following an attack on Macenta. a town on the border with Liberia, Mensah Kpognon, a member of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), was killed. Laurence Djeya, another member of UNHCR, was abducted. She managed to escape and reached Côte d'Ivoire a fortnight later.
AI country report and visits
Report
• Guinea: The Alpha Condé affair-A mockery of a trial {AI Index: AFR29/002/2000F)
Visits
AI delegates visited Guinea in April to conduct research and to hold talks with the government. It was not possible for any government official to meet the delegation.
AI sent an obsen/erto the trial of Alpha Condeand 47 others before the State Security Court in April.
