PORTUGAL
PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC
Head of state: Jorge Fernando BrancodeSampaio Head of government: Antonio Manuel deOliveira Guterres Capital: Lisbon Population: 9.8 million Official language: Portuguese Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Several deaths in, or immediately following, police custody were reported. The arrest of two police officers in connection with a homicide charge prompted angry street protests by police, and a prosecuting magistrate claimed to have been severely intimidated by some officers. Allegations of police ill-treatment and of cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions in prisons persisted. Judicial inquiries continued into previous allegations of police ill-treatment.
Background
In a year marked by serious allegations of police brutality, the UN Committee against Torture urged Portugal to shift "police culture" further towards respect for human rights. A range of legal and regulatory initiatives were undertaken. They included the establishment in May of a working group, coordinated by an inspector of the interior Ministry's police oversight body, the General inspectorate of Internal Administration (IGAI), to draw up an ethical code for the Public Security Police (PSP) and National Republican Guard (GNR). Practical measures to combat police violence included plans to install video cameras in all police stations and to close detention cells in police stations, concentrating them in the divisional buildings of the PSP, where detainees could be placed under the surveillance of officers of higher rank. The Justice Ministry confirmed that a new prison inspectorate was being created. This would, among other things, receive and examine complaints from prisoners. Its work was complemented by magistrates who carried out monthly visits to prisons and who were able to receive complaints.
Deaths in or after police custody
At least three judicial investigations were opened into deaths in or after police custody. In January, two men died in separate incidents, on the same night and in the same city, allegedly after being severely beaten by PSP officers. In all three deaths the cause was attributed to a ruptured spleen.
Q Alvaro Rosa Cardoso, a Rom, was allegedly beaten severely with truncheons and pistol-whipped by police
194
Amnesty International Report 2001
POR
who had been called to a street disturbance in the Aldoar area of Oporto. After being held in custody at Pinheiro Manso police station, he was taken to the Hospital de Santo Antonio, where he died. Varying versions were given of the death. Alvaro Cardoso was said to have been injured in a street fight before the arrival of the police. He was also said to have injured himself in a fall at the station and to have died of one or two heart attacks. After the Commander of the PSP of Oporto endorsed the police version that death was caused by a heart attack, the cause of death was found, on the contrary, to have been a ruptured spleen-Criminal and disciplinary procedures were opened and the Commander replaced. According to the Interior Ministry there was evidence of "violence inflicted by one or more PSP officers". Two officers were provisionally detained and examined in connection with a homicide charge.
In April PSP officers reportedly made death threats against a prosecuting magistrate after a judge's decision not to release the two officers. Because no formal complaint was lodged by the magistrate, no judicial investigation was undertaken. The threats took place against a background of angry street protests by police throughout Portugal, some of whom surrendered their weapons and wept openly.
In October, almost six months after the detentions, the Oporto criminal court (TIC) ordered the closure of the case on grounds of lack of evidence. A relative of Alvaro Cardoso, 17-year-old Franquelim Romao, who had been arrested with him, and had reportedly testified to the beating, remained the sole defendant in the proceeding, accused of assaulting PSP officers. The prosecutor appealed against the court decision, which was reportedly based largely on the testimony of nine witnesses, many of whom were police officers who had originally been suspects, and on a particular interpretation of the opinion of a forensic specialist that the spleen was not a "vital" organ. Q On the same night in January Paulo Silva died of internal injuries after complaining to his mother that he had been badly beaten by PSP officers in the Cerco area shortly before. He was taken to the Hospital de Sao Joao with a ruptured spleen. Nine officers remained under investigation in connection with the death. A separate internal inquiry was being conducted into an apparent attempt by the officer in command of the police unit involved to falsify paperwork. Q Judicial and IGAI inquiries were also being carried out into the death of Antonio Mendes dos Santos, who died about 10 days after being held at a police station at Coimbra in June. He too was reported to have died from injuries to the spleen.
Police ill-treatment
New allegations of police ill-treatment were reported and various judicial investigations continued into previously reported cases of police brutality. Q judicial and disciplinary inquiries were opened into the alleged ill-treatment of Mario Joao Augusto Rocha, a young black man who claimed that in February he was assaulted by PSP officers who intercepted him
while he was walking to his girlfriend's home at Arroja, Odivelas. According to Mário Rocha he was punched and slapped by plainclothes officers both before and after being taken to the police station at Odivelas. where he was also racially abused. He was asked only later for his identity papers. He was subsequently treated at the Hospital de Santa Maria. He lodged a complaint with the PSP of Santo Antonio dos Cavaleiros, Loures.
Q In December Mozambican national Cándido Ventura Coelho, who suffers from a mental disability, and his 17-year-old brother, José Carlos Coelho, were taken to the PSP station in Damala, near Lisbon, to be identified and questioned. Càndido Coelho, who had become a little muddled during questioning, was reportedly taken into a bathroom by an officer who pushed his head against a wall and punched him repeatedly in the face and head until a second officer intervened. Candido Coelho was subsequently treated in hospital- His complaint was being investigated by the Judicial Police at the end of the year.
Prisons
Ill-treatment by prison guards—mainly beatings— inhuman and degrading conditions, and cases of medical neglect continued to be reported. Many such reports were received about Linhó prison, Sintra. Prisoners suffering from illnesses, often with HIV/AIDS, alleged inadequate access to medical treatment, medical neglect and disregard of their dietary needs. The Justice Ministry informed Al that the rate of overcrowding was diminishing and that out of a total of 1,164 inquiries into complaints during 1998-99, only 117 related to alleged acts of violence by prison staff Twenty-three prison officers (out of a total of approximately 4,000) were punished with dismissal or compulsorily retired. These punishments did not all relate to assaults on prisoners.
The UN Committee against Torture
In May the UN Committee against Torture examined Portugal's third periodic report on its compliance with the provisions of the Convention against Torture. The Committee expressed concern about continuing reports of deaths in custody and police ill-treatment and persisting reports of inter-prisoner violence. The Committee urged Portugal to ensure in particular that the criminal investigation and prosecution of public officials, such as police officers, were undertaken as a 'matter of course", where the evidence revealed the commission of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Al submitted a report to the Committee. It summarized Al's main concerns about death and ill-treatment in police custody and in prisons and about cases of effective impunity and excessive use of force by law enforcement officers between 1997 and the beginning of2000- Al acknowledged the positive contribution made by IGAI to the monitoring and supervision of the activities of the PSP and GNR. Nevertheless, IGAI could not conduct its own disciplinary investigations, or impose its own penalties, and questions remained over the thoroughness of some of the inquiries carried out.
195	Amnesty International Report 2001

ROM
Al country report
• Portugal: Small problems...? A summary of concerns (Al Index: EUR38/001/2000)
