ANGOLA
REPUBLICOFANCOLA
Head of state and government: José Eduardo dos Santos
Capital: Luanda
Population: 12.8 million
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
Government forces and troops of the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNYTA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, were responsible for large-scale human rights violations including killings of civilians. The government continued to restrict freedom of expression. Journalists were convicted of defamation and given suspended prison sentences after trials that did not conform to international standards. There were proposals to revise the Press Law and impose further restrictions on freedom of expression. UNITAwas responsiblefor mutilating and abducting hundreds of civilians including children and women. Thousands of people were displaced by the armed conflictand increased insecurity. Three people were taken hostage by an armed opposition group in Cabinda.
Background
War continued to rage throughout the country. UNITA engaged in guerrilla warfare after government forces
expelled it from its last strongholds. In December 1999, the Namibian government authorized the use of its territory by the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) to launch an offensive against UNITA in southern Angola. UNITA forces were routed in January after several weeks of fierce fighting, which often spilled into Namibia. The FAA launched another offensive against UNITA in September in the eastern province of Moxico and captured UNlTA's last bastion of Cazombo. By the end of the year the government reportedly controlled 90 per cent of the country. Hundreds of UNITA soldiers, including high-ranking military officers and civilian officials, defected to the government.
Security deteriorated throughout the country, particularly along the Namibian and Zambian borders, in Bie and Huambo provinces in the centre, and Uige in the north, which were subjected to intense UNITA guerrilla attacks. Thousands fled the fighting and took refuge in Namibia and Zambia. By the end of the year the internally displaced population was estimated at about four million. Nearly 1.5 million people depended on humanitarian assistance for their survival. However, humanitarian aid agencies were unable to gain access to large numbers of people in need.
Civil society groups continued to make appeals to the warring parties to end the fighting. The Catholic Bishops of Angola and Sao Tomé e Principe issued a pastoral letter in March calling for an immediate end to the war and respect for human rights. The Inter-Church Committee for Peace in Angola, set up by the Catholic Church in April,.channelled the peace efforts of other churches and civil society groups and individuals. In June it organized a peace conference which endorsed the calls for dialogue between the warring parties. UNITA said that it would accept mediation by the Church and set up preconditions for negotiations which were rejected by the government. In turn, the government called on UNITA to give up fighting and, on the 25th anniversary of independence in November, it promulgated an amnesty law for crimes committed in the context of the war as wel I as for some common criminal offences.
The UN Office in Angola (UNOA) maintained a reduced presence in the country. Its mandate, which was restricted to humanitarian assistance and strengthening Angolan institutions in the area of human rights, was extended for six-month periods in April and October. In addition, the UN maintained the sanctions imposed on UNITA in previous years. In March, the UN's Security Council Sanctions Committee .on Angola reported on sanctions-busting by several African governments and individuals, and threatened to take unspecified action against them. A second report, published in October, questioned the effectiveness of the sanctions and stated that UNITA continued to sell diamonds to buy weapons.
Freedom of expression and assembly
Although Luanda saw greater tolerance of freedom of expression and assembly in 2000, peaceful demonstrators were beaten and arrested. In parts of the country less open to international scrutiny.
30
Amnesty International Report 2001
ANO
restrictions were much more severe. A draft revised press law was put forward in July which provided for harsher sentences for defamation and increased to 30 days the period for which journalists could be detained without charge. The draft law was widely opposed. Q In February police in Luanda dispersed two peaceful demonstrations organized by the Partido de Apoio Democrático e Progresso de Angola (PADPA), Angolan Party for Democratic Support and Progress, in protest at massive increases in fuel prices. The authorities claimed that the demonstrations were not authorized, although Angolan law does not require prior authorization for demonstrations. PADPA leaders Carlos Alberto de Andrade Leitào and Luis Silva Cardoso were among those beaten and briefly detained. Following the second demonstration the commander of the Luanda police issued a statement regretting the arrests, ordering the release of the detainees and announcing that an investigation would be carried out. By the end of the year no investigation was known to have been carried out. Subsequent demonstrations passed off peacefully.
Journalists
Journalists critical of the government continued to be prevented from carrying out their work and from leaving the country. Some were assaulted and others were threatened.
Q Critovao Lwemba, was beaten by two police officers in Cabinda in May. He was stopped by two officers who started beating him when he showed them documentation which identified him as a journalist for the Luanda Catholic Church station Radio Ecclesia. Critovào Lwemba reported the incident to the police but no action was taken. Trials
At least 10 Journalists charged in 1999 with defamation and revealing state secrets were tried. Two were acquitted. The others were given suspended prison sentences of up to one year and made to pay large fines. Their trials fell short of international standards for fair trial. Three had their convictions upheld on appeal, although their sentences were slightly reduced. Q André Mussamo was arrested in N'Dalatando, Kwanza None province, in December 1999 after the police found an unpublished article in his office which they alleged contained classified information. He was tried in June and acquitted for lack of evidence. However, his co-defendant. Agostinho Mateus, a former provincial government press secretary, was convicted of giving André Mussamo access to the information and sentenced to one year in prison. He lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court but this had not been heard by the end of the year. Update
Rafael Marques, Aguiar dos Santos and Antonio José Freitas were tried in March on charges of defaming the President of the Republic. Rafael Marques was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and a heavy fine. Aguiar dos Santos was sentenced to two months in prison and a fine. Antonio José Freitas was acquitted. Their trial was unfair; it was held behind closed doors
and the accused were not allowed to present evidence. In October, the convictions and sentences of Rafael Marques and Aguiar dos Santos were upheld on appeal, but their fines were reduced. Their sentences were suspended for five and three years respectively.
Ill-treatment
Some steps were taken to protect the human rights of detainees and prisoners. In addition to the placing of prosecutors in police stations, the Bar Association arranged for interns to be present in police stations to assist detainees in the early stages of their detention, to verify the legality of detention and interrogation, and to assist in cases of prolonged pre-trial detention. However, police and military officers continued to abuse their power with impunity. No steps appeared to have been taken to bring to justice police and military officers responsible for human rights violations. O In July police officers posted outside the national radio station beat and arrested three women who were on their way to a funeral. The officers alleged that the women had walked into an area not authorized for civilians. No investigation was carried out into this incident.
Violations of humanitarian law
Both government forces and UNITA were responsible for abuses including mutilations and killings of civilians. It remained difficult to confirm many of the incidents and the identity of the perpetrators. However, UNITA was responsible for the majority of the attacks and ambushes, as well as for laying landmines which killed hundreds of civilians and maimed many more, particularly women and children. Government officials, traditional authorities and members of religious groups were targeted. There were numerous reports that UNITA hacked and burned to death hundreds of people during raids on villages. Q Eyewitnesses stated that in February UNITA hacked to death more than 20 people and then buried their bodies during a raid on the town of Santa Clara, Cunene province. The victims were elderly people and children who were unable to flee.
Q In March UNITA members mutilated and severed the ears, arms and legs of 12 independent miners in Tchinguvo, Lunda Norte province, and killed 40 others.
UNITA abducted hundreds of civilians, including children, and forcibly recruited them into its forces as carriers or fighters.
Government forces were also responsible for the ' indiscriminate killings and extrajudicial executions of civilians and UNITA suspects. Q In February FAA soldiers reportedly killed 17 civilians they accused of collaborating with UNITA, near Kimbele, Uige province.
Update
In May UNITA released five Russian pilots who had been captured in 1999 when their airplane was shot down. The pilots reported that they had been deprived of food and water for long periods and that one of their colleagues was gunned down by a UNITA soldier.
Amnesty International Report 2001
31
ARC
Cabínda
The armed conflict continued between the government and two armed factions of the Frente para a libenagao do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave. Government soldiers carried out military activities against civilians, often in retaliation for FLEC military actions. They also arrested and beat people suspected of supporting FLEC. Q In November, 6o-year-old Silvana Domingos; her husband, Janúario Bingu; their son, José Pascoal Bingu; and Joao Baptista Cebóla, a neighbour, were beaten by several members of the Rapid Intervention Police, apparently because a member of the family was married to a FLEC soldier. José Pascoal Bingu was arrested after being beaten and taken to the Rapid Intervention Police headquarters in Cabinda city were he was held incommunicado.
In May, one of the FLEC armed factions, FLEC-Cabindan Armed Forces, took hostage three Portuguese employees of a construction firm and refused to release them unless Portugal recognized the struggle for independence of the enclave. The hostages had not been released by the end of the year.
Al country reports and visits
Reports
•	Angola and Namibia: Human rights abuses in the borderarea (Al Index: AFR 03/001 /2000)
•	Angola: Freedom of expression on trial {Al Index: AFR 12/008/2000)
Visits
Al delegates visited northern Namibia in January and February to assess the human rights situation in the borderarea.
