AUSTRIA
REPUBLICOF AUSTRIA
Head of state: Thomas Klestil
Head of government: Wolfgang Schüssel (replaced
Viktor Klima in February)
Capital: Vienna
Population: 8.2 million
Official language: German
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/sign a tu res: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute
ofthe International Criminal Court
There were continued allegations that police officers had ill-treated detainees and used excessive force. People vt/ho complained about or witnessed police ill-treatment risked being threatened vt/ith police counter-charges. One man was shot dead by police in controversial circumstances. The investigation into the death in May 1999 of Marcus Omofuma during deportation was notconcluded.There were concerns about restraint techniques reportedly used in prisons.
Amnesty International Report 2001	36
AUS
Background
The traditional coalition between the Social Democratic Party and the Austrian People's Party collapsed after elections in October 1999 and a new government was formed in February which included the People's Party and the main party of the far right, the Austrian Freedom Party.
Allegations of police ill-treatment
Allegations that police ill-treated detainees and used excessive force continued.
Q Around 130 police officers raided a building used to house asylum-seekers in Traiskirchen, Lower Austria, on the evening of 17 January, searching for drugs. Around 80 residents were confined to certain areas of the building, such as their bedrooms and kitchens. Many reportedly had their hands bound with plastic ties while they were systematically searched for drugs. Some detainees were reportedly subjected to interna! body searches in front of other residents as well as police officers. A number of detainees were allegedly searched internally by officers using the same pairs of latex gloves. Police officers allegedly acted towards the detainees in a disparaging manner, laughing at those who suffered pain while being searched internally, and using degrading language. The police raid reportedly lasted for approximately four hours, during which 80 asylum-seekers were temporarily deprived of their liberty, but only 15 people were eventually arrested, reportedly for possessing small amounts of drugs. In May the Ministry of the Interior stated that an investigation had been launched into the allegations of ill-treatment. On 10 July the Lower Austrian Independent Administrative Tribunal in St. Pölten heard the first of a series of testimonies about the police raid from detainees, who brought complaints against the police. The investigation had not concluded by the end of the year. Excessive use offeree
The Special Criminal Deployment Group appeared to have violated the principle of proportionality of force during another police operation in Vienna in the early hours of 3 March. Two masked police officers in civilian clothes, who were reportedly not identifiable as police officers, brandished guns and dragged two men out of a car and on to the ground. The two men reportedly belonged to a left-wing protest group and had participated in an anti-government demonstration the previous evening. The men were later charged only with the relatively minor offence of resisting state authority. Police counter-complaints Complainants and witnesses of alleged police ill-treatment risked being threatened with criminal counter-charges such as resisting state authority or defamation of the arresting police officers. Q Two police officers accused of ill-treating and racially abusing a French citizen of African origin in March 1999 at the Schottenring underground station in Vienna attempted to sue privately two of the five eyewitnesses for defamation of character. An initial court hearing in late August was adjourned for technical reasons.
Death during deportation
The investigation into the death of 25-year-old Marcus Omofuma, a Nigerian citizen who died in May 1999 after being gagged and bound during his forced deportation from Vienna to Nigeria, had not come to a close nearly 20 months after the incident. The three police officers who effected the deportation faced charges of ill-treating a prisoner with death as a consequence. Their trial was expected to start in 2001. Dangerous restraint techniques In April Al learned that inmates in Austria's largest penal institution, the Josefstadt prison in Vienna, were being restrained by being placed in cage-beds, beds enclosed in a i.2m-high metal cage. Reports suggested that in some instances prisoners had been confined inside cage-beds for up to 48 hours. Al expressed concern that the use of cage-beds might represent a cruel, inhuman and degrading method of restraint and asked to be informed of the regulations governing their use-
Police shooting
An unarmed man, referred to in the Austrian news media as Imre B., was shot dead by a police officer of the Special Criminal Deployment Group on 19 May in Vienna. It transpired that the weapon was the police officer's own firearm and not a service revolver. Two suspects under observation in a vehicle were about to drive away when two police officers approached the vehicle brandishing revolvers. As one police officer reportedly attempted to open the door of the vehicle, he fired his gun, killing the driver, Imre B. The Special Criminal Deployment Group was reportedly disbanded in July.
Unequal age of consent
A man was convicted in Vienna and sentenced to a fine in July for having sexual relations with his 16-year-old boyfriend in September 1999. He was 19 years old at the time of the incident. The age of consent for heterosexuals and lesbians is set at 14 years of age, but 18 for gay men. Al welcomed the decision of the court not to sentence the man to a term of imprisonment, but expressed concern that other men may still face up to five years' imprisonment.
Al country report
• Austria before the UN Committee against Torture: Allegations of police ill-treatment (Al Index: EUR 13/001/2000)
Amnesty International Report 2001
37
