KOREA
(REPUBLIC OF)
REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Head of state: Kim Dae-jung
Head of government: Lee Han-dong
Capital: Seoul
Population: 47.4 million
Official language: Korean
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court
President Kim Daejung's promises of domestic political and judicial reforms, including a review of the National Security Law and the enactment of a Human Rights Law, were not realized. Reports suggested that the government had given up plans to form a National Human Rights Commission under the Ministry of Justice, amid continued debate a bout the proposed Commission's autonomy and powers. The number of political prisoners In long-term detention declined, but a number of political prisoners were arrested and held briefly, mostly students and activists belonging to banned pro-North Korean organizations. Most political prisoners continued to be detained under the vaguely worded provisions of the National Security Law. Excessive force to quell trade union protests continued, and manytrade unionists were arrested.
Background
The year was dominated by the thawing of relations between the Republic of Korea (South Korea) and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea). President Kim Dae-jung accepted an invitation to a summit with North Korean leader Chairman Kim Jong II a few days before National Assembly elections in April, President Kim Dae-jung's Millennium Democratic Party (MDP) did not gain a majority and remained a minority government, necessitating the continuation of a coalition with the United Liberal Democratic Party (ULD), whose leader, Lee Han-dong, was appointed Prime Minister in May. The single largest party in the National Assembly was the opposition Grand National Party (GNP).
Despite initial scepticism, the mid-June summit between the leaders of the two Koreas led to an increased impetus to improve inter-Korean relations. Changes included the reunion of 100 separated families from each side in August and December. The South Korean Defence Minister, Cho Seong-tae, and the Defence Minister of North Korea, Kim ll-chol, met for the first time on Cheju island (South Korea). They agreed to work towards reducing tension on the Korean peninsula, and to coordinate efforts on the Military Demarcation Line and the Demilitarized Zone to expedite the construction of a railway and a road connecting North and South Korea. A third round of inter-Korean ministerial talks took place in September and ministers agreed to establish a Committee for the Promotion of Inter-Korean Economic Cooperation. Sixty-three former long-term "unconverted" prisoners were repatriated from South Korea to North Korea in September.
President Kim Dae-jung was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts in improving relations between North and South Korea, for fostering democracy and for his role in East Timor and Indonesia.
National Security Law
As of 25 August, of the 99 political prisoners in detention, 54 were detained on charges under the National Security Law. Of these, the majority were arrested under Article 7, which punishes membership of organizations deemed to "benefit the enemy". Improving relations with North Korea prompted debate on reform of the National Security Law. President Kim Dae-jung, apparently encouraged by his award of the Nobel Peace Prize, announced his support for revisions to the National Security Law, but opposition to reform in the National Assembly from both the GNP and the ULD prevented significant revisions. Q Park Kyung-soon, who was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment under the National Security Law for reportedly leading the "Youngnam Committee", remained in Pusan prison. He was a prisoner of conscience and was suffering from cirrhosis of the liver. Q At least nine members of a university student group, Hanchongryun, were detained in August under the National Security Law, accused of belonging to an anti-state organization, praising North Korea and organizing rallies propagating closer relations with "the enemy". They continued to be held at the end of 2000. Q Eight men were detained for having organized and participated in an allegedly anti-state organization called Minhyukdang, the People's Revolutionary Party. Ha Young-ok, a former student, was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment; Kim Kyung-hwan, a former journalist, was sentenced to four and half years; and Shim Jae-choon, a former lecturer, was sentenced to three and half years. Choi Chin-su, Parkjong-seok, Lee Uei-yeob and Han Yong-jin were held in Seoul Detention Centre and their trials were continuing at the end of 2000. Park Jung-hoon was released on bail.
Security Surveillance Law
The Security Surveillance Law continued to be used to control and supervise the activities of former political
Amnesty International Report 2001
149
KUW
prisoners, including prisoners of conscience. Under the law, former prisoners have to report regularly to the nearest police station, face restrictions on their freedom of movement, and are banned from meeting former political prisoners and participating in demonstrations, especially political demonstrations. Q Human rights activist and former prisoner of conscience Suh Jun-shik, who was the first political prisoner to be released without signing the "law-abidance oath", had his appeal against the continued extension of the Security Surveillance Law rejected in September by the Western branch of the Seoul District Court. He lodged an appeal before the Seoul High Court.
the death penalty was introduced by legislators in the National Assembly, but was not passed during 2000.
Al country visit
Al delegates visited South Korea in March, and met a number of non-governmental organizations.
