BANGLADESH
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH
Head of state: Shahabuddin Ahmed
Head of government: Sheikh Hasina
Capital: Dhaka
Population: 129.1 million
Official language: Bangia
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Optional Protocol
to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of
children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN
Women's Convention
Rampant corruption at all levels of society and government continued to dash hopes for improvement in the human rights situation and to thwart efforts to tackle widespread poverty and political instability. Torture, including rape in custody, continued to be reported, and impunity for past human rights violations persisted.
Background
The government failed to address the issue of corruption. In particular there was concern that the government failed to implement the recommendations of the Public Administration Reforms Commission aimed at making the country's burdensome bureaucracy transparent, accountable and accessible to ordinary people.
Despite promises, the government took no action to set up the National Human Rights Commission or to appoint an ombudsman.
The long-running opposition boycott of parliament continued.
The Public Safety (Special Provisions) Act 2000 was adopted in January amid concerns that some of its provisions breached international human rights standards and would allow the police to detain people without a warrant for a bribe, or on politically motivated grounds.
Torture/ill-treatment
Widespread and persistent reports of torture were routinely ignored by the authorities. Victims included children, women, the elderly, political dissidents and criminal suspects. Police frequently attacked demonstrators and beat Journalists reporting on the protests.
More than 50 people died in custody, reportedly as a result of torture. Methods of torture reported included beatings with rifle butts, iron rods and bamboo sticks; hanging by the wrists from the ceiling; rape; "water treatment" in which hose-pipes were fixed into each nostril and taps turned on full for two minutes at a time; the use of pliers to crush fingers; and electric shocks. Police officers tortured people to extract money, to ensure compliance with their own illegal activities, as a
favour to local politicians in return for a bribe, and to obtain confessions.
The perpetrators were able to continue committing such violations with impunity. None of the political parties under whose successive governments torture has been widespread responded to Al's request in September to state whether they planned to take action against torture.
Women
Rape in custody continued to be reported. As in the past, government action was only taken after a public outcry. Police, on payment of a bribe, often chose not to act against private perpetrators of violence against women.
Over a dozen women were sent to prison by magistrates under a practice known as "safe custody". The majority were young women who had married against their families' wishes and whose husbands were accused of kidnapping them. While the husbands were often released on bail pending a court hearing, magistrates invariably sent the women to jail, against their will, purportedly for their own "safety". Such women can remain imprisoned — in some cases for years—without being accused of any offence.
Death penalty
At least 37 death sentences were imposed, but no executions were carried out. At the end of 2000, more than 160 prisoners were reported to be on death row. Q On 14 December, the High Court upheld the death sentences on 10 of the 15 people sentenced to death by a lower court in November 1998 for the killing of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his family in August 1975. A split judgment in the case of the other five was to be clarified by a judicial panel.
Chittagong Hill Tracts
The government did not bring to justice those responsible for past human rights violations during the armed conflict which lasted from the mid-1970s until 1997.
Further tension emerged between the main tribal group, which had signed a peace accord with the government in December 1997, and the smaller dissident groups whose demands for full autonomy had not been met by the accord. Each group accused the other side of targeting their members. There were reports that Bangladesh army personnel were responsible for human rights violations against tribal people, including killing at least three Jumma people ' and setting on fire several Jumma homes.
There were continuing concerns about the slow pace of the implementation of all provisions of the peace accord.
Al country reports and visits Reports
•	Bangladesh: Human rights in the Chittagong Hill Tracts (Al Index: ASA13/001/2000)
•	Bangladesh:Tortureand impunity (Al Index: ASA 13/007/2000)
Visits
Al delegates visited Bangladesh in May and November
Amnesty International Report 2001
43
