TALY
ITALIAN REPUBLIC
Head of state: Carlo Azeglio Ciampi
Head ofgovernmentGiulianoAmato (replaced
Massimo D'Alema in April)
Capital: Rome
Population: 57.2 million
Official language: Italian
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
There were numerous allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement and prison officers, some of them relating to previous years. There were reports of detainee and prisonerdeaths in disputed circumstances. Criminal investigations were opened or continued into many such incidents. Two paratroopers were convicted in connection with human rights violations committed by Italian troops participating in a multinational peace-keeping operation in Somalia in the 1990s. Seven former members of the Argentine armed forces were sentenced in absentia in connection with the abduction and murderof Italian citizens during the years of military rule in Argentina, while another Argentine military officer, detained in connection with the abduction and torture of a French citizen,
Amnesty International Report 2001
137
ITA
was released and allowed to return home, amid international protest A controversial verdict of 1995, which had found three men guilty of participation in a politically motivated murder in 1972, was confirmed following judicial review, thus ending judicial proceedings which had lasted 12 years and whose fairness had been repeatedly called into question. The government pressed on with a program of reforms in the justice system, including measures aimed at strengthening fairtrial guarantees for defendants in criminal proceedings, and in the prison system, aimed at the eventual improvement of conditions.
Ill-treatment and shootings bylaw enforcement officers
There were frequent allegations of law enforcement officers physically assaulting detainees. Although the allegations related to both Italian and foreign nationals, many of the victims were of African origin or Roma. Criminal investigations were under way into a number of complaints of ill-treatment, and into several fatal shootings of unarmed suspects by police and cara6m/er/officers, including those of two 17-year-old youths - Mourad Fikri, a Moroccan national, shot dead by Rome police in May, and Mario Castellano, shot dead by Naples police in July.
Q In September the Salerno Public Prosecutor's Office requested that a carab/n/ere corporal be charged with the murder of Mohammed Ahdiddou, a 24-year-old unarmed Moroccan shot in January, and that six other carabinieri be charged with perjury for lying about the circumstances of the shooting. Q The Palermo Chief of Police apologized to Leontine Koadjo, from Côte d'Ivoire, for her treatment inside the Aliens Bureau attached to Palermo police headquarters in April. Criminal and disciplinary proceedings were opened against an officer who apparently subjected her to an unprovoked physical assault after she asked for information. She required hospital treatment for a facial fracture.
Torture/ ill-treatment in prisons
Tension was high in prisons and detention centres for aliens with frequent and widespread protests prompted largely by unsatisfactory conditions, in some instances amounting to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Severe overcrowding persisted, together with reports of inadequate medical assistance, poor sanitation and other connected problems, including high rates of suicide, attempted suicide and self-inflicted injuries. Numerous allegations of ill-treatment by prison officers emerged, in some cases amounting to torture, along with reports of a number of prisoner deaths in disputed circumstances. Criminal investigations were opened or continued into many such incidents. Fears expressed in previous years — that the failure to carry out thorough investigations into alleged torture and ill-treatment by prison officers, and to bring those responsible swiftly to justice, might be creating a climate of impunity— appeared Justified.
Q In April, the European Court of Human Rights found Italy guilty of failing to carry out a "thorough and effective investigation into the credible allegations" of ill-treatment by Pianosa prison officers made by Benedetto Labita in October 1993. Benedetto Labita alleged that he and other prisoners had suffered systematic physical and mental ill-treatment, mainly between July and September 1992. Q Following complaints made to the judicial authorities by Bolzano prison inmates, 25 prison officers and a doctor were put under investigation in connection with allegations that between 1994 and 1999 prisoners were regularly taken to an isolation cell and severely beaten.
Q The Public Prosecutor asked for 12 prison officers to be charged with murder and another 12 charged with aiding and abetting in connection with the death of Francesco Romeo in Reggio Calabria prison in 1997. Autopsy and forensic tests concluded that his extensive injuries were not consistent with a fall from a perimeter wall during an escape attempt, as claimed by the prison administration, but that he died as a result of a fractured skull caused by blows with batons or truncheons. The prison's duty records for the time of the incidents apparently displayed clear signs of tampering. Q Luigi Acquaviva died in the Sardinian prison of Bad'e Carros in January, within 24 hours of taking a prison officer hostage for some four hours and placing a noose around his neck. Administrative and criminal investigations, involving six prison officers and the prison director, were opened into his death following claims that his death was not the result of suicide as the prison administration maintained- Autopsy and forensic tests found that his body, found hanging in a cell, had suffered extensive traumatic injuries before death as well as neck injuries consistent with suicide. Q In December, the Public Prosecutor requested that 96 people be committed for trial following a criminal investigation into allegations that on 3 April more than 40 inmates of Sassari district prison, Sardinia, were subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, in some cases amounting to torture, by dozens of prison officers employed in various Sardinian penal institutions and in the presence of the prison director and the regional director of Sardinian prisons.
Human rights violations by the Italian armed forces in Somalia
In January, in response to an AI request of March 1999, the Ministry of Justice provided information about developments in criminal proceedings opened in connection with alleged human rights violations committed by members of the armed forces participating in a multinational peace-keeping operation in Somalia in 1993 and 1994. The Ministry stated that a request by the Milan Public Prosecutor for investigations concerning the alleged rape and murder of a Somali boy in March 1994 to be closed without further action was awaiting decision by a judge of preliminary investigation.
The Ministry also indicated that, although a judicial investigation had established that a Somali woman had
138
Amnesty International Report 2001	138
ITA
been gang-raped at the Demonio checkpoint in Mogadishu, it had not been possible to identify the perpetrators or the victim and thus the Livorno judge of preliminary investigation had ordered the closure of those proceedings. Proceedings against an officer accused of raping a Somali woman inside the former Italian embassy in Mogadishu and proceedings regarding allegations that in June 1993 soldiers had unlawfully shot and killed three Somali citizens on board a vehicle were also closed owing to lack of concrete evidence. The Ministry said that the outcome of three further proceedings, including those concerning Aden Abukar Ali, photographed while Italian soldiers were attaching electrodes to his body, were still awaited.
In April, Livorno Tribunal tried and sentenced a former paratrooper to 18 months' suspended imprisonment for abusing his authority and, pending the outcome of connected civil proceedings, made him provisionally liable to the payment of 30 million lire {US$14,000) to Aden Abukar Ali. A second officer apparently received a lower sentence after plea-bargaining.
Universal jurisdiction over crimes against humanity
In December, Rome Court of Assizes sentenced two Argentine generals to life imprisonment and five other former members of the Argentine armed forces to 24 years' imprisonment, following their trial in absentia in connection with the abduction and murder of seven Italian citizens and the kidnapping of the child of one them during the years of military rule in Argentina {1976-1983). The trial was the result of investigations opened by the Italian Judiciary in 1983, following complaints lodged by relatives of "disappeared" Italian citizens.
Several other criminal proceedings, at various stages of investigation, were under way into complaints of human rights violations committed against Italian citizens by the Argentine security forces and as a result of past collaboration between the Argentine security forces and those of several other South American countries.
In August, former Argentine military officer Jorge Olivera was arrested in Rome on an international warrant issued by France for the abduction and torture of a French citizen in Argentina in 1976. However, in September, while full examination of a French extradition request was still pending, the Rome Appeal Court ordered his release, on the grounds that the crimes of which he was accused were subject to a statute of limitations. He immediately returned to Argentina. The Procurator General appealed against the Court's decision, the Minister of Justice announced an internal disciplinary investigation into the conduct of the Appeal Court judges and the Public Prosecutor opened an investigation into apparently false information presented to the Court by Jorge Olivera.
AI expressed extreme concern at the court's decision, pointing out that, under international law, the scale and magnitude of human rights violations
committed under military rule in Argentina constitute crimes against humanity and, therefore, cannot be subject to statutes of limitation.
Adriano Sofri, Giorgio Pietrostefani and Ovidio Bompressi
In January, Venice Appeal Court confirmed a 1995 verdict by the Milan Appeal Court which had sentenced Adriano Sofri, Giorgio Pietrostefani and Ovidio Bompressi — three leading members of the former extra-parliamentary left-wing group Lotta Continúalo 22-year prison sentences for participation in the killing of police commissioner Luigi Calabresi in Milan in 1972. The 1995 sentence had resulted in their imprisonment in January 1997, after nine years of judicial proceedings and seven trials.
AI had repeatedly expressed concern at the excessive length and complexity of the proceedings, as well as serious doubts about their fairness, including the extent to which the final verdict relied on the uncorroborated evidence of a penf/fo{a person benefiting from remission of sentence in return for collaboration with the judicial authorities), whose testimony contained contradictions and inaccuracies.
The court ordered the reimprisonment of the defendants whose sentences had been suspended following an August 1999 ruling that their application for a judicial review of the January 1995 sentence was admissible. Adriano Sofri was reimprisoned immediately while Giorgio Pietrostefani and Ovidio Bompressi went into hiding. In March Ovidio Bompressi surrendered voluntarily to the judicial authorities and, after brief reimprisonment, was granted a suspension of his sentence on health grounds. Giorgio Pietrostefani re-emerged in France where he had right of legal residence.
In October, when the Supreme Court examined an appeal lodged against the January judgment, the Procurator General's Office asked it to annul the Venice judgment and order new review proceedings. However, the court rejected the appeal.
At the end of the year the three men were pursuing a petition against Italy with the European Commission of Human Rights, claiming violations of the European Convention on Human Rights.
AI country reports
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Italy
(AI Index: EUR 01 /003/2000)
•	L'ltalia e idirittiumani(\ta\y and Human Rights)
Amnesty International Report 2001
139
