HUNGARY
REPUBLICOFHUNGARY
Head of state: Ferenc Madl (replaced Arpad Goncz in August)
Head of government: Viktor Orban
Capital: Budapest
Population: 10.1 million
Official language: Hungarian
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Detention of large numbers of asylum-seekers continued; many were reportedly ill-treated. Although widely criticized for tolerating racist discrimination, particularly against Roma, the authorities rejected all appeals for the introduction of anti-discrimination legislation. A former police officer who publicly criticized his superior was threatened with imprisonment
11 l-treatment of asy I u m-seekers
Asylum-seekers continued to be detained, although in smaller numbers than in early 1999. There were numerous reports of beatings and the arbitrary use of CS gas by guards in detention centres. Detainees who were ill-treated had little opportunity to file a complaint because the detainee population was transient and because of fears that lodging a complaint could harm their chances of being granted asylum or of being transferred from detention to a refugee reception centre. Former detainees alleged that guards frequently hit them with batons if they did not stand in a straight queue for dinner. They also alleged that guards had sprayed CS gas into detainees' faces and into toilets when detainees needed to use them.
O A.O., a Kosovan asylum-seeker, was allegedly beaten by guards with batons after he climbed a fence within the territory of the Nyirbator detention centre to recover a football.
Q V.I., a Sri-Lankan asylum-seeker who had longstanding injuries to his leg and arm, was allegedly beaten on the head by a guard in the Nyirbator detention centre after he tried to explain that he could not comply with an order to take out and clean a dustbin because of his injuries. Q In April Sudanese and Liberian asylum-seekers were reportedly ill-treated by guards in the Balassagyarmat detention centre.
Roma
In June the Council of Europe's European Commission against Racism and Intolerance noted that "severe problems of racism and intolerance continue in Hungary". It noted that the incidence of discrimination towards the Roma continued in all fields of life and expressed concern particularly about police ill-treatment. However, at a conference where this report was discussed by local non-governmental organizations, a Ministry of Justice official stated that the government did not support proposals for a separate anti-discrimination act on the grounds that existing legislation provided sufficient protection.
Police investigations into reported cases of ill-treatment of Roma did not appear to be conducted promptly and impartially.
Q In March, in response to concerns about reports of ill-treatment of six young Roma in September 1999 during a raid on their apartment in Budapest, the Minister of the Interior claimed that detailed police inquiries at the apartment block on the morning of the raid resulted in "a well-grounded suspicion of assault" allegedly committed by the young Roma. However, he failed to explicitly acknowledge that the report upon which the entire police operation had been based was a complete fabrication. In November the Minister conceded that the execution of the police action had been "to our present knowledge, an infraction of the law". An investigation into the case by the Budapest Prosecutor's Office of Investigations was continuing at the end of 2000.
TiborKarancsl
Tibor Karancsi, a former police captain from Szeghalom, Bekes county, who made public statements alleging corruption among the former leadership of Szeghalom police, was threatened with up to three years' imprisonment. He had been indicted in December 1999 by the Szeged Military Prosecutor, accused of defaming his superior in a newspaper article, and sentenced in November to "being stripped of his rank", a decision against which he appealed. In a separate case for defamation of the same superior officer, Tibor Karancsi's trial was suspended pending the outcome of the trial of the complainant who was accused of abusing his powers by impeding investigations into oil smuggling.
Al country visits
In March anAI delegate visited the Nyirbator and Szombathely detention centres where ill-treatment of asylum-seekers had been reported in 1999.
Amnesty International Report 2001
123
