SAINT LUCIA
SAI NT LUCIA
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by Peariette Louisy
Head of government: Kenneth Anthony Capital: Castries Population:0.16million Official language: English Death penalty: retentionist
There were reports of severe beatings in prison and of police brutality and excessive use of force. At least two men remained under sentence of death.
Torture/ill-treatment
There were reports of severe beatings in prison, and of conditions that amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. Sanitation was poor, with an open pit for all prisoners to use as a latrine. Severe overcrowding was exacerbated by the large number of remand prisoners awaiting trial. Q In one case, a mentally ill man on remand was allegedly beaten and punched by prison guards until he became unconscious.
Q In July, a court ordered that shackles be immediately removed from Alfred Harding, a Bajan national. He had been kept in prison since August 1999 and held continuously in handcuffs and metal ankle restraints chained together, in contravention of the Prison Rules and international standards. He was also kept in solitary confinement and denied visiting rights. Reports indicated that he was detained in the part of the prison reserved for prisoners under sentence of death, although he was on remand, and that he was regularly subjected to punitive cell searches. The court ordered compensation to be paid to Alfred Harding, but this was not paid. By the end of the year the authorities had not responded to calls for an end to the practice of holding prisoners in chains and for an investigation into the torture of Alfred Harding.
Corporal punishment
No reports were received of sentences of judicial corporal punishment being imposed or inflicted. In 1999 the Court of Appeal had ruled that there was no provision in law for such punishments.
Police brutality
There were reports of police brutality and excessive use of force. Unofficial reports claimed that there were at least seven fatal shootings by the police, some in disputed circumstances. No inquests were held into any of these deaths.
Q In October Paul Hamilton was fatally shot by police officers in Castries. Reports indicated that he was shot in the back following a chase. Media reports stated that an internal police investigation had been announced, but the outcome was not known at the end of the year.
204
Amnesty International Report 2001
SAM
Q In November, Alfred Harding (see above) was shot dead by police in La Clery after escaping from custody. The circumstances of the killing suggested that he had been extrajudicially executed. Witnesses stated that Alfred Harding was ordered by a police officer to lie down and was subsequently shot twice in the thigh and spine. According to reports, he was denied medical attention. Witnesses were reportedly intirrjidated by police. Following the shooting, the Minister of Home Affairs announced that an independent investigation would take place into Alfred Harding's death and the circumstances of his escape from custody. The Prime Minister announced an internal investigation. The results of both investigations had not been disclosed by the end of the year.
Death penalty
At least two men remained under sentence of death. No further death sentences were imposed and no executions took place.
Human rights defenders
The Minister of Home Affairs accused human rights lawyers of being "politically motivated". The media was also critical of their work and at least one lawyer was subjected to anonymous death threats, verbal harassment and intimidation from members of the public.
