IRE
RELAND
IRELAND
Head of state: Mary McAleese Head of government: Bertie Ahern Capital: Dublin Population: 3.7 million Official languages: Irish, English Death penalty: abolitionistfor all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: UN Convention against Racism; Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
There v/ere delays in implementing some undertakings arising from the 1998 Multi-Party Agreement The amended Refugee Act undermines the fundamental right of people fleeing serious human rights violations to seek asylum.
Human rights aspects of the Multi-Party Agreement
On 31 May the President signed the Human Rights Commission Bill into law, and shortly afterwards the President of the Commission was appointed. By the end of 2000 the Commission had not yet started to function. The Commission will have powers to scrutinize upcoming legislation, to conduct inquiries into human rights abuses and to take cases to court on behalf of individuals and groups.
The Irish government failed to produce legislation which would bring into effect its commitment under the 1998 Multi-Party Agreement to incorporate the European Convention on Human Rights into Irish law and to "ensure at least equivalent level of protection of human rights as will pertain in Northern Ireland", AI was concerned that in favouring an "interpretative" incorporation of the Convention, the Irish government fell short of meeting its requirements under the Agreement, as this would not provide people with full access to the rights in the Convention,
The Review of the Offences Against the State Act(s), which was set up by the government as part of its undertakings under the Multi-Party Agreement, had still not reported its findings by the end of 2000, AI had presented a detailed submission about its concerns to the Review group in October 1999.
Shootings by the security forces
Investigations into disputed killings, which consist of police officers investigating actions taken by other police officers, cannot be considered independent. In addition, the current inquest procedure does not satisfy international standards which require a mechanism for public scrutiny of the legality of actions by government agents. The victims' families are severely disadvantaged: their lawyers are not provided with full autopsy statements, full forensic evidence or complete witness statements before the inquest. This
hampers the families from effectively challenging the official version. All these documents are available to the Carda(police). Furthermore, legal aid is not available to the victims' families to pay for legal assistance and independent expert advice, Q John Carthy was shot dead in April 2000 after he had barricaded himself for 25 hours in his home, which was surrounded by dozens of police officers. John Carthy was reportedly suffering from depression and questions were raised concerning the police handling of the incident, including why his request to speak to his solicitor was not met and whether the force used by the police was excessive in the circumstances. John Carthy was the third person to be killed in recent years by police officers from the Emergency Response Unit (ERU), a specially trained and heavily armed response unit. An inquest into his death took place in October, The Jury limited itself to a finding of death caused by being shot, having declined to issue a verdict on the circumstances, or any riders, AI believes that only an independent public inquiry could answer the questions that remained unanswered after the inquest, Q A Supreme Court ruling concerning the inquest into the killing by the ERU of John Morris (who was killed in June 1997) upheld in July the coroner's decision to allow officers from the ERU to testify anonymously and from behind a screen, and to deny the family's lawyer access to the full forensic evidence, including information concerning the identity of the firearm(s) used in the fatal shooting,
Q Officers from the ERU were also involved in the shooting of Ronan MacLochlainn in May 1998. His inquest had not taken place by the end of 2000.
ill-treatment
There were continued reports of ill-treatment by police. AI was concerned that the government did not ensure adequate safeguards against ill-treatment, including provisions against incommunicado detention, for effective legal assistance, and for an effective complaints mechanism. Many people alleging ill-treatment stated that they had no confidence in the complaints procedure, in particular if the investigating officers came from the same police force allegedly involved in the misconduct. AI was also concerned that people detained for criminal matters were not entitled to access to legal counsel during police questioning, and that there was no provision for legal aid for lawyers to attend police stations. AI called for audio- and video-recording of police interviews with detainees to be introduced.
The UN Human Rights Committee
In July the UN Human Rights Committee examined Ireland's second periodic report under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, The Committee expressed concerns about the continued operation of the Special Criminal Court, the lack of independent investigations of complaints against the Garda and the treatment of prisoners. AI had raised a number of these issues in its briefing to the Committee,
134
Amnesty International Report 2001
ISR
Refugees and discrimination
The Refugee Act of 1996 finally came into force in November. However, its amended version denies fundamental rights to people fleeing torture. Al expressed concern that the legislation was flawed because of inadequate legal safeguards, including an ineffective appeal system in accelerated asylum procedures. This concern was heightened by the dramatic increase in the number of asylum claims being rushed through such procedures. Al was also concerned about the provision for detention of asylum-seekers in the Refugee Act. Increased powers of detention were introduced by the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Bill 2000.
The Equal Status Act, which was brought into force in October, outlaws discrimination by those providing both public and private services and is designed to combat discrimination on nine grounds; gender, race, religion, age, sexuality, disability, membership of the Traveller community and family and marital status.
Al country report
• Ireland: Briefing to the UN Human Rights Committee on human rights concerns (Al Index: EUR 29/001/2000)
