MYA
MYANMAR
union of myanmar
Head of state and government: General Than Shwe
Capita I: Yangon
Population: 46.8 million
Official language: Burmese
Death penalty: retentionist
Hundreds of people, including more than 200 members of political parties and young activists, were arrested for political reasons. Ten others were known to have been sentenced to long terms of imprisonmentafterunfairtrials. At least 1,500 political prisoners arrested in previous years, including more than 100 prisoners of conscience and hundreds of possible prisoners of conscience, remained in prison. Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and other leaders of the National League for Democracy (NLD) were placed under de facto house arrest after being prevented by the military from travelling outside Yangon to visit other NLD members. Prison conditions constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and torture of political prisoners was reported. The military continued to seize ethnic minority civilians for forced labour duties and to kill members of ethnic minorities during counter-insurgency operations in the Shan, Kayah, and Kayin states. Five people were sentenced to death in 2000 for drug trafficking.
Background
As in previous years, the army continued to engage in skirmishes with the Karen National Union (KNU), the Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP), and the Shan State Army-South (SSA-South). Sixteen cease-fire agreements negotiated in previous years between the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) and various ethnic minority armed opposition groups were maintained. ,
Continuing political stalemate
In spite of international and domestic efforts, the military government of the SPDC refused to engage in dialogue with the NLD. In August Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and other NLD leaders left Yangon to visit NLD members. They were detained on the road in Dalah township by the military authorities for lo days before being forcibly returned to Yangon. They were then held incommunicado under house arrest for 12 days. The NLD headquarters in Yangon were raided and documents reportedly confiscated. In September, when Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and NLD Vice-chairman U Tin Oo attempted to travel by train to Mandalay, they were forcibly removed from the Yangon train station. U Tin Oo was taken to Yemon Military Intelligence Base and detained there; Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and eight other NLD Central Executive Committee members were placed under house arrest where they remained at the
end of the year. Almost 100 NLD members were arrested in connection with the two attempted NLD trips, including NLD supporters who had gathered to greet Daw Aung San Suu Kyi at the train station.
Political prisoners
At least 1,700 people remained imprisoned for political reasons, including 37 NLD members of parliament-elect. An additional 45 members of parliament-elect arrested in September 1998,43 of them members of the NLD, continued to be held without charge in "government guesthouses". They had been arrested in a pre-emptive move to prevent them from convening a parliament after the SPDC's refusal to do so. Saw Naing Naing, an NLD member of parliament-elect from Pazundaung township, Yangon, who had been released in January 1999, was rearrested in September 2000,
Ten political prisoners were known to have been released, including five elderly men released after the Special Envoy of the UN Secretary-General for Myanmar visited the country in October.
In the run-up to the loth anniversary in May of the NLD election victory, hundreds of NLD supporters were arrested. In press conferences held in May and July, the SPDC accused the NLD of having links with exiled opposition groups which it claimed were involved in "terrorist" acts.
Q U Than Lwin, an NLD member of parliament-elect from Constituency 2, Madaya township, Mandalay Division, was arrested and sentenced in May to nine years' imprisonment for sending a letter to the local authorities. The letter protested against a demonstration held against him in March, staged by the authorities, who reportedly forced people to attend. Q In May scores of NLD members from Taungdwingyi township, Magwe Division, were arrested for attending a parry meeting; seven were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.
Q U Aye Tha Aung, a prisoner of conscience and leader of the Arakan League for Democracy, was arrested in April and sentenced to 21 years' Imprisonment. His health deteriorated significantly following his arrest. He was the Secretary of the lo-member Committee Representing the People's Pariiament which the NLD and other opposition parties formed in 1998, and represented four ethnic minority opposition parties, including his own. O Seven Rohingyas, including Serajudin bin Nurislam, were arrested in June for attempting to travel to Yangon. They were later sentenced to between eight and 12 years' imprisonment and were held in Sittwe, capital of the Rakhine State. Rohingyas, who are Muslims living in the Rakhine State, are forbidden from travelling outside their home townships.
Prison conditions
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued visiting prisons, "government guesthouses' where members of parliament-elect were detained, and some labour camps. However they were not known to have had access to Military Intelligence Headquarters where torture was most frequently
Amnesty International Report 2001
175
MYA
reported. In April the ICRC announced that it had identified some 1,500 "security detainees". Conditions in most prisons were extremely poor, owing to lack of adequate food, water, sanitation, and medical care. Myingyan Prison in Mandalay Division and Tharawaddy Prison in Bago Division were known to be particularly harsh.
Q Daw San San Nweh, prisoner of conscience and well-known writer, suffered from high blood pressure, arthritic rheumatism and kidney problems, but did not receive appropriate medical treatment. Poor prison conditions in Myanmar's largest facility, Insein Prison, further exacerbated her health problems.
Torture/ill-treatment
Torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners continued to be reported. Methods of torture included severe beatings and kicks with boots; an iron bar being rolled repeatedly up and down the shins until the skin peeled off; near-suffocation; and "the airplane", where prisoners are suspended from the ceiling, spun around and beaten.
Q A Karenni Christian farmer from Loikaw township, Kayah State, reported that he was arrested by the army and accused of working with the KNPP after a battle between the two forces in February. He was beaten with rifle butts, punched in the face and kicked in the head so severely that his hearing was permanently damaged. He was then forced to accompany troops as a guide for one week during which time he was beaten every day with sticks and tied with a rope.
Forced labour
The army continued to seize ethnic minority civilians from the Shan, Karen and Karenni ethnic minorities for forced labour. They were made to work on infrastructure projects and to carry equipment for patrolling troops. Forced labour of criminal prisoners in labour camps, who were made to break rocks or to work as porters for the army, was also reported. Q A Shan woman from Laikha township, Shan State, reported that in February she had regularly been forced to cut bamboo, build fences, and maintain military camps and roads.
Extrajudicial executions
Extrajudicial executions of ethnic minority civilians taking no active part in the hostilities continued to be reported. In Kunhing township, Shan State, more than 100 Shan and hill tribe people were believed to have been killed in January, February and May. The SSA-South was reportedly active in Kunhing township.
to comply with ILO Convention No. 29 on forced labour, to which Myanmar became a party in 1955. If the SPDC was found not to comply, the ILO recommended, among other things, that ILO members should review "thelir] relations... to ensure that [the SPDC] cannot take advantage of such relations to perpetuate or extend the system". In November the ILO's governing body met and decided that sufficient concrete measures had not been taken by the SPDC to comply with Convention No. 29 and therefore it upheld the ILO measures adopted in June.
In April the UN Commission on Human Rights adopted by consensus its ninth resolution extending the mandate of the UN Special Rapporteur on Myanmar for another year and deploring "the continuing pattern of gross and systematic violations of human rights in Myanmar". A strongly worded resolution was also adopted by consensus at the UN General Assembly in December. In April the UN Secretary-General appointed a new Special Envoy for Myanmar, whose mandate is to ensure implementation of the 1999 General Assembly Resolution on Myanmar. He visited the country in June and July, and again in October, when he met with General Than Shwe and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. In November the UN Special Rapporteur on Myanmar resigned; during his four-year tenure he had never been permitted by the SPDC to enter the country.
In May the USA renewed limited economic sanctions. In April the European Union (EU) strengthened its Common Position to include freezing the funds of SPDC members and other government officials in EU countries; this was renewed in October. The SPDC postponed an EU troika visit which was to have taken place in October, but the meeting between the EU and the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), which the SPDC attended, took place in Laos in December.
Al country reports
•	Unsung heroines: Women of Myanmar (Al Index: ASA 16/004/2000)
•	Myanmar: Exodus from the Shan State (Al Index: ASA 16/011/2000)
•	The institution oftorture in Myanmar(AI lndex:ASA 16/024/2000)
International responses
The SPDC presented its initial report to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. The Committee expressed concern about, among other things, violations against ethnic minority women and the plight of women in custody.
At the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Conference in June, the ILO gave the SPDC until 30 November to enact "concrete and detailed measures"
176
Amnesty International Report 2001
