KENYA
REPUBLIC OF KENYA
Head of state and government: Daniel arap Moi
Capital: Nairobi
Population: 28,7 million
Official languages: English, Swahili
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; African
Charteren the Rights and Welfare of the Child
Scores of prisoners of conscience were arrested and held forshort periods after police stopped public meeti ngs, theatre performa nces a nd peacefu I demonstrations by human rights groups, politicians and others, sometimes violently. One human rights defender was killed in suspicious circumstances. Torture of criminal suspects by security officials continued, resulting in a number of deaths in custody, including six prisoners on death row. Scores of killings by security officials in circumstances suggesting possible extrajudicial executions were reported. Prison conditions remained harsh. At least 25 people were sentenced to death and more than 1,000 people were reported to be under sentence of death at the end of 2000.
Background
The report of the UN Special Rapporteur on torture on his 1999 mission to Kenya stated that the use of torture by law enforcement officials was widespread and systematic, primarily to obtain information or confessions, but also as means of carrying out extrajudicial punishments. Recommendations by the Special Rapporteur included not allowing confessions to the police to be admissible evidence in court and the abolitionofcorporal punishment.
The government announced that all the recommendations in the report would be implemented. In October the Criminal Law Amendment Bill was published, which included the above recommendations, together with a bill to establish an independent Human Rights Commission with the power to investigate human rights violations and visit prisons and other places of detention. However, concern was expressed that members of the Commission would be appointed by the President. A Domestic Violence (Family Protection) Bill was also published, which would strengthen the legal protection of women and children. While these proposed legislative reforms were welcomed, human rights organizations questioned whether, without appropriate resources and training, they would result in any real changes in practice, especially in poor rural areas where human rights groups engaging in civic education programs are harassed.
In July the International Monetary Fund (IMF) renewed loans to Kenya that had been suspended since
Amnesty International Report 2001
145
KEN
1997. Conditions imposed by the IMF included reforms to the judiciary and anti-corruption measures.
There was continued heated debate over what form the process of constitutional reform should take. In July the Constitution of Kenya (Amendment) Bill was passed, to enable the appointment of 15 Commissioners to review the Constitution. Opposition members of parliament opposed the Bill and supported the parallel review process set up in 1999 by religious leaders and others to challenge parliament's control of constitutional reform.
Severe drought in parts of Kenya resulted in tensions between different communities searching for grazing and water for their animals. In May fighting between the Somali and Borana communities led to scores of killings. The Kenyan army was accused of indiscriminate use of force when an army helicopter shot at raiders in an operation to stop the fighting.
More than 25,000 people were forced to leave their homes in the Wajir area near the Ethiopian border after armed cross-border clashes in December.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Reports of torture by police officers remained widespread during 2000, although the number of police officers arrested for human rights violations increased. There were also reports of torture by vigilante groups permitted by some Provincial Commissioners to arrest, detain and interrogate criminal suspects. Q In October a 16-year-old girl who was being held for alleged possession of illicit alcohol in Eshirakwe Chiefs' camp, Kakamega district, Western Province, was reportedly raped by an administrative police officer who removed her from the cells and took her to his house overnight. The girl alleged that he threatened to kill her if she reported the rape. Relatives complained of harassment by officials from the Chiefs' camp after they reported the alleged torture to the police-Shootings
Scores of people including several children were shot and injured by police officers during police attempts to arrest criminal suspects.
Q InJanuary, seven-year-old Chesoritich Kalomermoi was reportedly shot and seriously injured by police officers who fired into her family's home in Baringo, Rift Valley Province, in an attempt to arrest her father. Q In April, 18-year-old MuslimaAbdi Owl was shot and injured by police officers who opened fire on women and children protesting about the allocation of land in Garissa town. North Eastern province. The authorities accused the women of throwing stones at the police. Deaths in custody
At least 15 people died in custody during 2000 as a result of torture by police and prison officers. Q In April Sophia Nyaguthii Mbogo, who was four months pregnant, reportedly died from torture after she had been detained for three days by police. She was held initially at Kagio police post and then at Baricho police station on suspicion of theft. A post-mortem reportedly indicated that she died of internal bleeding and that almost half her body was covered in bruises. Under Kenyan law she should have been charged within
24 hours or released. A police officer was subsequently arrested.
Q In September, six prisoners on death row at King'ong'o prison, Nyeri, Central Province, died during an escape attempt. The initial police report stated that they had been shot by prison officers to prevent their escape. Prison officers alleged that they had died as a result of falling from the eight-metre high perimeter fence. A post-mortem revealed that none of the bodies had bullet wounds and gave the cause of death as falling from a height. The Attorney General ordered an inquest, which opened in December. Human rights groups and others alleged that the prisoners had been beaten to death and that the authorities were attempting a cover-up. A second independent post-mortem indicated that the bodies had been subject to repeated blunt trauma, injuries that were not consistent with a fall. The body parts of at least one other prisoner with similar injuries were discovered in the same grave. The body of one of the prisoners, James Irungu Ndugo, was not found. A report by the Commissioner of Prisons was not made public during 2000 and no prison officers were suspended from duty pending investigations. Caning
In June the government announced that corporal punishment in schools was banned following repeated reports of children being injured or killed as a result of caning. An earlier ban in 1996 had not been enforced. Q In September Edwin Mogire, an ii-year-old boy, died after reportedly being caned by a teacher at Nyamasakia Primary School, Nyanza Province. The teacher was arrested a month later after the boy's body was exhumed and a post-mortem performed.
Killings by police
Police officers killed scores of people during 2000 in what appeared to be extrajudicial executions or indiscriminate use of force by police officers randomly opening fire when chasing criminal suspects. Although several police officers were arrested, investigations into a number of killings appeared to be summary, with senior police officers frequently justifying them on the grounds that the victims were criminals. Q In May a police unit attached to the Criminal Investigation Department, established in 1997 to combat violent crime, was disbanded and officers were transferred to other police stations. Members of the squad were reported to have engaged in torture, extrajudicial executions and violent crime. The authorities denied this. In June, two former members were arrested and charged with the murder of Joseph ole Pirei, after an inquest in August 1999 found he had been shot 10 times while unarmed.
Human rights defenders
Scores of prisoners of conscience were arrested during 2000 for short periods after public meetings, theatre performances and peaceful demonstrations organized by human rights, religious, environmental and other groups were broken up by the police, sometimes violently. In November the President accused some non-governmental organizations of being agents of
146
Amnesty International Report 2001	146
KEN
subversion ostensibly promoting democracy. At least II people faced charges of unlawful assembly at the end of the year. One human rights defender was killed in suspicious circumstances.
Q In March, ii human rights defenders were arrested while performing a play as part of a civic education program for the Ogiek, an indigenous people living in Tinet forest, Rift Valley Province. They were charged with "holding an illegal meeting" and held for six days before being released. The charges were dropped in May. More than 5,000 people face eviction in Tinet, which is the focus of a land dispute between the government and the Ogiek. Q In April, 63 people including nuns, students and human rights defenders were arrested during a peaceful demonstration calling for the cancellation of Kenya's foreign debt, organized by the Kenya Debt Relief Network Jubilee 2000 Campaign. They were charged with unlawful assembly and released on bail. The charges were dropped in May. Q In August Father Kaiser, a US Roman Catholic priest, was killed in suspicious circumstances. An outspoken advocate for human rights, in 1998 he had given evidence which reportedly implicated several Cabinet ministers to a Judicial inquiry set up to investigate the causes of political violence in Kenya since 1992. At the time of his death he had been assisting an alleged rape victim to bring charges against a senior government minister.
Political rallies
Rallies organized by politicians were violently disrupted by the police.
& In August, one person was killed and many others were injured when police and security forces broke up a peaceful pro-democracy rally in Nairobi. Several members of the opposition were prevented from addressing the rally and were forcibly confined to the Parliament buildings by armed youths who attacked them when they attempted to leave. Armed police surrounding the building took no action to prevent the attacks. Q In October President Moi banned rallies by a new pro-democracy movement, Muungano wa Mageuzi, People's Movement for Change, set up by opposition and government politicians and others. The Movement refused to accept the ban. In November a rally in Eldoret town. Rift Valley Province, was stopped by the police who tear gassed more than 2,000 people, including 10 members of parliament, in an attempt to prevent them reaching the rally venue. Q On 26 November at the Tumsifu Centre. Kisumu, western Kenya, about 50 youths violently disrupted a public hearing on the Kenyan Constitution, organized by the Ufungamano Initiative which is challenging Parliament's control of Constitutional reform. The youths, who were armed with clubs, axes and stones, attacked participants while a police patrol reportedly stood by and watched. A petrol bomb was thrown at Dr Oki Ombaka, chairperson of the People's Commission of Kenya (PCK). The injured included members of the PCK and a journalist. Not only was no attempt made by the police to stop the violence, but when Dr Oki
Ombaka later attempted to lodge an official complaint, the local head of police refused to take his statement and physically removed him from the police station.
Press freedom
Restrictions on freedom of expression continued. Journalists were arrested, and some were beaten. Private radio stations broadcasting In local languages were threatened with closure, and proposed amendments to the Books and Newspaper Act targeted the independent press by significantly increasing the licence bond required to start a publication. O In January Vitalis Musebe and Mukalo wa Kwayera, the managing and news editors of The People, an independent daily newspaper, were arrested and charged under the Official Secrets Act following an article on low morale in the army. The case was still pending at the end of 2000.
Refugees
There continued to be reports of harassment of refugees by the police. In July over 300 people, mostly from Somalia, were arrested in Mombassa and accused ofbeingillegal immigrants.
Death penalty
At least 25 people were sentenced to death during 2000, including a yo-year-old man and one man whose sentence was increased by the Court of Appeal from six years to death. More than 1,000 people were believed to be under sentence of death. The death sentence on one woman was repealed. In October a motion in parliament to abolish the death penalty failed. Only 66 members of parliament attended the debate.
Prison conditions
Prison conditions in many prisons amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Severe overcrowding, food and medical shortages and lack of clean drinking water resulted in scores of deaths. Some prisoners have reportedly been held for over five years, awaiting trial. The President released 10,623 prisoners on Independence Day in December. Q In May, two members of the MungikireWfious group on remand were forcibly removed by prison officers from Nyeri Provincial General hospital. Central Province, after they had been admitted by the duty doctor because of the seriousness of their injuries. They were taken to the dispensary in King'ong'o prison, Nyeri, which reportedly had no drugs or facilities to treat their injuries.
Al country report and visits Report
• Kenya: Prisons - Deaths due to torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions (Al Index: AFR 32/010/2000) Visits
Al visited Kenya in April to attend meetings with nongovernmental human rights organizations and in November to attend a post-mortem. In October a launch meeting for Al's worldwide campaign against torture was held in Nairobi.
Amnesty International Report 2001
147
