SLO
SLOVENIA
REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA
Head of state: Milan Kucan
Head of government: Andrej Bajuk
Capital: Ljubljana
Population: 1.99 million
Official language: Slovenian
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict
There were reports of ill-treatment and excessive use of force by police officers. Conditions in reception centres for refugees and asylum-seekers were inadequate and in at least one case reportedly amounted to degrading treatment.
Torture/ ill-treatment
In May the UN Committee against Torture reviewed Slovenia's initial report on its implementation of the Convention against Torture. In its Conclusions and Recommendations, the Committee expressed concern that the present Slovenian Criminal Code, adopted in 1994, does not include torture as a criminal offence. Slovenia's report argued that crimes within the Convention's definition of torture—specifically the infliaion of aggravated and serious bodily harm and the abuse of power by state officials—were incorporated in the Criminal Code. However, the Committee stated that the Convention definition of torture was more comprehensive than merely inflicting bodily harm and that failure to include torture as defined by the Convention in criminal law led to people guilty of torture not being appropriately punished. The Committee was also concerned about allegations of police ill-treatment and use of excessive force against people in custody, in particular members of the Romani community. In addition, Slovenian legislation on the treatment of aliens allowed, under certain circumstances, for the expulsion of people to countries where they could be at risk of torture, which constitutes a breach of the Convention.
In November the European Court of Human Rights found that Slovenia had breached several provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights in the case of Ernst Rehbock, a German national who had been ill-treated by Slovenian police in September 1995. The Court concluded that the arresting officers had used unwarranted force, as a result of which Ernst Rehbock had his jaw broken and sustained further injuries. In addition, his right to have the legality of his detention reviewed promptly had been violated as it took local courts several months to decide on his complaint against his detention.
Reports of ill-treatment by police officers increased from late 1999 onwards. Police officers resorted to excessive force in several instances against young people and children.
Q During the night of 21 to 22 April, 16-year-old Goran Razgorsek was reportedly beaten by police in the town of Slovenj Gradec. Goran Razgorsek left a local discotheque around midnight with some friends and then found that his motor cycle had a flat tyre. While he was calling his parents on his mobile phone, two passing police officers accused him and his friends of making a noise and of having damaged a traffic sign. They then ordered Goran Razgorsek to come with them to the police station. One officer reportedly grabbed his arm, twisted it behind his back, punched him in the chest and threw him on the ground. While he was lying on the ground, Goran Razgorsek was reportedly kicked in the back and stomach by both police officers, one of whom also kicked him on the head. He was taken to the police station in Slovenj Gradec, along with three friends who were released after questioning. Goran Razgorsek was refused permission to call his parents or a lawyer and, after being questioned, was locked in a cell. After an hour in the cell he became dizzy and vomited some blood. His parents were finally informed about his whereabouts and came to pick him up around 2am. An examination by the Slovenj Gradec hospital revealed bruising to his chest and back, a tear in his left ear lobe, bruising and swelling on his cheekbone, and a bump on his temple. Goran Razgorsek's parents filed a complaint with the Ministry for Interior Affairs in Ljubljana which was referred back to the Slovenj Gradec police station, which replied that since the complaint had not been sent to them within the legally required period it could not be taken into consideration. However, the complaint was forwarded to the district public prosecutor.
Amnesty International Report 2001
215
