KYRCYZSTAN
KYRCYZ REPUBLIC
Head of state: AskarAkayev
Head of government: Kurmanbek Bakiyev (replaced
Amangeldy Muraliyev in December)
Capital: Bishkek
Population: 4,6 million
Official languages: Kyrgyz, Russian
Death penalty: retentionist
The clamp-down on suspected supporters of banned Islamist opposition parties continued following new armed incursions into Kyrgyzstan in August by members of the banned Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU). At least one ethnic Uighurwas forcibly deported to China. A leading opposition activist was imprisoned. Human rights groups, the independent media and opposition supporters came under increasing pressure from the authorities.
Background
Law enforcement officers reportedly used excessive force to break up peaceful demonstrations in several regions of the country protesting against irregularities in the February and March rounds of parliamentary eleaions. Hundreds of demonstrators, including women and the elderly, were reportedly detained and beaten.
Both the February parliamentary and the October presidential elections were heavily criticized by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Incumbent President Askar Akayev won a third term in office amid claims that a controversial mandatory Kyrgyz-language test for presidential candidates had been aimed at excluding the chairman of the opposition Ar-Namys parly, Felix Kulov.
In August a military court cleared Felix Kulov of reportedly fabricated and politically motivated charges of abuse of authority while serving as a Minister of National Security. He had spent six months in pre-trial detention.
Arrests of suspected supporters of banned Islamist opposition parties increased following renewed armed incursions by fighters of the IMU who crossed Kyrgyz territory from neighbouring Tajikistan on their way to Uzbekistan in August. Units of IMU fighters also carried out attacks on Uzbek territory.
The President extended the 1998 moratorium on executions until the end of 2001.
Amnesty International Report 2001
151
KYR
Prisoner of conscience
In September former prisoner of conscience and leader of the opposition Erkindikpariy, Topchubek Turgunahev, was sentenced to i6 years' imprisonment on charges connected with an alleged plot to assassinate the President; seven others were also convicted in the trial. TopchubekTurgunaliev consistently denied the charges and alleged that the case against him was fabricated by the Ministry of National Security (MNS) in order to punish him for his peaceful political opposition activities. Three MNS officers reportedly admitted in court that there was not enough evidence to support the allegations. The charges were based on the testimony of one of the co-accused, Timur Stamkulov. who later confessed that he had carried out MNS instructions to plan a fictitious assassination attempt in order to implicate Topchubek Turgunaliev. In court, Timur Stamkulov reportedly retracted this confession. He was sentenced to four years' imprisonment but was granted an amnesty and released.
The other six co-accused claimed never to have met Topchubek Turgunaliev until the trial. They were sentenced to between 14 and lyyears' imprisonment. Bishkek City Court reduced their sentences on appeal by more than half. On 30 November President Askar Akayev signed a decree granting them amnesties, reportedly because they had admitted their guilt and asked for pardon.
Topchubek Turgunaliev did not qualify for the amnesty because he refused to admit any guilt. On appeal, his term was reduced to six years by Bishkek City Court. A further appeal against his conviction to the Supreme Court was still pending at the end of 2000.
Torture/ill-treatment
In court TopchubekTurgunaIiev's co-accused, who were arrested in May 1999, alleged that they had been tortured and ill-treated in pre-trial detention to force them to confess. Mamadyar Orozov, for example, alleged that he was beaten with batons on the soles of his feet, neariy suffocated with a gas mask and handcuffed to a radiator. The court did not take any of these allegations into consideration.
Harassment of human rights defenders
Q In April human rights activists, including former prisoners of conscience, founded the Guild of Prisoners of Conscience, and applied for registration to the Ministry of Justice. At the end of May the Ministry of Justice explained that it could not proceed with the registration of an organization created to defend the rights of prisoners of conscience since the Kyrgyz Constitution prohibited anyone from being discriminated against because of their political views and the current criminal code did not carry any articles for political crimes.
Q In July Ramazan Dyryldayev, chairman of the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) was forced into exile after the Kyrgyz authorities issued a warrant for his arrest, reportedly detained his son for questioning, and sealed the KCHR's offices. Although
the procurator general allegedly ordered the criminal case to be suspended, KCHR's lawyer believed that it was not safe for Ramazan Dyryldayev to return because the criminal investigation had not been officially closed. The criminal charges related to a dispute with a former KCHR member of staff over an unfair dismissal claim.
Restrictions on freedom ofthe press
In the run-up to the parliamentary and presidential elections, the independent media came under increasing pressure from the authorities for their coverage of opposition parties and candidates. For example, journalists and media organizations were sued for libel and tax evasion or other administrative or criminal offences.
Q Moldosali Ibrahimov, a freelance correspondent of the Jalal-Abad regional newspaper Akyikatand local KCHR activist, was found guilty of defamation and sentenced to two years' imprisonment by Jalal-Abad City Court injune. The defamation charge related to an article he had written in which he reported rumours that a local district court Judge had accepted a bribe in a dispute between two rival candidates in the parliamentary elections. He was released on appeal in July.
Forcible deportation
Jelil Turdi, an ethnic Uighur from the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region (XUAR) in the People's Republic of China was reported to have been forcibly deported in April to China where he was at risk of torture and possibly the death penalty for alleged "separatist" activities. He was first detained by Kyrgyz police in early March 2000, reportedly for having an illegal residence permit, then rearrested a few weeks later after the Chinese embassy in Kyrgyzstan claimed that his Chinese documents were false. According to unofficial sources, however, Chinese security officers told their Kyrgyz counterparts that Jelil Turdi was wanted in China for involvement in a nationalist opposition group. The Chinese officers reportedly took part in Jelil Turdi's interrogation, during which he was allegedly tortured. Jelil Turdi was denied the opportunity to challenge the decision to deport him before a court in Kyrgyzstan.
Al country report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Kyrgyzstan (Al Index: EUR 01/003/2000)
152
Amnesty International Report 2001	152
