CONGO
(REPUBLIC OFTHE)
REPUBLICOFTHECONGO
Head of state and government: Denis Sassou Nguesso
Capital: Brazzaville
Population: 2.6 million
Official language: French
Death penalty: abolitionist in practice
A measure of stability returned to the country after cease-fire agreements between warring militia were signed at the end of 1999. Around ha If those militia were estimated to have been demobilized during 2000, with many being reintegrated into the army. However, a proposed national dialogue involving all sides to the conflict did not take place. Although most of those who had been internally displaced by the fighting were able to return to their homes, the country was hit by a new refugee crisis in the north as tens of thousa nds of civilians fled the war in neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Conditions of detention were harsh; 13 people died in police custody.
Demobilization of militia
Following the signing of two cease-fire agreements in November and December 1999, the process of demobilizing an estimated total of 25,000 militia fighters began. These included members of the Cocoyesdoyal to former President Pascal Lissouba), the Cobras{\oya\ to President Dennis Sassou Nguesso), and the Ninjas (loyal to former Prime Minister Bernard Kolelas). All those who surrendered and handed in their weapons were guaranteed an amnesty by the government, including those responsible for serious human rights abuses during the armed conflict.
In April in the northern town of Owando, 700 weapons were reportedly handed in by the militia known as the Faucons (Falcons), loyal to former Prime Minister Joachim Yhombi Opango. In July, 800 members of the Cocoyeswere reportedly demobilized in the western town of Mossendjo. In December the follow-up committee responsible for overseeing the implementation of the cease-fire announced that 13,000 weapons had been handed in and that 12,000 militia fighters had been demobilized during ?ooo.
However, some groups reportedly refused to demobilize, including militia in the Niari region, traditionally a stronghold of the Coco>'e5. Many of those who had been demobilized found themselves homeless and without the means to support themselves properly. In October the government announced a reintegration program, part-funded by the UN, aimed at reintegrating 5,000 former militia members into civil society.
In March Lieutenant Jean-Claude Bayoulath, a former member of the Cocoyes, was reportedly killed in the town of Nkayi following a dispute with a former
80
Amnesty International Report 2001	80
COT
member of the Cobras. Both had recently been reintegrated into the army. It was not known if anyone was brought to justice for the killing-
National dialogue delayed
The cease-fire agreements provided for an inclusive national dialogue on ways forward for the country, and the year began positively with the release in Impfondo in January of 17 political prisoners linked to Bernard Kolélas. They had been detained since late 1997. However, the proposed national dialogue had still not taken place by the end of 2000 and it remained unlikely that some of the main opposition leaders in exile, who were excluded from the amnesty, would take part.
On 4 May Bernard Kolélas and former Minister of the Interior Philippe Bikinkita were convicted in absentia of torture during the 1997 conflict. They were sentenced to death after a trial lasting three days. In late 1999 Pascal Lissouba had been sentenced in absentia to 20 years' imprisonment for plotting to kill President Nguesso. All three remained in exile at the end of 2000.
A preliminary draft of a new constitution was approved by the government in November but criticized by opposition groups, which claimed that it concentrated too much power in the hands of the President. The government announced that elections would take place in 2001.
Refugees and the internally displaced
Almost all the estimated 800,000 people who were internally displaced by the armed conflicts of 1997 and 1998 were reported to have returned to their homes by the end of 2000. Many were in poor health after being forced to live in forests where food was scarce and medical care virtually non-existent. The homes of many had been looted in their absence.
Heavy fighting between DRC government forces and the armed opposition in neighbouring DRC forced tens of thousands to seek safety in northern Congo. Some claimed to have been fleeing forcible recruitment by DRC government forces. On 29 December, DRC government planes bombed the port of Boyele on the Oubangui river, reportedly killing eight people and injuring dozens. By the end of 2000 at least 100,000 refugees from the DRC were estimated to be living in the northern province of Likouala. There were serious food shor-tages. In September the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimated that as many as 28,000 refugees were inaccessible and cut off from humanitarian aid, but by the end of 2000 UNHCR had managed to gain access to most areas.
AI delegates attempting to visit refugee camps around Bétou in November were refused permission to enter the camps by the Congolese authorities.
Deaths in custody
On 12 November, 13 detainees died, reportedly of suffocation, in a police cell in the coastal town of Pointe-Noire. Three others were admitted to hospital in a critical state. They had been held in a small cell for several days, reportedly without charge, in December,
five police officers went on trial, accused of causing the deaths of the 13 through negligence-
Prison conditions were generally poor, with reports that in several prisons, including those in Pointe-Noire and in the northern town of Ouesso, detainees were deprived of food for several days at a time. Medical care was often unavailable.
Freedom of expression
On 15 July Crepin Casino Mbeto, a journalist for the pro-government newspaper Le Choc, was arrested at his home in Ouesso, apparently for having reported on a recent clash in the town between members of the police and the gendarmerie. He was held for several days without charge.
AI country visit
In NovemberAI delegates visited Bétou in the northern Congolese province of Likouala in order to interview refugees from the DRC.
