PARAGUAY
REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
Head of state and goverment: LuisÁngeí González
Macchi
Capital: Asunción
Population: 5.5 million
Official languages: Spanish, Guaraní
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: UN Convention
against Racism; Optional Protocol to the UN Children's
Convention on the involvement of children in armed
conflict
Respect for human rights deteriorated amid continuing political instability. Scores of military personnel were arrested following a failed coup attempt; several were tortured. Reports of ill-treatment and torture of criminal suspects, including juveniles, and of underage military conscripts, increased. As in previous years there were reports of excessive use of force by the security forces during land evictions, of illegal conscription of minors into the armed forces, and of unexplained deaths of military conscripts.
Background
Scores of military and police personnel were arrested following an attempted coup in May when tanks manned by soldiers of the army's First Division fired on the Congress and briefly took over police headquarters in Asunción. The government introduced a 30-day state of emergency and arrested more than 70 soldiers and police officers, journalists and opposition politicians. Most were released without charge. The majority were believed to be supporters of fugitive former army chief Lino Oviedo who was responsible for previous coup attempts and was wanted by the authorities in connection with the 1999 assassination of Vice-President Luis Maria Argaña.
The ruling Colorado party's monopoly control of government was broken for the first time in more than
II
Amnesty International Report 2001	198
PAR
50 years when liberal opposition candidate Julio César Franco was elected Vice-President in August.
Investigations into March 1999 killings
Three men, including a former army officer, were sentenced to up to 25 years in prison for their part in the assassination of Vice-President Argana in 1999. Major General Reinaldo Servin was found gMilty of hiring gunmen to assassinate Vice-President Argana, allegedly under orders from former General Lino Oviedo-
Lino Oviedo was forced to leave Argentina after breaking his asylum conditions and was arrested in Brazil in June. He remained in detention in Brazil at the end of the year pending a ruling on an extradition request from Paraguay.
Investigations into the killings of eight young demonstrators outside Congress in March 1999 made little progress.
Torture/ill-treatment
In its consideration of Paraguay's third periodic report in May, the UN Committee against Torture stated: "Acts of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment continued in police stations, in prisons and in the armed forces where soldiers fulfilling obligatory military service are frequently subjected to ill-treatment". Although some victims of torture have presented formal criminal complaints, only exceptionally have such complaints been the subject of criminal investigation by the judiciary and even more rarely have they resulted in those responsible being brought to justice.
Several inmates of the Panchito López juvenile detention centre were tortured by prison guards. Q Fifteen-year-old Francisco Carballo Figueredo and 17-year-old Rubén Dario Alvaraz were tortured by prison guards in Panchito López in February. Both youths were beaten, kicked and one was suspended by his wrists for several hours. The guards implicated in the torture were transferred and faced disciplinary and criminal investigations which were continuing at the end of the year.
All inmates in Panchito López continued to be subjected to conditions which amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Following two fires in February in which eight inmates died and at least 20 others suffered serious burns, some inmates were transferred to other prisons. However, the authorities failed to close Panchito López, despite international recommendations and the authorities' own repeated promises.
Q Six police officers, detained in connection with the aborted coup attempt in May, testified that they had been tortured by police in the presence of the then Minister of Interior, Judicial investigations opened on the basis of the complaints had not been concluded by the end of the year
Conscripts
Reports of ill-treatment of army recruits continued and at least six recruits under 18 years of age — the legal
minimum age for conscription into the armed forces in Paraguay—died of injuries sustained in unclear circumstances,
Q Fourteen-year-old Pedro Antonio Centurion died in September as a result of a gunshot wound to his head. He had been illegally recruited when he was 13 for a year's military service. An internal military investigation into his death revealed that his army records had been falsified to show his age as 19. The records of at least 100 other underage recruits at the army base where he was stationed had also been altered to change the recruits' ages. Two army colonels — the recruiting officer and the commander of the base—were detained and faced prosecution. Despite the investigation, however, the remaining underage recruits were not released from military service.
There was no further information on the whereabouts of two underage conscripts, Marcelino Gómez Paredes and Cristian Ariel Núñez Lugo, who "disappeared" in 1998.
Land disputes
As in previous years there were reports of harassment, intimidation and attacks on peasant farmers in the context of land disputes. Although investigations were opened into some incidents of alleged excessive use of force, no one was arrested or brought to justice. Q Three peasant farmers died in January and more than 80 were detained when police violently evicted peasant farmers from land they were occupying in General Resquin, San Pedro department, Q In May some 800 landless peasant families were expelled by police, reportedly using excessive force, from land they had occupied in Kaugueti, department of Caazapá. During the eviction, women occupiers were reportedly subjected to sexual abuse by the police.
Amnesty International Report 2001
189
