AZERBAIJAN
REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN
Head of state: HeydarAliyev
Head of government: Artur Rasizadeh
Capital: Baku
Population: 7.7 million
Official language: Azeri
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Several people active in the political opposition were detained for short periods. Reports of torture and ill-treatment in custody continued to be received. In the disputed Karabakh region, one prisoner of conscience received a suspended sentence; other political detainees were reportedly ill-treated; and two death sentences were commuted.
Background
Opposition political parties continued to report harassment and intimidation, especially outside the capital and in the run-up to the November parliamentary elections. International pressure helped reverse a decision which would have prevented some parties from taking part in the elections. The ruling New Azerbaijan party won the elections which were described as falling short of international standards. A joint observer mission by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the Council of Europe reported that the elections were "marred by numerous instances of serious irregularities, in particular a completely flawed counting process. Observers reported ballot stuffing, manipulated turnout results, pre-marked ballots, and production of either false protocols or no protocols at all. Additionally, party proxies frequently suffered intimidation, harassment and sometimes even arrest whilst carrying out their legitimate activities. " Protesters at various demonstrations around the country following the elections also aired grievances at poor socio-economic conditions.
The Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan continued their one-to-one meetings regarding the disputed region of Karabakh, but no major progress was reported in attempts to achieve a political settlement. In March a failed assassination attempt on the region's leader prompted a wave of arrests.
Torture/ill-treatment
Positive moves
In March the Supreme Court issued instructions to lower courts specifying, among other things, that the term "torture" should be understood in accordance with the definition in the UN Convention against Torture; reminding courts of their obligations to initiate
investigations whenever defendants allege torture or ill-treatment; reiterating that evidence obtained in violation of the law is inadmissible; and repeating the 1999 decision of the Constitutional Court that those detained under administrative procedures are entitled to a lawyer. The UN Special Rapporteur on torture visited the country in May at the invitation of the government. In June an agreement was finally concluded allowing access by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to all places of detention and all detainees within its mandate. Continuing allegations
In spite of these positive moves, however, there were continuing reports of ill-treatment during 2000. Q In April there were allegations that police used excessive force in Baku when dispersing opposition party supporters trying to hold an unauthorized demonstration in connection with the parliamentary elections. According to reports a number of journalists were assaulted while covering the events, during which 34 police officers were officially reported to have been injured and a number of leading opposition figures were allegedly ill-treated.
Vajif Hadjibeyli, chairman of the £/7rar (Peasants) Party, was reportedly severely beaten by police while being detained. He was then taken to the local police station suffering from concussion for which he allegedly did not receive prompt, appropriate medical attention. He was not allowed to see his lawyer or telephone his family and was sentenced to 10 days' administrative detention for resisting the lawful demands of a police officer. Before the end of this term he was transferred from the Main Police Directorate to Bailov investigation isolation prison No. i, after being charged with resisting a police officer. He was . subsequently released on bail but no trial had taken place by the end of the year-
Council of Europe
In June Azerbaijan's application to join the Council of Europe was reviewed by the Council's Parliamentary Assembly, which recommended membership on the understanding that Azerbaijan would fulfil a number of commitments within a stated time frame. These included ratifying the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment within a year of accession; adopting a law on an ombudsperson within a year of accession; and adopting, within two years of accession, a law on an alternative to compulsory military service, in compliance with European standards. Among other things, Azerbaijan also undertook to allow unrestricted access to prisoners by the ICRC; to release or grant a new trial to political prisoners; and to prosecute members of law enforcement bodies suspected of human rights violations, in particular torture. A formal invitation of membership was issued in November, although additional conditions were set in connection with the instances of fraud and irregularities reported during the November parliamentary elections.
38
Amnestylnternational Report 2001
A2E
Possible prisoners of conscience
Several people active in the political opposition were detained for short periods, and were possible prisoners of conscience.
Q Rauf Arifoglu, editor-in-chief of the opposition newspaper Yeni Musavat, was arrested on 22 August at his home in Baku after police claimed to have found an illegally held pistol in the apartment.
Events leading to Rauf Arifoglu's arrest began on 18 August, when a man attempted to hijack an aircraft carrying more than 100 passengers. Before being overpowered, the hijacker telephoned Rauf Arifoglu and listed a number of political demands regarding the parliamentary elections. Rauf Arifoglu stated that immediately after the call he rang the Minister of National Security and the press services of the Interior Ministry and the General Procurator's Office.
The following day, two employees of the district procurator's office and three police officers arrived at the Yeni Musavatoiiices with a search warrant, stating that they were looking for a tape recording of the telephone conversation with the hijacker. Rauf Arifoglu was taken to Sabail police department where he gave oral and written testimony, and the cassette tape was taken from him. He was then released.
Three days later, police arrived at Rauf Arifoglu's apartment and started to conduct a search. Rauf Arifoglu rang journalist colleagues and they gathered outside his apartment. Police did not allow either the journalists or Rauf Arifoglu's lawyer to enter the apartment while the search was conducted. When the pistol was found, Rauf Arifoglu shouted down to his colleagues that it had been planted, and refused to sign the police protocol of the search. He was arrested on a charge of illegally possessing a weapon, and later charged with other serious offences, including treason, in connection with the hijack, Rauf Arifoglu was released on bail on 5 October after widespread national and international pressure. Charges against him were still pending at the end of the year.
Decriminalization of homosexuality
Consensual homosexual relations between adult males, previously punishable by up to three years' imprisonment, were decriminalized when a new criminal code came into force in September. The new code sets a general age of consent at 16 and punishes only forcible sexual acts.
Karabakh
In the early hours of 22 March gunmen attempted to assassinate Arkady Ghukasian, "President" of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic {elections in the disputed region are not regarded as legitimate by the Azerbaijani authorities). Samvel Babaian
The assassination attempt was immediately followed by a wave of arrests centring on the former Defence Minister of the region, Samvel Babaian, and his associates. A number of those detained, including Samvel Babaian, were said to have been severely ill-treated in detention. Specific details were difficult to
obtain, however; most of those detained reportedly had no access to their families and, in some cases, inadequate access to a defence lawyer. In May, for example, Sasun Aghajanian's lawyer reported that they had met only twice since his client's arrest some two months earlier — once in private for a meeting that lasted around 10 minutes and once during an interrogation on 27 April, which was reportedly stopped by the lawyer when his client lost consciousness. There were also allegations that those detained in connection with the assassination attempt were denied food parcels from their relatives, and that some had no opportunity to take daily exercise.
Ai urged the procurator general in Karabakh to ensure that all necessary procedures for a fair trial were observed for all defendants at each stage of the criminal proceedings, including the requirement that public authorities, particularly prosecutors and the police, not make public statements about the guilt or innocence of the accused before the outcome of the trial which could prejudice the presumption of innocence.
The trial opened in September, but was adjourned several times over the question of whether Sasun Aghajanian was mentally fit to stand trial. It had not concluded by the end of 2000. Vagram Aghajanian
Journalist Vagram Aghajanian was among those arrested following the March assassination attempt. He had been critical of the Karabakh authorities and was regarded as close to opposition figures such as Samvel Babaian. Vagram Aghajanian was detained on 28 March after officers searched his home, reportedly without presenting a warrant. Vagram Aghajanian was subsequently found guilty of "hampering the implementation of martial law" by publishing articles regarded by the authorities as "contributing to internal tension", and sentenced to 10 days' administrative detention.
In April Vagram Aghajanian was sentenced to one year's imprisonment for libel. The criminal case had originally been opened in December 1999 following an article in which Vagram Aghajanian had criticized what he regarded as insufficient aid being made available to those who wished to resettle in some areas of Karabakh. The article quoted several people who claimed that the Prime Minister told them there was no money available in the budget for such help.
The Prime Minister is said to have denied that he had met the people quoted. It was reported that botFi Vagram Aghajanian and the newspaper editor had offered to publish a retraction of the report that such a meeting had taken place, but that this was rejected in favour of a criminal prosecution. There were allegations that Vagram Aghajanian's friends and colleagues were given very little notice of the impending trial, hampering their attempts to find him a defence lawyer. As a consequence the lawyer was said to have had only a few hours to acquaint himself with the case before the trial began. In April the appeal court changed the custodial sentence to a suspended one.
Amnesty International Report 2001
39
BAH
The death penalty
The death penalty was retained in the Karabakh region. In January Arkady Ghukasian commuted two death sentences to periods of 15 years' imprisonment. No executions were reported.
Al country report
• Concernsin Europe,January-June2000:Azerbaijan (Al index: EUROl/003/2000)
