UGANDA
REPUBLICOF UGANDA
Head of state: Yqweri Museveni Head of government: Apollo Nsibambi Capital: Kampala Population: 21.7 million Official language: English Death penalty: retentionist
Cross human rights abuses by armed opposition groups, including killings and abductions, continued throughout 2000. Torture and possible extrajudicial executions by the security forces were reported. The Ugandan army was accused of human rights violations including torture in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Meetings by political parties and others, peaceful demonstrations and strikes were disrupted by the security forces, sometimes violently. Scores of political prisoners, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were arrested. Prison conditions were harsh. At least 10 people were sentenced to death, but no one was executed.
Background
Human rights abuses by armed opposition groups increased during 2000. The Amnesty Act, which came into force in December 1999 and offered an amnesty to all rebel fighters who gave themselves up, was extended in July to the end of the year. The Commission to implement the Act was not set up until June and was hampered by under-funding. Under an agreement between Uganda and Sudan, Uganda returned more than 70 Sudanese prisoners of war, but large numbers of abducted children held in Sudan in camps run by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) were not returned. Of the 10,000 children estimated by the
UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) to have been abducted by the LRA since 1994, more than 5,000 remained unaccounted for. Although the government of Sudan had stated that the people it returned would be primarily abducted children still held in LRA camps, these appeared to be less than half of those returned.
In June a referendum was held to choose a political system in preparation for the 2001 presidential and parliamentary elections. The referendum approved President Yoweri Museveni's "Movement" system, which does not allow political parties to contest elections. In August the Referendum and Other Provisions Act was annulled by the Constitutional Court, following a petition by the opposition Democratic Party, on the grounds that it had been passed into law without a quorum. In response, the government enacted the Constitutional Amendments Act in September, which increased the power of parliament, barred courts from inquiring into parliamentary proceedings, and reduced the requirement for a parliamentary quorum.
In September the Ugandan Human Rights Commission opened an office in Soroti district and the army set up a human rights desk in Luwero district.
Abuses by armed opposition groups
Lord's Résista nee Army
There was an increase in abuses by the LRA in 2000. primarily against civilian targets. Killings, torture, including rape, and abductions, particularly of children, were reported throughout the year, mainly in the northern districts of Gulu and Kitgum. Abducted children were forced to become child soldiers, and girls were used by LRA commanders as sexual slaves. Nearly 80 per cent of LRA combatants were abducted children, according to estimates.
Q In May, 16 children between the ages of nine and 18 were reportedly abducted by the LRA in Gulu district. Q In October a two-year-old child was among five civilians abducted in Atero sub-county. Q In October Father Rafaelle Di Bari, an Italian priest who had lived in Uganda for over 30 years, was killed by the LRA on the road to his home in Kitgum district. His death was followed by a grenade attack by the LRA on Opit Travellers Inn disco hall in Gulu town, which left nine people killed and scores injured. Both attacks appeared to be in response to a renewal of the agreement between Sudan and Uganda in September in which the Sudanese government agreed to force the LRA to move its bases i,oookm from the border. Allied Democratic Front
Abuses in western Uganda by the Allied Democratic Front (ADF), based in the DRC, continued throughout 2000. They included killings, maimings and abductions of civilians, including children, to become soldiers. Although security in Kasese, Kabarole and Bundibugyo districts improved a little, attacks by the ADF spread to Bushenyi, Hoima, Kibaaleand Mbarara districts during the year.
Q In August, seven people were killed in one attack by the ADF in Bushenyi district.
Amnesty International Report 2001
251
UCA
Human rights violations by security forces
Reports of human rights violations by the security forces, including possible extrajudicial executions, torture and detention without trial, continued. There were reports of human rights violations by the army, the Ugandan People's Defence Forces (UPDF), fighting in support of rebel forces in the DRC. Q In April Ugandan troops were reportedly involved in deliberate and arbitrary killings of members of the Lendu ethnic group in Kibali-lturi province, and in other abuses. At least 700 unarmed civilians were reportedly killed when Ugandan and Rwandese troops fought for control of Kisangani injuneand july. In August over 100 children were reportedly taken from the DRC to Jinja in Uganda by government forces for military training. More than 4,000 members of the UPDF were withdrawn from the DRC by September. Political prisoners
Scores of people, including some possible prisoners of conscience, were briefly detained without charge or trial, often in military barracks. The majority of detainees were suspected members or supporters of armed opposition groups.
Q In February, two men were reportedly arrested by the army and held in incommunicado detention in military barracks in Mbarara district for more than three months before being released without charge. S In June Azia Turigye was reportedly arrested by the police in Bushenyi district and handed over to the UPDF in Mbarara. She was held illegally in incommunicado detention at an undisclosed location for two months before being charged with treason and held on remand in Luzira prison.
At least 75 prisoners were pardoned under the Amnesty Act, some of whom had been held without trial on treason charges for more than three years. The Amnesty Commission reported that it had received over 300 applications from prisoners detained in Luzira prison, the majority of whom were held on treason charges. More than 2,000 refugees in Nairobi, Kenya, mainly former members of the LRA, were still waiting for their applications to be processed by the end of 2000.
Torture and killings
There were reports of torture and possible extrajudicial executions by members of the UPDF, members of Local Defence Units (LDU) and the police. Q In August Hafusa Muzamili was reportedly raped and killed by UPDF soldiers from the army headquarters at Bombo, Luwero district. O in September, 18 LDU members reportedly forced more than 15,000 villagers in Kapchorwa district to flee their homes. The LDU members attacked local home guards at the sub-county prison who were holding three LDU members accused of beating Simon Kitiyo, an alleged thief, into a coma. One civilian and two LDU members were injured and three killed.
Freedom of assembly and association
Despite legislative changes in preparation for the referendum on the political system, restrictions to prevent political parties contesting elections remained.
Scores of prisoners of conscience were arrested for short periods after public meetings and peaceful demonstrations organized by political parties, human rights groups and others were broken up by the police, sometimes violently.
Q In May in Mbale district, police officers dispersed a crowd and arrested participants at a seminar on the referendum organized by the Uganda Young Congress, youth wing of the opposition Uganda People's Congress. Q In June, 11 students were arrested in Kampala and charged with "misconduct and alarming the President", which carries a life sentence, after they attempted to disrupt a rally by the President at Makerere University. They were reportedly carrying anti-Movement placards and shouting slogans.
O In September several people were injured when police violently dispersed a meeting in Gulu district to celebrate the fifth anniversary of the Uganda Young Democrats.
Freedom of expression
Journalists continued to face harassment and arbitrary arrest.
Q In February, two journalists, Frank Bagonza Kimome and Joseph Kasimbazi, were detained by the army for a week and subsequently charged with publishing false news after Voice o/foro radio falsely reported that over 30 people had been killed by the ADF. The station retracted the report shortly after it was broadcast. The case had not come to court by the end of 2000. Q The case against the three senior editors of the independent daily The Monitor— Charles Onyango-Obbo, David Ouma Balikowa and Wafula Oguttu — began in September. They had been charged in May 1999 with sedition and publishing a false statement following the publication of a photograph allegedly showing members ofthe UPDF assaulting a woman.
Prison conditions
Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Both civilian and military prisons had high mortality rates from overcrowding, malnutrition, diseases spread by insanitary conditions, and HIV/AIDS. Pre-trial detainees comprised nearly three quarters of the prison population. The average time in pre-trial detention was two to three years. Because of lack of space in juvenile facilities, juveniles were often imprisoned with adults.
Death penalty
At least !0 people were sentenced to death, including one woman. At least 11 members of the UPDF had their sentences quashed on appeal, including two who had been in prison awaiting appeal for more than i 1 years. In July President Museveni commuted the death sentences of 16 prisoners to life imprisonment and pardoned over 500 other prisoners. There were more than 260 prisoners under sentence of death at the end of 2000.
At visit
Al delegates visited Uganda in April. They met journalists, human rights organizations and others.
252
Amnesty International Report 2001	252
