BELGIUM
KINGDOM OF BELGIUM
Head of state: King Albert II Head of government: Guy Verhhofstadt Capital: Brussels Population: 10,2 million Official languages: Dutch, French, German Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
There were further allegations that criminal suspects were ill-treated by law enforcement officers and that asylum-seekers were ill-treated during forcible deportations and in detention centres for aliens. Criminal investigations were opened or continued into many such incidents. By the end of 2000 nobody had been brought to justice in connection with the death in 1998 of an asylum-seekerasphyxiated after gendarmes pressed a cushion over her face during forcible deportation. There was concern that, although a proposed government reform of asylum procedures, announced in November, would introduce welcome and substantial simplification of
45	Amnesty international Report 2001

BEL
the existing system, certain provisions could restrict accessto fair and impartial refiigee determination procedures and might result in the refoulement (forcible repatriation) of people at risk of serious human rights violations. Four Rwandese nationals were charged with war crimes committed during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
Allegations of police Ill-treatment
Many allegations of ill-treatment concerned non-Caucasian Belgian and foreign nationals, often accompanied by reports of racist abuse. In its annual report to parliament, the Permanent Monitoring Committee of Police Services, known as Committee P recorded dozens of complaints of physical ill-treatment, threats, intimidation and verbal abuse by law enforcement officers. It emphasized the importance of improved training. The annual report of the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism, a body reporting to the Prime Minister and parliament, recorded some decrease in the number of complaints of racism and discrimination, including complaints of ill-treatment, by law enforcement officers. However, noting the regular recurrence of such complaints, it also recommended increased training.
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRl) of the Council of Europe published its second report on Belgium in March. It stressed "the urgent need to address the problem of manifestations of racism on the part of some law enforcement officials, as well as the need to provide the means for a better response on the part of the authorities (judicial and non-judicial) to complaints of racist behaviour." It reported recurrent complaints of "discriminatory identity checks", many of which resulted in counter-accusations of resisting arrest or insulting police officers, as well as complaints of "bodily injuries, arbitrary detention and humiliating treatment." It found that a "considerable proportion of complainants are young males of North-African origin."
It indicated that the number of formally registered complaints did not reflect the true extent of the problem "since many members of minority groups are reluctant to resort to a formal complaint, due to lack of confidence in the possibility of redress or fear of further reprisals" and that when complaints were filed there was "evidence to suggest that... the response of the judicial authorities is unsatisfactory." ECRl said that "Itlhe police service appears reluctant to acknowledge any incidence of racist behaviour on the part of its officers. In addition, a serious lack of transparency is reported, as complainants are very rarely informed by the police authorities of the results of the procedures." It concluded that "[tlhis situation contributes to the impression that members of police forces enjoy virtual impunity".
In response the authorities emphasized the introduction of new training programs for law enforcement officials and judges. They also cited the inclusion of a code of professional conduct in legislation setting out basic principles for a new police
service, integrating the existing gendarmerie, judicial and communal police forces, due to become operational in 2001.
Q Charles Otu, a Belgian citizen of Ghanaian origin, alleged that he was repeatedly physically assaulted, threatened and subjected to racist abuse by law enforcement officers in Brussels on 14 October. He had refused to hand over his car-keys, but offered his driving and Identity documents to two gendarmes who approached him while he was sitting in his car at traffic lights. He said that he was dragged out of the car. thrown to the ground, handcuffed, then kicked and hit with truncheons and that later both gendarmes, joined by an officer of the communal police, assaulted him again in a hospital car-park. He claimed that after transfer to a gendarmerie post, two more gendarmes joined in a renewed assault, observed by colleagues, and that one officer kicked him with such force in the abdomen that he defecated Involuntarily. A medical certificate issued within hours of his release later that day recorded cuts and bruises to his face and multiple bruising to his body. The gendarmes said that they had approached Charles Otu because they had seen him commit a traffic offence, that they believed he was drunk and that he had violently resisted them, injuring several officers.
Ill-treatment
During deportation and in detention centres for aliens
There were new allegations of foreign nationals being subjected to excessive use of force and ill-treatment during forcible deportations from Brussels-National airport and in some detention centres for aliens. Delays were reported in some investigations into cases from previous years.
In a positive development, a decree issued by the Minister for Transport in April explicitly banned methods of restraint involving the full or partial obstruction of the airways of people being deported under gendarmerie escort, as well as the use of sedative or other drugs to subdue such people against their wishes. The decree also directed that a doctor or an independent observer should accompany any group of more than four people being forcibly deported under gendarmerie escort. This apparently followed discussions between the Ministry and the Belgian Cockpit Association whose members had, for a three-month period in 1999, refused to carry passengers being forcibly deported because of incidents, including alleged ill-treatment, and security problems arising on board such flights,
Q Kifle Alemayhu, an Ethiopian national, alleged that he was ill-treated by gendarmes on 20 May, during a fourth attempt to deport him from the country against his will. A fifth unsuccessful attempt was made to deport him on 3 June. He lodged a formal complaint of ill-treatment in June, supported by a medical report issued by a doctor attached to Vottem detention centre where he was transferred immediately after the May deportation attempt. It recorded a perforated eardrum and injuries to his wrists, apparently as a result of hand restraints.
46
Amnesty international Report 2001
BEL
Q The results of a criminal investigation into the circumstances surrounding the death of Semira Adamu, a 20-year-0ld Nigerian national who died in September 1998 after gendarmes pressed a cushion over her face during a deportation operation, were still unknown over two years later. The so-called "cushion technique" — a dangerous but authorized method of restraint at that time — allowed gendarmes to press a cushion against the mouth, but not the nose, of a recalcitrant deportee. In 1998, three gendarmes were placed under investigation in connection with possible manslaughter charges. In October A1 sought confirmation from the Minister of Justice of reports that the investigating magistrate had concluded his inquiries in February and that the Public Prosecutor's Office would be submitting the dossier to a court (chambre du conseiD later in October where a judge would decide on any requests for prosecution. In November the Minister indicated that no decision had yet been taken. Q There were allegations that Xhevdet Ferri, an asylum-seeker of Albanian origin, was subjected to medical neglect and cruel and degrading treatment before he died in Steenokkerzeel detention centre 127-bis on 12 October. He participated in a breakout from the prison on that day but, after fellow escapees observed him lying on the ground in pain, they alerted the centre's personnel. It was claimed that when gendarmes arrived to recapture Xhevdet Ferri they found him lying on the ground near a perimeter wall, groaning, but handcuffed him and took him back to the centre in their vehicle, without any medical examination. The gendarmes then allegedly dragged him by his feet from the vehicle, while he cried out that he was ill and in pain. It was also reported that he was locked in the cell with a fellow escapee, again without any medical examination being carried out. His condition rapidly deteriorated and he died in the cell after attempts to resuscitate him failed. A criminal investigation was promptly opened into his death. Q An investigation into a criminal complaint of ill-treatment lodged in November 1998 by Blandine Kaniki, a 20-year-0ld asylum-seeker from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, had still not concluded by the end of 2000. She had alleged that in October 1998 she and other inmates of Steenokkerzeel detention centre 127-bis were subjected to an indiscriminate physical assault by helmeted gendarmes armed with batons and shields and that as a result of that and medical neglect, she suffered a miscarriage. The outcome of an internal investigation opened into the incidents in the detention centre was unknown.
Universal jurisdiction
In June, four Rwandese nationals residing in Belgium were committed for trial before the Brussels Court of Assizes, accused of committing war crimes in the Butare region of Rwanda in the context of the 1994 genocide. The trial was expected to take place in 2001.
Legislation enacted in 1993 and 1999 made specific provision for Belgian courts to exercise universal jurisdiction over war crimes in international and non-international armed conflict, genocide and crimes
against humanity, including torture. Criminal proceedings were reportedly under way, and were at various stages of investigation, into complaints lodged against a number of leaders and prominent members of past and present administrations of various foreign states, including Cambodia, Chile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iran, Morocco and Rwanda.
Al country reports and visit
Reports
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Belgium (Al Index: EUR 01/003/2000)
•	Belgium: The death of Semira Adamu - Justice still awaited (Al Index: EUR 14/003/2000)
•	Belgium: The death of Xhevdet Ferri (Al Index: EUR 14/004/2000)
Visit
An Al delegate visited Belgium in January to conduct research into alleged ill-treatment
