JAM
JAMAICA
JAMAICA
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by Howard Felix Cooke
Head of government: Percival James Patterson
Capital: Kingston
Population: 2,5 million
Official language: English
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatu res: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court
Reports of police brutality and excessive use of force continued. At least 140 people were killed by the police, often in disputed circumstances. At least 45 people were on death row. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (the final court of appeal for Jamaica) commuted the death sentences of six prisoners in a ruling that will also be binding on many other nations using the death penalty in the English-speaking Caribbean.
Background
The economic situation remained dire with large sections of society living below the poverty level, and economic development continued to be hindered by the highlevel of external debt. Jamaican society continued to suffer from an extremely high level of violence. More than 850 people were reportedly murdered in 2000, including 12 police officers.
In May, the Court of Appeal ruled that the indefinite detention of children at the Governor General's pleasure was unconstitutional.
A legal aid scheme for people unable to pay for legal counsel was established, and police officers were given training in the legal aid regulations, including the rights of all detained or arrested people to legal aid and representation.
Brutality by the security forces
There were at least 140 killings by the security forces, especially the police, many of which resulted in disturbances and tension in communities. There were several apparent extrajudicial executions.
In August the government of the United Kingdom withheld an export licence for the sale of 500 hand guns to the Jamaican police, citing concern about human rights violations by the police, including the very high incidence of fatal police shootings. The government of the USA also withheld the transfer of equipment, citing similar concerns. Shootings
In several cases, witnesses and relatives of victims of police shootings were reportedly subjected to intimidation and death threats. In September, following protests about escalating crime levels, the Prime
Minister established a new police anti-crime unit. By November there were several reports that the unit had committed extrajudicial executions, Q On 19 September, Williams Richards, a criminal suspect, was shot and killed in Kingston by members of the police unit, in an apparent extrajudicial execution. When Al delegates visited the site several hours after the shooting, forensic evidence had been disturbed and removed. Family members were subsequently denied permission to view the body. The Bureau of Special Investigations (BSD stated that it had initiated an investigation, but there had been no ruling on whether charges should be filed at the end of 2000,
Torture/ill-treatment
Arbitrary and illegal arrests, searches and detention were reported, often in the context of curfews which continued to be imposed in some areas. Ill-treatment in police custody remained widespread and incidents of torture were documented. Conditions in police custody remained harsh and in many cases amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Access to medical attention, relatives and legal aid was frequently denied. In August, government officials told Al that children were no longer being detained in police lockups, However, in September, Al interviewed a 17-year-old in Hunts Bay police lock-up. There were a number of reported deaths in police custody Q In November, a man was reportedly arbitrarily detained and tortured for a week. During this time he was subjected to a mock execution, was continually kept in handcuffs and was beaten until his eardrums burst. Prisons
In February, soldiers replaced the majority of prison officers, who were removed and indicted after strike action in protest at the reappointment of the Commissioner of Corrections, The Commissioner of Corrections recommended the release of prisoners serving sentences of six months or less to relieve severe overcrowding. The authorities failed to prevent violence between inmates and at least 13 prisoners were killed. One was reportedly beheaded by fellow prisoners,
Q in May, a mass beating of a reported 300 prisoners over several days by soldiers and prison wardens in St Catherine's District Prison resulted in injuries including hand, ribs, feet and skull fractures, and broken teeth. Reports indicated that the prisoners were beaten with batons and baseball bats, rifles and irons and that some were strangled with cord and rubber belts. At least 100 injured prisoners were reportedly denied medical attention until the Head of Medical Services in the prison publicly condemned the incident. In September, he was transferred to another prison by the Commissioner of Corrections, who cited concerns for his safety as justification, in June, the authorities established a Commission of Inquiry whose terms of reference included investigating the May events. There were reports of retaliatory beatings against at least three prisoners who testified at the Inquiry, None of the officials allegedly involved were removed from duty. In
140
Amnesty International Report 2001
JAP
September, the Commissioner of Corrections told Al that 80 prison personnel had since been transferred. The Commission had not reported its findings at the end of 2000.
Investigations
By September, the BSl had completed 86 investigations into pohce shootings since its inception in 1999. In 10 cases, there were subsequent rulings that police officers involved in shootings should face criminal charges.
In March the Director of Public Prosecutions declined to file charges against police or army officers involved in the killing of Michael Gayle in August 1999. on the grounds that the evidence failed to identify the individuals responsible. The Minister for National Security and Justice ordered that the investigation be reopened. No charges had been filed by the end of 2000,
In February, the Prime Minister appointed a Commission of Inquiry to investigate the forced removal and ill-treatment of homeless people in Montego Bay in July 1999 and ordered the reopening of police investigations. In May a police officer was granted immunity from prosecution in exchange for his testimony before the Commission of Inquiry. The Commission's recommendations, published in September, included compensation for 18 of the victims and the amendment of legislation regulating Commissions of Inquiry to strengthen their powers. The Commission identified six police officers involved in the removal but was unable to identify other officials. The findings omitted reference to evidence that two homeless people had disappeared, presumed dead, after the incident. By the end of the year compensation had not been paid and no criminal charges had been filed.
No charges had been brought at the end of 2000 against any of those involved in the 1997 killings of 16 inmates in St Catherine's District Prison. The Commissioner of Corrections informed AI that no disciplinary action had been taken against any prison officers in connection with this event.
Death penalty
At least 45 prisoners remained on death row and the courts continued to impose death sentences.
In September, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC) in the United Kingdom - the final court of appeal for Jamaica - commuted the death sentences of six prisoners in the case of Neville Lewis and others. The JCPC ruled that the procedures for deciding whether prisoners should be granted clemency should be opened to legal scrutiny; that executions cannot occur while the prisoner has an appeal pending before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights; and that the issue of whether prison conditions have a bearing upon executions being carried out should be investigated further. The decision will be binding on other Caribbean stales that have the JCPC as their final court of appeal.
Threats to human rights defenders
Human rights defenders were threatened, Q In August attorney Dahlia Allen fled the country after receiving telephone death threats. She had
previously represented homeless people ill-treated by the police in Montego Bay and prisoners beaten in May at St Catherine's District Prison. Dahlia Allen also alleged that her telephone had been tapped. The Prime Minister strongly refuted these allegations in a meeting with AI in September.
Q In May and June, two members of the organization Jamaicans for Justice received death threats in a series of anonymous phone calls.
Al country report and visits Report
• Jamaica: The killing of Michael Gayle-authorities yet to hold police and army officers accountable (Al Index: AMR 38/002/2000) Visits
Al visited Jamaica in February and August to conduct research. In September Al's Secretary General held talks with the Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet, the Commissioner of Police, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Commissioner of Corrections. Al's Secretary General visited several places of detention, including death row.
