GUATEMALA
REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
Head of state and government: Alfonso Portillo
(replaced AlvaroArzu Irigoyen in January)
Capital: Guatemala City
Population: 11.2 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights; Optional Protocol tothe UN Children's
Convention on the involvement of children in armed
conflict; Optional Protocol tothe UN Women's
Convention; Inter-American Convention on Forced
Disappearance of Persons
Implementation of the 1996 Peace Accords continued to be slow/. The recommendations of two recent human rights reports were not acted on and impunity continued to prevail for most human rights violations perpetrated during the civil conflict. Those attempting to investigate and bring to justice the perpetrators continued to face legal obstructions, harassment, intimidation and an escalating level of attacks, including several apparent "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. Several demonstrators protesting over social and economic issues were killed. Lynchings of criminal suspects increased, allegedly provoked on occasion by local leaders. The death penalty continued to be imposed: two prisoners were executed by botched lethal injections.
Background
In January Alfonso Portillo assumed the presidency and promised that the Peace Accords, which formally ended Guatemala's civil conflict in 1996, would become state policy. He pledged to implement the recommendations of the 1998 report of the Guatemalan church's Recuperation of the Historical Memory (REMHI) project, and of the UN-sponsored Historical Clarification Commission (CEH) which reported in 1999. He stated that shadowy "paraller structures interfering with the administration of justice would be dismantled and that the murder of Bishop Juan José Gerardi would be clarified within six months. Bishop Gerardi, the head of the Archbishop's Human Rights Office (ODHAG) and leader of the REMHI project, was murdered in April 1998, just two days after the official presentation of REM Hi's report.
President Portillo failed to fulfil these promises, and observers noted the increasing power of General Efrain Ríos Montt, former President, founder of President Portillo's political party, and now President of Congress. General Ríos Montt was Head of State and Commander of the Armed Forces during a period when the army killed tens of thousands of indigenous peasants, apparently assisted by unofficial security units and by civil patrols. These patrols had acted as auxiliaries to the
military during the conflict and were officially disbanded after the Accords, but were allegedly operating again.
The government did not implement the CEH's recommendation to establish a program to exhume the bodies of those killed in the conflict. Similarly, little progress was made in establishing a witness protection program. The government also failed to implement CEH recommendations to establish special commissions to assess the conduct of military officials during the conflict, and to establish the fate of the "disappeared", including an estimated 444 children.
It was announced that the Presidential Chiefs of Staff Unit (EMP), frequently implicated in abuses including Bishop Gerardi's murder, was to be disbanded. However, EMP staff were to be "recycled" into other government security bodies. A new unit announced in September, mandated to prevent threats to internal security and combat crime, was challenged by the Constitutional Court as it had been created by decree rather than Congressional vote, and would report to the Minister of the Interior, rather than to Congress. The government rescinded the decree and proposed a new unit of special military police to assist the civil police. A similar unit had been disbanded following the Peace Accords.
In May, a database of 650,428 names, apparently compiled by military intelligence during the 1980s, was made public by a government official. Guatemalan analysts believed the coded number against each name contained information on their fate.
Allegations of government incompetence and corruption created repeated rumours of an impending coup and heightened tensions. In April protests in the capital over proposed public transport price rises resulted in four deaths, including that of a prominent journalist. The discovery that General Ríos Montt and members of his party had altered a liquor tax law after passage by Congress sparked further demonstrations later in the year. One demonstrator was killed.
Efforts to combat impunity
Efforts to combat impunity in individual cases or with respect to specific past massacres made very slow progress through the courts.
Depositions were finally taken in March 2000 from two former special forces soldiers (kaibiles) who testified in exchange for safe passage abroad regarding the 1982 massacre at Dos Erres, El Petén, when the army killed more than 350 indigenous villagers. Almost immediately, the government announced 'friendly settlements" with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in several cases, including Dos Erres. The settlements involved some compensation for the survivors, and official recognition that government forces had been responsible, but no prospect of legal proceedings. They were not accepted by all the families concerned. The military objected to arrest orders issued against a number of soldiers in connection with the massacre, arguing that the pre-trial testimony of the former iia/Mes violated the presumption of innocence and due process. By the end of 2000. the soldiers had not been arrested.
Amnesty International Report 2001
113
GUA
In a new departure, in May the Centre for Legal Action in Human Rights (CALDH) assisted survivors from 10 massacres to file genocide charges before the Guatemalan courts against former Head of State General Romeo Lucas Garcia (1978-1982) and several officials from his administration. The CEH had concluded that genocide had been committed against indigenous peoples in four specific areas.
A suit filed before the Spanish High Court in December 1999 by the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation, based on the concept of universal jurisdiction, charged a number of former officials, including General Ríos Montt. with human rights crimes including genocide. The suit was joined by several individual victims, survivors and non-governmental organizations. In December the High Court ruled that it did not currently havejurisdictiontojudge the crimes. The plaintiffs immediately appealed against the decision; judgment on their appeal was pending at the end of the year, Q In August, two men with petty criminal records charged with the May 1999 kidnapping and murder of businessman Edgar Ordonez Porta were acquitted. The court found that the Public Ministry had allowed an unofficial "parallel" agency to carry out its own "investigation". Proceedings were left open against military officials charged by relatives with carrying out and covering up the murder.
Bishop Gerardi's murder
Obstructions continued in the case of Bishop Gerardi, who was murdered in 1998, In May, two members of the ODHAG investigating team received death threats after the case judge, who has herself received threats and been followed, ruled that three high-ranking military officers should stand trial for the murder, along with the priest who shared Bishop Gerardi's residence, and their housekeeper. By the end of 2000, no date had been set for the trial. Earlier, several others involved in the case were forced to flee the country after threats.
In October, a long-promised report on the case was made public by President Portillo, but provided no new information.
Attacks on human rights defenders
Human rights defenders and journalists were subjected to an escalating wave of abuses. Victims included members of the Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology Association, active in exhuming mass graves; the Students Association of the state University of San Carlos; members of a shanty-town dwellers' association; indigenous and women's rights activists; staff and directors of the news agency CERIGUA which regularly covers human rights issues; staff of human rights organizations including the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation; and officials of the Human Rights Procurator's Office.
Q In one typical incident in August, Celso Balán, a CALDH worker, was detained, robbed, drugged and left unconscious in Chimaltenango by two men. They appeared to be paramilitaries acting under the orders of those responsible for the 1982 army massacre in . Chipastor, San Martin Jilotepeque, Chimaltenango,
currently under investigation by CALDH, Celso Balan required treatment for neurological, physical, psychological and emotional damage. Q In September, heavily armed men raided offices shared by two human rights groups: Families of the Detained and "Disappeared" of Guatemala, FAMDEGUA, and HljOS, children of the "disappeared" who want their parents' fate clarified. The armed men forced their victims to the floor, held pistols to their heads, and threatened to kill them, Male victims were forced to strip. Office equipment and case records, including some concerning Dos Erres, were stolen.
'Disappeared' children and illegal adoptions
In August an ODHAG study reported that it had located eight children out of 86 "disappeared" children's cases it had investigated. It stated that Guatemala's lucrative trade in illegal adoptions began during the conflict, when military or paramilitary families took in children found wandering after massacres.
People who tried to investigate illegal adoptions faced threats and intimidation. Staff of a human rights and economic migrants organization on the Guatemalan-Mexican borderwere threatened, apparently because they provided information regarding illegal transfers of children across the border to the UN Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. Q University professor Mayra Angelina Gutiérrez, missing since April, was reportedly targeted because she submitted information about illegal adoptions to the Special Rappo'rteur. Her name was found on the military database released in May, supporting the hypothesis that her "disappearance" was politically motivated.
Women and sexual minorities
In October, Guatemalan women's rights activists reported the failure to implement Peace Accord provisions regarding women to the UN Security Council,
Q In June and July, two transvestite sex workers were killed in Guatemala City. Guatemalan gay groups have alleged the existence of an orchestrated program of "social cleansing" carried out with police acquiescence, support, and possible direct involvement.
Death penalty
Concern over crime rates contributed to widespread support for the judicial death penalty. By the end of 2000 about 40 people were under sentence of death. In May Congress annulled legislation providing for executive clemency, a right recognized under international law. However, President Portillo considered clemency appeals already filed, and in May granted clemency to a mentally disturbed indigenous man, deemed fit to stand trial after psychological testing carried out in Spanish, which he did not speak, and then convicted at a trial also held in Spanish. In November, the Constitutional Court revoked five death sentences on the grounds that according to the Guatemalan Constitution, international law prevailed over national law in human rights matters.
114
Amnesty International Report 2001
GUI
Q Tomás Cerrate Hernández and Luis Amiicar Cetino Pérez were convicted in 1998 of the kidnapping and murder of a wealthy woman. They were executed by lethal injection in June 2000, and the executions were televised. Tomás Cerrate Hernández took seven minutes to die and Luis Amiicar Cetino Pérez eight to nine minutes, after the machine malfunctioned. O Injanuary, five lawyers who appealed against death sentences passed on alleged kidnappers received death threats, apparently from death penalty supporters. Fearful for their lives, the lawyers resigned.
Al country reports and visits
Reports
•	Guatemala: Women's rights defender missing -Mayra Angelina Gutiérrez {Al Index: AMR 34/016/2000)
•	Guatemala: Breaking the wall ofimpunity-Prosecution forcrimes against humanity(AI Index: AMR34/020/2000)
•	Guatemala: Further executions loom (Al Index: AMR 34/022/2000)
•	Guatemala: HIJOS-Justice for the new generation (Al Index: AMR 34/042/2000)
Visits
An Al research delegation visited Guatemala in April and May and helped make publictheCALDH genocide suit. Al's Guatemala Trial Observers Project monitored proceedings related to the killing of Edgar Ordóñez Porta and thel982 massacres at Dos Erres and Tululché, ElQuiché.
