ERITREA
ERITREA
Head of state and government: IssayasAfewerki
Capital: Asmara
Population: 3.8 million
Official languages: English, Arabic, Tigrinya
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: African Charter
on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
A cease-fire in June followed by a peace treaty in December ended the border war with Ethiopia. The UN began to supervise the return to Eritrea of southern areas captured by Ethiopia in heavy new fighting in May. Eritrean troops pulled out of Ethiopian areas they had occupied in May 1998. Each side accused the otherof human rights abuses during these occupations, but many of the allegations were difficult to substantiate. Eritrea interned many Ethiopian nationals in make-shift camps. There were reports of detentions and extrajudicial executions of political opponents, which were difficult to verify.
Background
Thewarwith Ethiopia
The border war with Ethiopia resumed in May after a year's tense confrontation along the i,ooo-kilometre border. Both sides had continued to expand their forces and to buy weapons. Eritrea continued to conscript nationals for military service, allegedly recruiting some children under i8 years old. Some people tried to evade military service by fleeing the country and several Jehovah's Witnesses were detained when they refused to serve in the armed forces. There was no provision for conscientious objection.
In May Ethiopia attacked and captured large parts of southwestern Eritrea, forcing Eritrean troops out of areas they had occupied since the war began in May 1998. The UN Security Council called for a cease-fire and imposed an arms embargo on both sides. After three weeks of fighting with heavy casualties, a ceasefire was signed in June under the auspices of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). Ethiopian troops withdrew to a buffer zone 25 kilometres from the border. Some 60,000 Eritrean civilians and hundreds of soldiers had fled to Sudan and about 370,000 civilians were internally displaced by the fighting. Despite mutual recriminations and accusations, the cease-fire held and there was no further fighting. Refugees and internally displaced civilians began to return. Almost half the population was at risk of famine.
A formal peace treaty was signed in December in Algeria in the presence of the UN Secretary-General. This provided for UN supervision of the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops and temporary UN administration of the buffer zone, neutral demarcation of the border, and examination of claims by both sides for compensation. The UN Secretary-General promised international help to both sides to recover from the destruction caused by the conflict. In December the UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) began deploying troops and human rights observers into the Ethiopian-occupied zone.
Ratification of the Geneva Conventions
Eritrea finally signed the Geneva Conventions in July and allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to prisoners of war. in December an exchange of prisoners of war and civilian internees began under the auspices of the ICRC, which had previously registered 2,600 Eritrean prisoners of war in Ethiopia and 1,000 Ethiopian prisoners of war in Eritrea.
Constitutional process
In October the National Assembly announced that elections would be held in December 2001 and that an Assembly Committee would draft regulations for the formation of political parties. The only permitted party was the ruling People's Front for Democracy and Justice. Shortly before this announcement, a group of Eritrean intellectuals, mostly living abroad and not attached to opposition groups, had called on the government for more democracy, the abolition of the Special Court, and the fair trial or release of detainees.
Internal armed opposition
Both Eritrea and Ethiopia continued to support opposition groups, both political and armed, in the other country. Information on the activities in Eritrea of the Ethiopian-supported Alliance of National Eritrean Forces, which included the Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary Council and the Sudan-supported Eritrean Islamic Salvation Movement, was difficult to obtain. Allegations by these groups and by the Ethiopian government of killings, torture and detentions of their supporters were impossible to verify with independent evidence.
Amnesty International Report 2001
97
ETH
Ethiopian nationals in Eritrea
Immediately after the outbreak of fighting in May. the security forces interned thousands of Ethiopians throughout Eritrea. Some 3,000 were interned in makeshift camps near Asmara without adequate provision of food, shelter, water, medical facilities or hygiene. Following international criticism, the authorities improved conditions, allowed access and after a few weeks released most of the internees. Others were detained on suspicion of helping the Ethiopian attacks and many were still held without charge or trial throughout 2000. The authorities claimed that others were held for their own protection in displacement camps, having been evacuated during the fighting.
The Ethiopian government's claims of widespread killings, torture, detentions and forcible expulsions of Ethiopian nationals in Eritrea were difficult to verify. Some members of the Kunama ethnic group (or nationality), for example, were allegedly killed for supporting the Ethiopian military advance. Some abuses did occur, and there were incidents of Eritrean civilians targeting Ethiopians for reprisals after the Ethiopian attacks, leading to some deaths reported in Barentu in May. But there was no evidence of any official government policy of systematic abuses or forcible expulsion. Hundreds of destitute Ethiopians voluntarily returned to Ethiopia in November and December under ICRC auspices.
Detention without trial
There were continuing allegations that the authorities held many Eritreans, as well as thousands of Ethiopian nationals, without charge or trial for political reasons, particularly for suspected links with armed Eritrean opposition groups. "Disappearances" and cases of incommunicado detention were reported in 2000, as they had been in previous years, but were denied by the government. Hundreds of people remained in detention throughout 2000 for possible trial by the Special Court, where international fair trial standards are not followed. Some Special Court detainees were released in early 2000 after several years in detention without having been charged or tried.
In October, six journalists from the new private media were arrested, allegedly on account of articles critical of the government- Four were released after a few days but the other two were detained for longer periods. The government said the arrests were connected to national service requirements.
Updates
As many as 100 Eritrean officials of the former Ethiopian government in Eritrea continued to serve prison sentences, imposed without fair trial, for human rights abuses.
There were conflicting reports about whether some "disappeared" members of the Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary Council abducted from Sudan in 1992 might still be alive in detention. The government had never satisfactorily accounted for them.
