TURKMENISTAN
TURKMENISTAN
Head of state and government: Saparmurad Niyazov
Capital: Ashga bat
Population: 4.4 million
Official language:Turkmen
Death penalty: abolition ist forall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Second Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, aiming at the abolition ofthe death
penalty__
A prominent opposition activist was sentenced to imprisonment. Members of unregistered religious denominations and their families continued to report frequent harassment by the authorities, including deportation and internal exile. There was concern for the health of political prisoners.
Prisoner of conscience
In February Nurberdi Nurmamedov, co-chair of the opposition movement Agzybirlikand one of the few opposition figures to openly criticize President Niyazov's policies, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment. At the same trial Nurberdi Nurmamedov's 25-year-old son, Murad Nurmamedov, was sentenced to a suspended two-year prison sentence and confined to live in Ashgabat for five years. Despite an official invitation to send trial observers, representatives of foreign embassies and of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) were refused access to the court. Al believes that the charges of "hooliganism" brought against Nurberdi Nurmamedov were fabricated, that he was imprisoned for his peaceful opposition activities, and that his son was put on trial in order to put pressure on him.
Appeals against their sentences were turned down in March. The two lawyers representing Nurberdi Nurmamedov at the appeal reportedly left the courtroom before the end of the hearing in protest at violations of international fair trial standards. At the end of March Nurberdi Nurmamedov was reportedly forced to publicly confess his guilt on television. In September unofficial sources reported that Nurberdi Nurmamedov had been transferred from Turkmenbashi maximum security prison to a prison near Kyzylkaya in the south of Turkmenistan. As a result of poor prison conditions his health had apparently deteriorated sharply and he was reported to be suffering from an acute stomach ulcer. Nurberdi Nurmamedov was released on 23 December under a presidential amnesty. Earlier in December he reportedly had to repent on state television and swear an oath of loyalty to President Niyazov.
Political prisoners
Following an official visit in May, the OSCE Chairman-in-Office said she was deeply disappointed at President
250
Niyazov's unwillingness to release political prisoners as requested by the OSCE.
Q There was concern that the lives of political prisoners Mukhametkuli Aymuradov and Pirimkuli Tangrykuliev were in danger following reports that their health had deteriorated sharply as a result of poor prison conditions and the absence of medical care. According to reports. Pirimkuli Tangrykuliev was beaten repeatedly by prison guards. He was released under the December presidential amnesty. He was reportedly forced to repent on state television and swear an oath of loyalty to President Niyazov.
Repression of religious minorities
Human rights violations by law enforcement officials against religious believers continued to be reported. Peaceful religious meetings in private homes were broken up and the participants fined or detained for short periods; religious materials were confiscated and places of worship destroyed; religious believers were physically and verbally abused and some were imprisoned because of their religion. A number of foreign missionaries were deported.
Internal exile
Some religious activists had their freedom of movement within Turkmenistan restricted through the use of residence permits.
Q Artygul Atakova, the wife of Shagildy Atakov, and their five children were deported to the village of Kaakhka in February and put under "village arrest". Shagildy Atakov, an ethnic Turkmen member of a Baptist congregation in Turkmenbashi, continued to serve a four-year prison sentence in a corrective labour camp- His supporters believed that the true reason for his imprisonment was his religious affiliation. Shagildy Atakov's brother, Chariyar, was administratively detained for 15 days; the reason for his detention was not clear. In February a younger brother of Shagildy Atakov was found hanged. The circumstances surrounding his death remained unclear. Q In February, 72-year-old Khodzha Akhmed Orazgylych, a Muslim cleric, was arrested and charged with "swindling". In a radio interview, he had reportedly criticized an invitation by President Niyazov at the end of 1999 for children to celebrate the new year by dancing around a Christmas tree chanting a prayer to the President. Around a month later Khodzha Akhmed Orazgylych was said to have been among a group of prisoners taken to meet President Niyazov, The cleric reportedly asked for forgiveness, and President Niyazov replaced a possible prison term with internal exile in a village in Khodzha Akhmed Orazgylych's home region.
Conscientious objectors
Information came to light that conscientious objectors Roman Sidelnikov, Oleg Voronin and Roman Karimov had been released under a presidential amnesty in 1999, However, conscientious objectors to military service continued to be sentenced to prison terms.
Amnesty International Report 2001	250
UCA
Q Two Jehovah's Witnesses were imprisoned for their conscientious objection to military service. Nuryagdy Gairov was serving a one-year prison sentence, imposed in January, In theTedzhen corrective labour colony. He reportedly did not benefit from the 1999 amnesty because he refused to swear the oath of allegiance to President Niyazov. Igor Nazarov, who was also detained in theTedzhen corrective labour colony, was serving a second prison term imposed in Ma'rch; he had previously been sentenced to a suspended two-year term.
At country report
• Turkmenistan: Harassmentand imprisonment of religious believers (Al Index: EUR 61 /007/2000)
