ZIMBABWE
REPUBLICOFZIMBABWE
Head of state and government: Robert Mugabe
Capital: Harare
Population: 11.6 million
Official language: English
Death penalty: retentionist
The election campaign leading uptoJune parliamentary elections saw what appeared to be a deliberate and well-thought-out plan of systematic human rights violations by forces allied to the government. Violations included more than 30 political killings and widespread torture and ill-treatment throughout the country. Violations continued after the elections, albeit on a smaller scale. In an apparent attempt to intimidate the population, a strong military presence was deployed immediately after the elections in those areas where the opposition had won a substantial number of votes. Incidents of torture, ill-treatment and political killings continued throughout the year, particularly in the run-up to two parliamentary by-elections.
Background
The Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), which had ruled Zimbabwe since independence in 1980 without any serious challenge under a Constitution negotiated in the United Kingdom at the time of independence, remained in power. A government-dominated constitutional commission had presented a draft new constitution to the President in November 1999. The National Constitutional Assembly, consisting of most of Zimbabwe's non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and opposition parties, refused to participate in the commission and campaigned against its recommendations.
The government put forward a slightly amended version of the proposal from the constitutional commission for a referendum in February. The campaign for the referendum was marked by some violence against voter education officials and those campaigning
for a "no" vote, some of whom were arrested. However, the proposal was rejected in the referendum. This was the first time ZANU-PF had been defeated in a popular vote since independence. Shortly after the referendum, a violent campaign against real or suspected opponents of the government started. Government supporters and people paid by ZANU-PF invaded farms and harassed supposed government opponents. By the end of March the situation had degenerated into political violence and killings which continued until the elections. The opposition was involved in some of the violence, but the vast majority of human rights violations were committed by ZANU-PF supporters. As a result, most international observers declared that the elections were not free and fair. The main opposition party, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), challenged the election results in 38 constituencies. The cases were still pending at the end of the year.
Political killings
More than 30 people were killed during the election campaign; most were reported to be supporters of opposition parties. There were allegations that the state intelligence police, the Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO), was involved in several of the killings. Q On 15 April, two MDC activists, Tichaona Chiminya and Talent Mabika, were killed when a petrol bomb was thrown into their car Police in the area reportedly failed to take appropriate action, even though they were given the names of two suspects, believed to be members of the CIO.
Q On 15 April, David Stevens, a commercial farmer in the Macheke area and MDC supporter, was abducted from his farm and killed, allegedly by ZANU-PF supporters. A witness, who rushed to the local police station to report the abduction, reported that he was himself abducted from inside the police station and taken to the office of the local "war veterans" in Murehwa where he and David Stevens were severely beaten. They were then driven away, taken out of the car, and forced to march up a hill. The witness explained that, after they complained that they could walk no further, they started walking back towards the car. On their way back to the car, the captors shot David Stevens, in the presence of the witness, but left the witness after one of the captors pleaded for his life.
Torture/ill-treatment
At the end of April reports began to emerge that torture centres were operating in different parts of the country in which ZANU-PF supporters, particularly the "war veterans", were torturing actual or suspected supporters of the opposition with impunity.
One such centre was in a doctor's surgery in the Budiriro suburb of Harare, where a large number of people were reportedly tortured in the first two weeks of May.
Q On 13 May a man was abducted 50 metres from the surgery as he was returning home from work by five people, all allegedly ZANU-PF supporters. He said the attackers beat and kicked him and squeezed his testicles. He alleged that inside the surgery he was
Amnesty International Report 2001
273
ZIM
beaten until his mouth and nose bled, deprived of sleep for three days, subjected to death threats, and had his head forced into a toilet while his captors were urinating in it. The injuries sustained were clearly visible to Al delegates who met him more than two weeks after his release. He was believed to have been abducted because his brother was the chair of a local branch of MDC's youth league. Q On 8 May an MDC youth league activist was abducted from a nearby shopping centre and taken to the surgery. He alleged that groups of six people took turns to torture him and that some 90 people were involved. He reported that the torture Included electric shocks applied to his armpits and genital area, beatings on the soles of his feet, and piercing of the skin with bottletops. Forensic experts confirmed that his physical scars were consistent with his allegations.
Witnesses stated that they informed the police of the activities at the surgery and that the police freed some of the victims upon request, but it was only when a victim was killed while fleeing from the surgery on 17 May that the police moved in and arrested those torturing people at the surgery. The surgery was owned by a leader of the "war veterans" who was elected to parliament in June. To AI's knowledge he had not been questioned about the use of his surgery as a torture centre by the end of the year.
The torture centres appeared to have closed down after the elections. However, reports of beatings and threats continued throughout the year, although they appeared to be more targeted and to be focused around the by-elections.
Q On 17 October, Justin Mutendadzamera, a recently elected MDC member of parliament, and his wife were beaten at their home, allegedly by police officers who accused him of having instigated protests against food prices.
Prior to the June elections, groups, mostly made up of young people, travelled from village to village identifying opposition party supporters and beating them or forcing them to attend pungwes (party rallies) for ZANU-PF where they were made to chant slogans and denounce the opposition. Q On 3 April, alleged ZANU-PF supporters attacked game warden Farai Sandikonda near Mvurwi, breaking his arm and cutting his head.
Q On 10 April, ZANU-PF youth league members in the Mount Darwin area publicly stripped and assaulted six farm workers, four men and two women, and made them dance and sing ZANU-PF songs. Army involvement
During July the army was actively involved in intimidating people in many of the areas where the opposition had made a strong showing in the elections. There were reports of random beatings in the streets and in beer houses. There were numerous reports of people in the suburbs of Harare and Kwekwe being assaulted by soldiers in what appeared to be targeted reprisals for voting for opposition parties.
Breakdown in the rule of law
The independence of the judiciary was under constant threat during the year. There were a number of strong
verbal attacks on the judiciary in general as well as on individual judges. These culminated on 24 November in an invasion of the Supreme Court by a group of "war veterans" who disrupted the court hearing and threatened to kill thejudges.
The government complied with court rulings in a selective way during the year. There was no evidence that police took any action to comply with a 30 March Supreme Court order to investigate the abduction and torture of two journalists in January 1999. Court rulings ordering the police to evict those who invaded farms were routinely ignored. The government did not act to comply with court rulings which declared their land reform scheme unconstitutional. In some cases the authorities openly stated that they would not comply with court decisions. For example, the police commissioner publicly stated that his force would not act in what he called "political matters", regardless of court rulings.
Internally displaced people
During the course of the election campaign more than 10,000 people fled the campaign of violence and intimidation in the countryside to seek refuge in the cities.
In May and June the Harare headquarters of opposition parties, such as the MDC and the United Parties, provided shelter for injured party members arriving in large numbers from the countryside. In addition, people with no apparent party affiliation fled the countryside following the threats and violence.
Freedom of expression and human rights defenders
Journalists were prevented from carrying out their work in a number of ways. They were arrested, beaten and threatened, A request from the Zimbabwe Union of Journalists for police protection of journalists travelling into dangerous areas in April received no response.
Zimbabwe's strong NGO community was under constant threat. Any criticism of government policy was perceived as opposition activity, NGO members and activists were threatened with human rights violations, including death and torture. Voter education workers, many of whom were drawn from human rights organizations, were targeted. On numerous occasions they had their T-shirts torn off and were chased away, especially in the Mashonaland provinces, but also in rural areas of the rest of the country.
NGOs reported that individuals, who they suspected were from the CIO, visited their headquarters, and that their telephone calls and e-mail were regularly tapped. Q On 30 March human rights activist Mr Mahoso, a headmaster, was assaulted by armed men, near Machete, during a school function. He was beaten with stones, sticks, boots and fists. The armed men also berated school staff, pupils, parents and guests for neglecting their national duty by not invading farms, Q Pius Ncube, the Roman Catholic Archbishop in Bulawayo, reportedly i^eceived several death threats during the year. In his post-election speech, broadcast on national television, the President named
274
Amnesty International Report 2001	274
ZIM
Archbishop Ncube as one of the key figures contributing to the opposition vote-
Freedom of assembly and association
Throughout the country, political meetings were violently disrupted. The MDC called off ail their rallies in the last week of campaigning ahead of the by-election in Marondera in November, after several of their memb,ers and supporters had been severely injured.
People who were unable to produce the correct parry membership card were beaten- When prominent politicians were holding rallies people were forced to participate. People who refused were in many instances beaten.
Impunity
Impunity for human rights violations remained an entrenched problem. Wide-ranging amnesties had been granted for human rights violations committed during the war of independence and after large-scale atrocities in Matabeleland in the 1980s. In February, a Supreme Court order granted two human rights organizations the right to sue the President's office to obtain the release of two official reports produced on the atrocities in Matabeleland in the 1980s. The ruling stated that "no impunity was accorded to the office of the President". At the end of the year the two human rights organizations were preparing an application to the Supreme Court to secure the publication of the reports.
Amnesty for politically motived crimes
On 6 October President Mugabe announced a clemency order granting amnesty for all politically motivated crimes committed between 1 January and 31 July, during the two campaign periods and immediately after the elections. Although some offences, such as murder, rape and possession of arms, were excluded from the amnesty, other serious human rights violations, such as torture and abductions, were not.
Al country reports and visits
Reports
•	Zimbabwe: Constitutional reform - an opportunity to strengthen human rights protection (Al Index: AFR 46/001/2000)
•	Zimbabwe: Open letterto President Mugabe on the 20th Anniversary of Independence (Al Index: AFR 46/015/2000)
•	Zimbabwe: A human rights brief for election observers (Al Index: AFR 46/012/2000)
•	Zimbabwe:Ahuman rights agenda for political parties (Al Index: AFR 46/018/2000)
•	Zimbabwe: Terror tactics in the run-up to parliamentaryelections(Al Index: AFR 46/014/2000)
Visits
Al delegates visited Zimbabwe in February, May and June.
Amnesty International Report 2001	275
i	Vf.- >	-
I..	r t.,i
I • -»i




,4 -	8
Al REPORT 200
m
