ALBANIA
republic of albania
Head of state: Rexhep Meidani
Head of government: IlirMeta
Capita I: Tirana
Population: 3.1 million
Official languages: Albanian
Death penalty: abolitionistfor ordinary crimes only
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Protocol No. 5 to
the European Convention on Human Rights concerning
the abolition of the death penalty
Scores of people were ill-treated and tortured by police. Some were severely injured. Victims of police ill-treatment included both criminal suspects and opposition supporters. Several journalists were detained and beaten by police. More than 7,000 opposition supporters were arrested and detained in November and December in connection with sometimes violent protest demonstrations. Most were released within 24 hours, but between 10 and 20 were detained in custody for several weeks under investigation, and a few were still under house arrest at the end of 2000. Some were possible prisoners of conscience.
Background
The Socialist Party (SP) government, elected to power in 1997 following a widespread breakdown in law and order, had not fully established law and order in all parts of the country Organized crime gangs, linked to smuggling and trafficking in drugs, would-be immigrants to Western Europe and women, continued to be powerful- In October municipal elections took
26
Amnesty International Report 2001
ALB
place which were won by the SP. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) monitored the elections and concluded that despite irregularities and some incidents of intimidation they were generally valid. Opposition parties, in particular the Democratic Party (DP), the former ruling party and main opposition party, complained that the elections were rigged. From November the DP held daily protests, and there were a number of incidents in which demonstrators attacked government buildings and police. More than i,ooo opposition supporters were arrested, and political tensions increased. At the end of November a DP demonstration in the northern town of Bajram Curri ended in clashes between police and armed men, in which one man died and others were wounded.
Torture/¡M-treatment
Most incidents of torture and ill-treatment took place in police stations following arrest. Q In September police in Elbasan arrested Nairn Pulaku on suspicion of stealing car tyres and beat him so brutally that he had to be admitted to hospital for surgery to his damaged sexual organs. The press reported at least eight such incidents of torture and ill-treatment by police in Elbasan, and lawyers and human rights activists protested about these and other similar cases which had taken place in the same town in 1999, several of which were alleged to have resulted in the victim's death. Five incidents of alleged ill-treatment by police were under investigation in Tirana because prosecutors in Elbasan were reportedly intimidated by police and reluctant to investigate such cases. Q In November police in Vlora arrested Ferit Cepi, who suffers from hearing and speech defects, suspecting (wrongly) that he had stolen some money. They tortured him so badly that he lost his sight in one eye.
Ill-treatment of demonstrators
There were a number of reports that police had ill-treated DP demonstrators who were detained in November on suspicion of organizing protest demonstrations which did not have official authorization, or of throwing stones or other violent acts.
Q Besnik Papa, who had shouted slogans over a megaphone, was arrested in Tirana and beaten so severely that he required hospital treatment for broken teeth, injuries to his jaw and severe bruising. Ill-treatment of minors
The ill-treatment of minors detained by police was reported to be common.
Q In July a police officer in Saranda beat and burned with a cigarette a lo-year-old orphan boy, Ergest Shele, whom he wrongly suspected of stealing a bag. The officer was subsequently dismissed from his post. Q At least 20 minors detained during demonstrations in Tirana in November were reportedly ill-treated at police stations. Three of them, when brought to court on 13 November, claimed that police had ill-treated them in order to force them to name the people who had allegedly incited them to throw stones.
Ill-treatment of journalists
There were several incidents in which opposition journalists were ill-treated by police. Q Injune, FlamurHasbegu, a cameraman for-4 Wi, a private television company controlled by the DP, was filming in Berat where police had evicted the local DP branch from disputed premises. Police officers dragged him into the police station and kicked and punched him, injuring his right arm.
Impunity
In February Albania's first Ombudsman was appointed and he was reported to have intervened in some cases involving police ill-treatment. A number of police officers alleged to have tortured or ill-treated detainees were dismissed or suspended from their duties, but police officers were very rarely brought to Justice for torture or ill-treatment. Q In July the Court of Appeal in Tirana sentenced three police officers to two years' suspension from their duties and a suspended prison sentence of 18 months for ill-treating and injuring Rushit Korteshi, a Rom, in August 1999. However, several weeks later this sentence had still not been carried out and the officers continued to persecute him.
Detention of political opponents
Over 1,000 opposition supporters were arrested in November during demonstrations led by the DP which claimed the October municipal elections had been rigged. Most detainees were released within 24 hours, but between 10 and 20 were detained in custody for up to several weeks under investigation on charges of damaging public property or of organizing illegal demonstrations. A few were still under arrest at the end of 2000. Some were possible prisoners of conscience. Q Among those arrested was Edi Paloka, a Journalist and spokesman for the DP. He was detained on 29 November and held for nine days on charges of organizing and taking part in illegal demonstrations, and offering violent resistance to police. He was released pending trial.
Death penalty
In December 1999 the Constitutional Court declared that the death penalty was incompatible with the Constitution of Albania. In September Albania ratified Protocol N0.6 to the European Convention on Human Rights concerning the abolition of the death penalty, but by the end of 2000 the Criminal Code had not been amended.
Al country reports
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Albania (Al Index: EUR 01/003/2000)
•	Albania: A disturbing pattern of disregard for basic human rights (At Index: EUR 11/002/2000)
27	Amnesty International Report 2001

