TAIWAN
TAIWAN
President: ChenShui-bian (replaced Lee Teng-hui in May)
Head of government: Chang Chen-hsiung (replaced
Tang Fei in October, who replaced Vincent Siew in May)
CapitahTaipei
Population: 22.2 million
Official language: Mandarin Chinese
Death penalty: retentionist
The new government of President Chen Shui-bian publicly committed itselfto the protection ofhuman rights. However, legislative reforms to ensure improvements in human rights were not enacted during 2000. The death penalty continued to be imposed and at least 17 people were executed.
Background
In the March presidential elections, Chen Shui-bian of the Democratic Progressive Party was elected as the first non-A'uom/nfan^President of Taiwan.
The new government included many former political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience and human rights activists. In his inaugural speech on 20 May, President Chen Shui-bian requested the advice of Al in bringing Taiwan's domestic law into conformity with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in establishing a National Human Rights Committee.
Political and economic instability within Taiwan increased. Prime Minister Tang Fei of the largest party in the Legislative Yuan, the Kuomimang, resigned in October following disputes over the construction of a nuclear plant. The new Prime Minister, Chang Chen-hsiung, came
Amnesty International Report 2001
235
TAJ
from the same party as the President, the Democratic Progressive Party, but the President found it difficult to steer legislation through the opposition-controlled legislature- There was also concern that the economy was slowing down and unemployment was rising.
Taiwan planned to commence historic direct contacts with the People's Republic of China by permitting the "three mini links" of direct trade, transportation and postal services between the cities of Kinmen (Quemoy) and Matsu in Taiwan, and Xiamen and Fuzhou in China.
Taiwan gained greater integration within the international community. It was expected to enter the World Trade Organization in 2001 and was represented at the ministerial level at the regional APEC meeting.
Legal reforms
The government stated its intention to introduce structural and legislative changes to improve human rights. Vice-President Annette Liu, a former prisoner of conscience, was appointed chief coordinator of the President's Advisory Group on Human Rights. The Group's mandate included compiling a work of reference on human rights for use in Taiwan; promoting a National Human Rights Bill; considering the formation of a National Human Rights Committee; promoting human rights education; and reviewing Taiwan's human rights conditions.
A preparatory committee led by Annette Liu was formed to consider the mandate and the process of establishment of a National Human Rights Committee, Proposals from non-governmental organizations included the formation of an autonomous commission in line with international standards. The Kuomintang party proposed a part-time, ad hoc commission.
Conscientious objectors to military service
On 15 January, the military conscription law was revised and a provision was created for civilian service as an alternative to military service.
On io December, there was a presidential amnesty for 21 prisoners, including 19 Jehovah's Witnesses who had been convicted of refusing to undergo mandatory military service for religious reasons.
Death penalty
There were at least 17 executions during 2000. There were no reforms to laws providing a mandatory death penalty for a wide range of crimes. O The case of Su Chien-ho, Liu Bin-lang and Chuang Lin-hsun, known as the "Hsichih trio", who were sentenced to death in 1992, was sent to the Taipei High Court for a retrial. The retrial started in November and was broadcast live on television. Al had earlier called on the government to institute a thorough, impartial and independent investigation into reports that the three men were tortured while in police custody and confessed under duress, and had called for a retrial. Al had expressed concern that their earlier trial did not conform to international standards of fairness, and that it appeared that they had been convicted on the basis of confessions extracted under torture.
