DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Hipólito Mejía
(replaced Leonel Fernández Reyna in May)
Capital: Santo Domingo
Population: 8.4 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court
A pattern of unlawful killings by police and military continued in 2000. In many cases, the authorities alleged that the victims were killed in exchanges of gunfire with criminal suspects, but this version was disputed by witness testimony and other evidence. Such cases were normally heard before police or military, rather than civilian, courts. There were also reports of ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police stations, and prisons were extremely overcrowded.
Background
The presidential elections held in May were won by Hipólito Mejia of the Partido Revolucionario Dominicano, Revolutionary Dominican Party. The elections were declared free and fair by international observers. Human rights initiatives announced by Hipólito Mejía following his inauguration included the creation of a Commission for the Reform and Modernization of the Armed Forces and the Police and a Military Institute for Human Rights-
Killings by security forces
Killings in disputed circumstances by police and military continued. Some appeared to be extrajudicial executions. In May, the US government halted nearly US$i million in aid to the Dominican police because of inaction on killings by police. O On i8JuneinGuayubin, Monte Cristi province, soldiers pursued and opened fire on a covered truck after it failed to stop at a checkpoint some distance from the border with Haiti. After a chase of several
kilometres, the truck crashed. Six Haitians and one Dominican were killed, all but one by multiple gunshot wounds. Numerous other occupants of the vehicle were wounded. A military commission was created to investigate. Al called for the soldiers to be tried before civilian courts, but the case remained within the military justice system, and virtually no information about the proceedings was made public. Q Two police officers accused of killing Padre José Antonio Tineo outside his church in August 1998 were, exceptionally, tried in civilian courts following public pressure. One of the officers was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment for the killing, while the second was acquitted.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Reports ofbeatings of detainees continued. In May. 12 prisoners in Rafey prison in Santiago were said to have been badly beaten by guards. The guards were sent before a police court, and the chief of police announced the formation of a commission to investigate claims of ill-treatment of pre-trial detainees.
There were several reports of killings of detainees by military or police guards, generally in the context of escape attempts.
Q In Najayo prison on 19 August, three prisoners were shot dead after being taken into custody following an escape attempt. Although an investigation by the Attorney General and Chief of the National Police concluded that excessive force had been used, there was no public information on whether the officers irivolved had been disciplined or prosecuted. Harsh conditions
In November, Al assessed conditions in seven of the country's 34 prisons. All the facilities were extremely overcrowded (containing between two and a half and four times their maximum capacity) and in each the conditions constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Extreme overcrowding contributed to the deaths of 14 inmates in a fire in La Victoria prison in June.
Skin diseases were rampant and contagious diseases such as tuberculosis were of major concern. Medical care was inadequate. Water and sanitary conditions were also sub-standard in many prisons, contributing to intestinal and other health problems.
Overcoming impunity
There was a breakthrough on Impunity issues in 2000, when four men, including two high-ranking military officers, were brought to trial for the 1975 killing of journalist Orlando Martinez Howley. The four were sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment and fined. However, other important cases remained pending, including that of Narciso Gonzalez, who "disappeared" in 1994.
Treatment of Haitians
In August the Inter-American Court of Human Rights considered a request for provisional measures to prohibit mass expulsions of suspected Haitians. Dominican human rights activists who appeared before the Court were subjected to acts of intimidation
Amnesty International Report 2001
EAS
and threats by nationalist figures. The Court's resolution was considered only a partial victory by human rights advocates, in that it failed to address the practice of mass expulsions; these continued at the end of the year. The Dominican Republic failed to comply with protection mechanisms ordered by the Court on behalf of the individuals involved.
Al country report and visit Report
•	Dominican Republic: Killings bysecurityforces(AI Index: AMR 27/001/2000)
Visit
•	In November, Al representatives visited the Dominican Republic and met government officials, other authorities and members of different sectors of civil society.
