SOUTH AFRICA
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
Head of state and government: Thabo Mbeki
Capital: Pretoria
Population: 40.3 million
Official languages: Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Pedí, Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; African Charter on the Rightsand Welfare of the Child
There were reports of ill-treatment, torture and unjustified use of lethal force by police and security forces. Asylum-seekers and suspected illegal immigrants were also victims of official ill-treatment or racially motivated attacks. Further evidence emerged about past human rights violations during trial proceedings against the former head of the Chemical and Biological Warfare program and in hearings held by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission's Amnesty Committee. Human rights defenders were harassed and attacked because of their work.
Background
Local government elections were held nationally in December. They were largely peaceful and the ruling African National Congress (ANC) won an overall majority of votes. However, in several provinces there were incidents of violence, including in KwaZulu Natal where a number of election candidates were killed or injured in the run-up to the elections.
Continuing official and public concern at levels of violent crime, large-scale circulation of illegal weapons and a spate of bombings in the Cape Town area led to a number of high profile joint military and police security operations in different parts of the country. Investigators from the Office of the National Director of Public Prosecutions and the police arrested and charged a number of members of People Against Gangsterism and Drugs (PAGAD) in connection with killings and other violence in the Cape Town area. In October investigators seized from the South African Broadcasting Corporation and other media organizations film footage which was then apparently used as a basis for arresting three PAGAD members in connection with the public killing of gang leader Rashaad Staggie in 1996. Two prosecution witnesses were killed in December.
The South African Law Commission issued an interim report on a proposed anti-terrorism bill, which contained provisions for prolonged detention without charge for interrogation of individuals believed to have information on terrorist acts.
The government and the statutory Human Rights Commission held a number of hearings and a national conference examining patterns of racism in the
Amnesty International Report 2001
219
sou
country, preparatory to the UN World Conference against Racism in 2001. The Human Rights Commission also held hearings into alleged racist practices in media institutions-
The Constitutional Court in September upheld the appeal by an applicant refused employment by South African Airways because of his HIV status. In its ruling the Court drew attention to the stigma attached to the illness and the importance of ensuring that those living with it enjoy special protection from the law.
Human rights violations by the security forces
There were reports of torture, ill-treatment and unjustified use of lethal force by the security forces, including military units based in KwaZulu Natal province, primarily in the context of crime investigation and searches for illegal weapons. Incidents included the cases below. Q In April, police tied 16-year-old Siphiwo Zide and another youngster suspected of involvement in a robbery with ropes to a police vehicle which was then driven away. Siphiwo Zide died when his head was crushed under a wheel. In September, three Barkley East police officers were charged with offences including culpable homicide and assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm, following an investigation by the statutory oversight body, the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD). Q InJune, 16-year-old Simon Khubeka was arrested without warrant by a police officer investigating animal stock theft. While in custody at Villiers police station he was allegedly assaulted and verbally abused by another, white, officer who forced him to maintain painful physical postures for prolonged periods and repeatedly punched him and banged his head against a wall. Following his release without charge Simon Khubeka required hospital treatment. Q In July a woman police officer, Sergeant Nozipho Ntoni. was beaten, kicked, stamped on and threatened with a gun in her home by a senior police officer from Bisho police station in the Eastern Cape, with whom she was involved in a personal relationship. Bleeding from her injuries, she attempted to lay a charge against him at the police station, but was again assaulted by the same officer in the presence of other, junior-ranking, officers. The next day she reported the case to King William's Town police station whose officers attempted to arrest the perpetrator but were prevented by his brother, also a senior police officer. Following ICD investigations, the perpetrator was arrested and charged with assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm.
Q Six soldiers and a Police Reservist were charged in a magistrates' court with murder in connection with the death of 33-year-old Basil Jaca at Flaxton Farm, near Ixopo. They were accused of beating Basil Jaca at his home on i July and assaulting him by repeatedly pushing a rifle into his anus, while demanding to know the whereabouts of a gun. The doctor who later examined him failed to refer him to hospital although Basil Jaca was bleeding, in great pain and barely able to walk. Hedied on2july.
O Four police officers were charged with murder and released on bail in connection with the suspected extrajudicial execution of an ANC parliamentarian, Bheki Mhkize, in July. He was shot dead when about a dozen members of the Public Order Police Unit based at Ulundi in KwaZulu Natal raided his home, apparently searching for weapons. Independent forensic and other evidence gathered by the ICD indicated that he was shot intentionally at close range by the police.
Impunity
The trial of the former head of the Chemical and Biological Warfare program. Dr Wouter Basson, for murder and attempted murder of opponents of the apartheid government, and on other charges, continued in the Pretoria High Court. The Court heard evidence from prosecution witnesses of covert operations to eliminate identified enemies of the state, and ofthe killing of members of the security forces who threatened to expose these operations. Witnesses testified about their involvement in the "dumping" of bodies or of semicomatose individuals from aircraft into the seas. The victims Included imprisoned members of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO). Some of the victims were allegedly injected with toxic chemicals by or under the instruction of the accused and others, including military doctors. Other witnesses told the Court of their involvement, as members of clandestine army units, in attempted killings of government opponents in the 1980s. Truth and Reconciliation Commission The Amnesty Committee of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) continued its hearings on applications for amnesties. Cases considered included applications from former police commissioner Johan van der Merwe and former Vlakplaas security police commander Eugene de Kock for the raid in December 1985 into Lesotho which led to the killing of six ANC members and three Lesotho nationals; from former security police officers for the death in detention in 1982 of trade unionist Neil Aggett; and from members of a covert military unit for the attempted murder of government opponents, including a current government minister, Dullah Omar, during the 1980s.
The Committee granted amnesty to, among others, former Azanian People's Liberation Army commander Phila Dolo, who admitted to ordering an attack which resulted in the deaths of three white civilians travelling in a vehicle in March 1993. The decision to grant amnesty to former security police member Craig Williamson and explosives expert Jerry Raven, for the killings of exiled apartheid government opponents Ruth First and Jeanette Schoon and six-year-old Katryn Schoon in the early 1980s, was challenged by surviving family members. They lodged an appeal for judicial review of the decision on the grounds that the applicants failed to make full disclosure and meet other requirements of the law, in addition to their failure to show any remorse for the deaths they caused.
In September the Minister of Justice, Penuell Maduna, stated that the government would finalize by the end of 2000 its policy on reparations for the
220
Amnesty International Report 2001	220
sou
thousands of people whom the TRC had declared in 1998 to be eligible for compensation. The government's apparent reluctance to implement theTRC's recommendations led to public conflict with the TRC and protests by victim support groups.
Human rights defenders
Human rights lawyers and members of investigation bodies were subjected to physical attack, death threats or other forms of harassment as a consequence of their work.
Q Injuly an ICD investigator, Velaphi Kwela, was killed on his way to carry out an arrest. He was shot seven times and thrown out of his vehicle. The vehicle and the investigation dockets he had with him were not recovered.
O Two police officers were acquitted by a magistrates' court of perjury and of attempting to defeat the course of justice in connection with investigations into the 1998 Richmond tavern massacre. Two of their lawyers were subjected to death threats and damage to their property during the course of the trial- The trial proceedings and the court's ruling revealed evidence of possible complicity of National Intelligence agents in killings in the Richmond area, and conflicts between police, justice and intelligence officials which undermined the effectiveness of subsequent investigations-Q In September magistrate Pieter Theron, who was hearing a case against PAGAD members, was killed in a drive-by shooting outside his home in Cape Town. Q In October Zackie Achmat, a member of the Treatment Action Campaign, was arrested and charged with importing generic drugs to treat AIDS patients unable to afford patented drugs. This prosecution underlined the human rights dimensions of the conflict between non-governmental organizations, the government and drug companies over the importation or manufacture of cheap life-saving drugs in South Africa.
Refugee concerns
The government ordered the arrest of members of the police East Rand Dog Unit after being shown film footage of police officers deliberately inciting dogs to maul three captive suspected illegal immigrants from Mozambique. The helpless men were attacked by the dogs, as well as being beaten and subjected to racist verbal abuse by the police officers. Although the incident had taken place in 1998, the broadcasting of the footage on state television in November 2000 led to a public outcry and statements by officials and civil society organizations on the need to address persistent problems of racism and xenophobia. Six police officers were later charged in a magistrate's court with abduction and assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm before being released on bail.
In separate reports the Human Rights Commission and the non-governmental Human Rights Committee documented abuses of undocumented migrants and asylum-seekers. These included unlawfully prolonged detentions, poor conditions and beatings of detainees
by guards at Lindela Repatriation Centre, assaults by police officers involved in the arrest of suspected illegal immigrants, and arbitrary and verbally abusive conduct towards asylum-seekers by Department of Home Affairs officials.
In March the police launched an anti-crime initiative. Operation Crackdown, with the arrest by police and soldiers of over 7,000 alleged illegal immigrants in the Johannesburg area. The raids were allegedly accompanied by abuses such as beatings and theft, as well as arbitrary arrests of individuals with a legal right of residence.
The 1998 Refugee Act, which was brought into effect in 2000, denies asylum-seekers the right to education and the right to seek employment until they have been granted refugee status.
In December, the High Court ordered the government to release official correspondence relating to the deportation to the USA of a Tanzanian national, Khalfan Khamis Mohammed. He faced a possible death penalty for his alleged involvement in the 1998 bombing of the US Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, and was allegedly removed from South Africa without an extradition hearing, as required under South African law.
Al country reports and visits Reports
•	South Africa: Amnesty Internationa! welcomes Government action against racially motivated violence by police {Al Index: APR 53/003/2000)
•	South Africa; Preserving the gains for human rights in the 'war against crime': Memorandum to the South African Government and South African Law Commission on the draft Anti-Terrorism Bill, 2000 (Al Index: APR 53/004/2000)
•	South Africa: Points of clarification on Amnesty International's comments on torture (Al Index: APR 53/006/2000)
Visits
Al delegates visited South Africa in Octoberto conduct research and meet officials concerning allegations of police and military complicity in the ill-treatment of individuals in custody In March Al co-sponsored with several regional non-governmental organizations a workshop in Pretoria on policing and human rights in southern African countries.
Amnesty International Report 2001
221
