CHILE
REPUBLIC OF CHILE
Head of state and government: Ricardo Lagos {replaced
Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle in March)
Capital: Santiago
Population: 15.2 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: retentionist__
There vt/ere reports that detainees were tortured and ill-treated by police. Legal proceedings in connection with past human rights violations continued in Chile and abroad.
Baclcground
In January Ricardo Lagos of the Concertación de Partidos por la Democracia. Coalition for Democracy Party, was elected President in January and inaugurated in March.
The political and human rights debate in 2000 were dominated by the return to Chile of Augusto Pinochet, following his release from detention in the United Kingdom (UK) on health grounds.
Members of the Mesa de Diálogo, a dialogue set up in 1999 to deal with the issue of "disappearances" during the years of military rule between 1973 and 1990, signed a Declaration in June. This initiative was rejected by some human rights groups, including relatives of the "disappeared". The Declaration recognized the grave human rights violations committed under the military government. It registered, among other things, that the armed forces and Câra6//7ero5 (uniformed police) had no information on the "disappeared", but established their commitment to cooperate in obtaining it. It set a timetable of six months, which can be extended for a further six months by the President, to gather information, and called for new legislation to grant anonymity to those who came forward with information on the location of the remains of the "disappeared". New legislation for this purpose was passed by Congress and became law in July.
A bill abolishing the death penalty for ordinary crimes and increasing the minimum term to be served under a life sentence from 20 to 40 years was passed by the Senate in December. By the end of the year the bill had not become law.
68
Amnesty International Report 2001
CHI
Past human rights violations
Augusto Pinochet
In March, after protracted legal procedures, the UK authorities decided not to order the extradition of Augusto Pinochet to Spain or to allow legal proceedings in respect of extradition requests from Switzerland, Belgium and France on grounds that Augusto Pinochet was unfit to stand trial. Augusto Pinochet left the UK for Chile the same day.
In Chile, more than 70 criminal complaints involving nearly 2,000 individual cases of human rights violations had been filed against Augusto Pinochet by the time he returned to the country. Seven Chilean human rights lawyers filed a legal request before the Santiago Appeals Court to lift Augusto Pinochet's pariiamentary immunity from prosecution as a senator for life.
The Chilean Council for Defence of the State, which represents the legal interests of the state, joined the complaint against Augusto Pinochet and other members of the armed forces for their responsibility for the "disappearance" of 19 people during a military operation in Oaober 1973 known as the "Caravan of Death".
In June, the Santiago Appeals Court ruled by 13 votes to nine to lift Augusto Pinochet's parliamentary immunity. An appeal against the ruling was lodged before the Supreme Court. In August, the Supreme Court announced its decision to uphold the decision to lift pariiamentary immunity, opening the way for a criminal investigation of Augusto Pinochet's involvement in the "Caravan of Death" "disappearances".
In December, the Supreme Court overturned on appeal an order for the house arrest of Augusto Pinochet for the kidnapping and/or murder of 75 victims of the "Caravan of Death" issued by the judge in charge earlier the same month. The Supreme Court ruled that the judge had failed to interrogate Augusto Pinochet before issuing the order and subsequently ruled that, before the interrogation could take place, mental and physical medical tests should be carried out to determine Augusto Pinochet's fitness to stand trial. By the end of 2000, a total of 202 criminal complaints had been filed against Augusto Pinochet in Chile.
Three other former high-ranking officers were charged in connection with the "Caravan of Death". During the year criminal proceedings were also opened against over 80 former members of the security forces in connection with a number of past human rights violations.
In Argentina in October, a Buenos Aires court requested the extradition of Augusto Pinochet and six former members of the Chilean secret police for their alleged involvement in the killing of Carlos Prats, former head of the Chilean army, and his wife, in Buenos Aires in 1974 {see Argentina entry).
Torture/ ill-treatment
There were continued reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects detained by members of the Carabineros. A number of victims required hospital treatment for their injuries and several others lodged official complaints.
A report compiled by the Chilean non-governmental human rights organization, Corporación de Promoción y Defensa de los Derechos del Pueblo, Committee for the Defence of the Rights of the People, containing 33 complaints of torture or ill-treatment during 1999 and the first half of 2000 and affecting over 141 individuals, was submitted to the Chilean authorities by an Al delegation in October.
Government authorities continued to deny all reports of torture or ill-treatment.
Al report and visits
Report
• Memorandum to the Government of the Republic of Chile-Al's Secretary General on mission to Chile, 1-6 October2000 (Al IndexAMR 22/022/2000) Visits
In July an Al delegate observed the Supreme Court's hearings on the lifting of Augusto Pinochet's parliamentary immunity. In October an Al delegation led by Pierre Sané, Al's Secretary General, visited Chile to hold talks with government officials, representatives of human rights organizations, victims of human rights violations and other members of civil society. During a meeting with President Ricardo Lagos, Al submitted a memorandum on its concerns in Chile and called for the implementation of a National Action Plan on Human Rights.
