AFGHANISTAN
Taleban's islamic emirate of afghanistan,
headed by Mullah Mohammad Omar, recognized as a government by three countries Anti-Taleban alliance's islamic STATE OF AFGHANISTAN,
headed by Burhanuddin Rabbani, recognized as a government by other governments and the UN Capital: Kabul Population: 23.7 million Official languages: Dari, Pushtu Death penalty: retentionist
Human rights abuses, including arbitrary detention and torture, continued to be reported in the context of the ongoing conflict between warring factions. The Talebancontinued to impose harsh restrictions on personal conduct and behaviour as a means of enforcing their particular interpretation of Islamic law. Fighting in the northern provinces intensified during the second half of the year as the Taleban and anti-fa/e/janforces fought for control of territory. Forced displacement of the civilian population was used by the Talebanto gain control of territory in areas north of Kabul, creating a severe humanitarian crisis.
Background
War and drought resulted in a serious threat to the food supply in many areas. A peaceful resolution to the armed conflict remained a remote prospect; UN efforts to bring the warring factions to the negotiating table were again unsuccessful. Other peace efforts, including an initiative by the former Afghan king, Zahir Shah, to establish a government representative of all ethnic groups and factions through a traditional Loya jirga (Grand Assembly), did not receive support from the Taleban.
The Taleban continued to assert that it represented the majority of people in the country, despite the absence of any independently verifiable evidence to support this claim. As in previous years, the civilian population was denied the opportunity to formally express its wishes regarding the kind of government it wanted.
In December the UN Security Council imposed new sanctions, stating that unless the 7a/edan "cease the provision of sanctuary and training for international terrorists and their organizations... turn over Osama bin Laden to appropriate authorities in a country where he has been indicted, or to appropriate authorities in a country where he will be returned to such a country, or to appropriate authorities in a country where he will be arrested and effectively brought to justice... act swiftly to close all camps where terrorists are trained within the territory under its control", all states would prevent the sale and transfer of military supplies, including technical advice, assistance, or training, to areas of
Afghanistan under ra/e6ancontrol, and close Taleban offices and deny Taleban officials entry in their territory.
Forced displacement
More than 70,000 people were reported to have fled intensified fighting in the northern province of Takhar to the neighbouring province of Badakhshan. Tens of thousands more were reported to have fled not only drought-stricken rural areas but also a deteriorating security situation in the northern and central regions of the country. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) warned of health risks and lack of preparation for the winter months and nutritional surveys by the relief organization Médecins sans Froni/éres showed a substantial increase in levels of malnutrition in the northern region.
The bulk of this massive displacement was a direct consequence of the pressure exerted by Taleban guards on the local population to flee their homes. The Taleban initially denied that mass displacement had taken place, but later reportedly criticized the UN and other aid agencies for not providing food and shelter to the displaced people.
Q On fi September, after Fa/eban forces reportedly declared Taliqan town and its surrounding villages military zones, some 18,000 people living in the villages of Ganj Ali Beg, Sarai Sang, Khatayan, Oazaq, Ahan Dara. and Shurab were forced to abandon their homes in search of safety.
Refugees
During the year Iran, Pakistan and Tajikistan closed their borders to tens of thousands of Afghan refugees fleeing the war and the drought.
In May, the Iranian parliament voted to close, in principle, Iran's border with Afghanistan, supposedly to prevent drug smuggling. The Tajik government closed its border with Afghanistan in mid-September, preventing tens of thousands of Afghans fleeing the fighting from entering Tajikistan. Pakistan closed its North West Frontier Province and Balochistan border to Afghan refugees without valid travel documents in early November while Taleban guards stopped Afghan refugees at checkpoints on the road from Jalalabad to the Torkham border crossing with Pakistan, reportedly beating many of them. Restrictions were particularly applied to family groups including women.
From April onwards, Iran repatriated tens of thousands of Afghan refugees under a program jointty implemented with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). However, aid workers monitoring the repatriation process said many refugees cited pressure from the Iran government as their reason for returning to Afghanistan. In December, Médecins sans fronf/éres withdrew from the repatriation program on the grounds that the safety and well-being of Afghan refugees who were returned could not be guaranteed.
Women
Despite statements by some Taleban officials that the ban on women's right to education, employment and
Amnesty international Report 2001
25
ALB
freedom of movement would be lifted, these restrictions remained in force. The ban on women's right to employment was reinforced when thousands of female employees and teachers, who had already been stopped from working under Taleban edicts and whose salaries had been stopped, were laid off in April. In July, the raye£>a/7 stopped Afghan women, including those employed at bakeries in Kabul, from working for foreign aid groups, accusing the UN and nongovernmental organizations of undermining the ban on women's employment. They withdrew the ban on employment of women in bakeries in August following pressure from UN agencies and the prospect of mass protests in Kabul.
Q Mary MacMakin, an aid worker from the USA and director of the non-governmental organization Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation Support for Afghanistan, was arrested with seven Afghan women colleagues on 9 July in an attempt by the Taleban to impose the ban on women's employment. The women were released after several days following international expressions of concern about their situation.
The ban on women's freedom of movement continued to be enforced.
Q On 19 October, a fa/edan-controlled radio station in Mazar-e Sharif, reported: "Thanks to an inspection carried out by senior officials from the Department for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice in [northern] Balkh Province, 12 taxis which were transporting women without male relatives have been identified and the taxis confiscated for three days in accordance with the promotion of virtue and prevention of vice. Therefore, all taxi drivers are warned to seriously [s/'d avoid taking and transporting women without male relatives."
Young women living in areas captured by the Taleban in the north of the country were reportedly abducted by guards and taken against their will as "wives" for fa/edan commanders. Family members were not informed of the whereabouts of these women. In some cases, the women sent smuggled messages to their relatives telling them where they were being held.
Detention and torture
Thousands of people were believed to be held without charge or trial. The majority were reportedly members of ethnic minority groups held on suspicion of supporting the anti-fa/edanalliance.
According to reports, a Taleban official seeking to investigate reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners noted in September that hundreds of prisoners who said that they had been tortured or ill-treated had been held for prolonged periods by the Istakhbarat, the Taleban's intelligence department, without charge or any legal record of their detention. The Ta/edan official reportedly resigned from his post after he complained to the Taleban authorities about the conditions of detention of these prisoners. No action was taken to improve conditions.
Unfair trials, cruel punishments and the death penalty
fa/eban Shari'a courts, whose procedures fall short of international fair trial standards, continued to impose cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments. At least 15 people were executed in public during 2000. At least one woman was stoned to death. There were at least five amputations, and over a dozen floggings.
Abuses by other groups
Abuses by forces opposed to the Taleban continued to be reported.
Q On 6 December, the Afghan anti-Taleban alliance, the United Front, executed six people in the opposition-held stronghold of Panjshir. They had been convicted, after an apparently unfair trial, of killing a senior opposition commander from eastern Laghman province.
