URUGUAY
EASTERN REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
Head of state and government: Jorge Batlle (replaced
Julio Maria Sanguinetti in March)
Capital: Montevideo
Population: 3.3 million
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/treaties: Optional Protocol to
the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of
children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN
Women's Convention; Rome Statute ofthe International
Criminal Court
Steps were taken to establish the fate of people who "disappeared" under military governments between 1973 and 1985. There were reports oftorture and ill-treatment.
Background
President Jorge Batlle took office at the beginning of March. His first months in office were marked by a willingness to clarify the fate of those who "disappeared" in Uruguay between 1973 and 1985. Some 34 people "disappeared" in Uruguay and at least 100 Uruguayans "disappeared" in Argentina during this period. Thousands of people were tortured and ill-treated under the military government in Uruguay.
In August the government established a special commission, the Comisión para la Paz, Peace Commission, to clarify the fate of all those who "disappeared" during those years. However, the 1986 Expiry Law, which granted exemption from punishment to all police and military personnel who committed human rights violations for political motives or to fulfil orders before i March 1985, prevented the perpetrators being brought to justice. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has stated that the Expiry Law violates the American Convention on Human Rights.
Developments in 'disappearance' cases
Q In May a civil court ruled that the mother of Elena Quinteros had the right to find out the whereabouts and circumstances in which her daughter "disappeared". Elena Quinteros "disappeared" in 1976 in Montevideo after being detained by the security forces inside the Venezuelan embassy where she had hidden. In addition, in November, a court ruled that those civilians who were allegedly involved in Elena Quinteros' "disappearance", including the then Minister of Foreign Affairs, who were not covered by the 1986 Expiry Law, should be brought to Justice. S The fate of Juan Gelman's granddaughter was established. Juan Gelman's son, Marcelo Gelman, and his pregnant wife, Maria Claudia Garcia Irureta Goyena, both Argentine citizens, "disappeared" in Argentina in August 1976. Marcelo Gelman's body was discovered in 1989. In 1999 it emerged that Maria
Amnesty International Report 2001
251
UZB
Claudia García had given birth to her baby at the Military Hospital in Montevideo.
Torture/ill-treatment
There were continued reports that detainees were ill-treated and tortured by police and prison guards. Q Reports came to light that in July 1999, four men and a 17-year-old boy, who had been detained by police on suspicion of theft, were tortured and ill-treated in order to force them to sign confessions. The four men were also reported to have been tortured and ill-treated at the Santiago Vázquez prison.
Al country report
• Uruguay: The "Disappeared" - One step closer to truth and justice (Al Index: AMR 52/002/2000)
