BELARUS
REPUBLiCOF BELARUS
Head of state: AlyaksandrLukashenka
Head of government: VladimirYermoshin (replaced
Sergey Ling in February)
Capital: Minsk
Population: 10.2 million
Official languages: Belarusian, Russian
Death penalty: retentionist___
The year 2000 brought no improvement in the human rights situation, resulting in repeated international condemnation. A prominent journalist apparently "disappeared" and no progress was made in clarifying the possible "disappearances" of opposition figures in 1999. A number of prisoners of conscience remained imprisoned. Hundreds of people were arrested for peaceful opposition activities. There were allegations that police ill-treated detainees. Belarusian legislation did not allow for conscientious objectors to military service to undertake an alternative civilian service. The death penalty continued to be imposed in secret.
Background
The opposition continued to protest peacefully against President Lukashenka, calling for genuinely democratic parliamentary and presidential elections. Parliamentary elections were eventually held in October, but the results were disputed. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and various Western governments refused to send observers because of serious doubts about the fairness of the elections.
Intergovernmental bodies
During 2000, Belarus' human rights record became the focus of criticism of a number of intergovernmental bodies. In January the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe expressed "its profound concern that Belarus continues to fall seriously short of Council of Europe standards as regards pluralist democracy, the rule of law and human rights".
Belarus was also scrutinized by the UN Committee against Torture in November, which expressed concern about "Itihe numerous continuing allegations of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment or treatment, committed by officials of the State party or with their acquiescence, particularly affecting political opponents of the government and peaceful demonstrators, and including disappearances, beatings, and other actions in breach of the Convention". The Committee recommended that the authorities correct their failure to impartially investigate these persistent human rights violations and "consider establishing an independent and impartial governmental and non-governmental national human rights commission with effective
powers to, inter alia, promote human rights and investigate all complaints of human rights violations".
Possi ble'd Isa ppea ra nces'
There was concern about the possible "disappearance" of Dmitry Zavadsky, a television cameraman, who went missing on 7 July He failed to meet a colleague from Russian Public Television, Pavel Sheremet, at Minsk airport. The Belarusian authorities denied any involvement in the apparent "disappearance" and blamed the opposition for staging it. Both Dmitry Zavadsky and Pavel Sheremet had previously been detained by the authorities for their journalistic activities. Q There was no new information about the whereabouts of opposition figures who apparently "disappeared" in Minsk in 1999; the former Minister of the Interior, Yury Zakharenko, and the first secretary chairman of the dissolved parliament, Viktor Gonchar, and his companion, Anatoly Krasovsky.
Prisoners of conscience
Two political opponents of President Lukashenka were sentenced to prison terms after high profile trials during 2000. Al believed the real reason for their imprisonment was to suppress their opposition activities. In addition, a number of protesters were sentenced to shorter periods of detention, usually after being arrested during peaceful demonstrations. Q On 19 May Minsk City Court convicted 52-year-old Mikhail Chigir, a prominent opposition leader and former Prime Minister, of abuse of power. The charges related to a position he had held as head of a bank before becoming Prime Minister in 1994. The Court sentenced him to three years in prison, two of which were suspended, and ordered him to pay a large fine as compensation to the state. Since he had spent eight months in pre-trial detention in 1999, he did not have to serve the remainder of his sentence. Q Andrey Klimov, a 34-year-old member of the dissolved parliament and political opponent of President Lukashenka, was arrested on 11 February 1998 on charges relating to his business interests. He was sentenced to six years' imprisonment at a hard labour colony with confiscation of property by the Leninsky court in Minsk on 17 March 2000. Andrey Klimov joined another prisoner of conscience and former opponent of President Lukashenka, Vladimir Koudinov, who was also imprisoned on charges relating to his business interests after an unfair trial in August 1997.
Release of possible prisoner of conscience
On 5 October Vassily Leonov, former Minister of Agriculture and director of the agriculture company Rassvet, was released in a prison amnesty. He was convicted in January of taking bribes and sentenced to four years' imprisonment on charges which members of the opposition claimed were politically motivated. By October he had already spent nearly three years in prison.
Harsh conditions of detention
Protesters detained during peaceful demonstrations, and those detained at the time of parliamentary
44
Amnesty international Report 2001
BEL
elections in October, frequently complained about the conditions of detention. Al has also expressed concern about conditions in prisons and pre-trial detention centres which fall well below international standards and amount to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Q On 30 March Vyacheslav Sivchik, deputy chairman of the Belarusian Popular Front, received a 10-day prison sentence for his part in organizing a demonstration several days previously. After his release from the Okrestina detention centre he reportedly stated that he was deliberately placed in a cell with a broken window while the weather was very cold. He alleged that fellow inmates with a severe form of tuberculosis were kept together with other prisoners. In addition, on the last day of his imprisonment, guards allegedly spread disinfectant all over the cell while the prisoners were still in it.
Detention of protesters
During its third periodic review of Belarus in November, the UN Committee against Torture expressed concern about "persistent abrogations of the right to freedom of expression, such as limitations of the independence of the press, and of the right to peaceful assembly'. During 2000 Al continued to receive numerous reports of people who were arrested for exercising these rights. Q In the run-up to the elections in October, protesters in various cities and towns, including Minsk, Bobruysk and Vitebsk, were reportedly detained by police because of their attempts to organize a boycott of the elections. A number were reportedly fined, and their leaflets and other materials confiscated. Q In November over 100 young protesters, many of them minors, were detained by police in Minsk after staging an unauthorized demonstration, The police reportedly used considerable force to herd them onto police buses and into police vans.
Police ill-treatment
During an unauthorized demonstration in Minsk on 25 March, between 400 and 500 demonstrators were reportedly detained for several hours by the police. At least 30 journalists covering the demonstration were also targeted by the authorities. There were reports that police officers used unnecessary force to detain some protesters. A number of people complained of being knocked to the ground, beaten with truncheons, kicked by police officers and verbally abused. Q Yury Belenki, deputy chairman of the Conservative Christian Party of the Belarusian Popular Front, alleged that he and his companions were attacked by a group of police officers on Yakub Kolas Square in Minsk on 25 March. He stated that he was hit in the face with a truncheon, knocked off his feet and repeatedly punched and kicked. He was then arrested and held in detention for three days. The relevant prosecutor's office in Minsk reportedly refused to investigate his allegations of police ill-treatment.
Conscientious objection
Belarusian legislation does not allow conscientious objectors to military service to undertake an
alternative civilian service. Military conscription is compulsory for men aged between 18 and 27 and lasts 18 months, except for university graduates, who serve 12 months.
Q On 23 March Valentin Gulai, a 2t-year-old Jehovah's Witness, was given a suspended 18-month prison sentence by Rechitsa regional court for refusing to perform military service. The sentence was conditional and required him to spend 18 months working on state construction projects. Gomel regional court later reduced the sentence to a one-year suspended sentence.
Al country reports and visit
Reports
•	Possible "disappearances" in Beianjs(AI Index: EUR 49/003/2000)
•	Belarus: Conscientious objectorValentin Gulai (Al Index: EUR 49/012/2000)
•	Belarus: Dissent and Impunity (Al Index: EUR 49/014/2000)
Visit
Al delegates visited Minsk in March to take part in a human rights conference, to monitor a demonstration and trial and to meet lawyers and non-governmental organizations.
