RUSSIAN FEDERATION
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Head of state: Vladimir Putin
Head of government: Mikhail Kasyanov
Capital: Moscow
Population: 145.9 million
Official language: Russian
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
Serious and widespread human rights violations took place in 2000, including grave crimes against civilians on a massive scale during the renewed armed conflict in the Chechen Republic (Chechnya). Russian federal forces were responsible for gross human rights violations against the civilian populationof Chechnya. Thousands of civilians were killed in indiscriminate attacks and there were widespread reports of torture, incommunicado detention and summary executions. Few, if any, investigations into these crimes took place and none of those responsible were known to have been prosecuted in 2000. Throughout the Russian Federation, torture and ill-treatment in police custody, in prisons and in the armed forces continued. Prison conditions were cruel, inhuman
198
Amnesty International Report 2001
RUS
and degrading. Former prisoners of conscience faced trials. Refugees, asylum-seekers and internally displaced people were not given adequate protection. Conscientious objectors to military service continued to face imprisonment.
Background
2000 saw continuing political and economic instability and a general disregard for the rule of law. Government pressure to limit civil liberties increased against the background of the ongoing war in Chechnya.
Acting President Vladimir Putin won a decisive victory in the March presidential elections. President Putin divided the 89 regions of the Russian Federation into seven administrative regions and appointed representatives — some of them allegedly close friends and supporters from his time as a KGB officer — responsible only to the President. He also pushed through special legislation stripping regional leaders of their seats in the Federation Council.
The Russian authorities repeatedly made inflammatory statements designed to divert public criticism of the government by heightening anti-Chechen sentiment in the country. For example, the authorities repeatedly blamed Chechen ""terrorists" for bomb attacks, such as the bombing in Moscow in August, before investigations had produced any evidence as to who was responsible.
The Chechen conflict
The Russian authorities claimed that the situation in Chechnya had normalized following the scaling down of military activities in the first quarter of 2000. However, the human rights crisis in Chechnya continued. There were frequent reports that Russian forces indiscriminately bombed and shelled civilian areas. Chechen civilians, including medical personnel, continued to be the target of military attacks by Russian forces. Hundreds of Chechen civilians and prisoners of war were extrajudicially executed. Journalists and independent monitors continued to be refused access to Chechnya. According to reports, Chechen fighters frequently threatened, and in some cases killed, members of the Russian-appointed civilian administration and executed Russian captured soldiers. Q At least 60 civilians were summarily executed in the Noviye Aldy suburb of the Chechen capital, Grozny, by Russian forces duringa "cleansing operation" on ç February.
Q In March Russian forces launched an attack on a group of up to 60 civilians, mostly women and children, in the village of Samashki. The villagers had been promised a "safe corridor" for one day to allow them to collect food- Despite these assurances, the group came under artillery attack and at least three women were killed and five were wounded. Q Andrey Babitsky, a Russian war correspondent working for Radio Liberty, went missing in Chechnya while trying to leave the capital Grozny. It later emerged that he had been arrested by the Russian military authorities and was being held incommunicado. On 3 February the Russian authorities
announced that Andrey Babitsky had been handed over to Chechen fighters, reportedly in exchange for Russian soldiers held by Chechen forces. On 25 February Andrey Babitsky was found in detention in the Dagestan capital, Makhachkala, from where he was released and flown to Moscow following the intervention of Vladimir Putin.
Andrey Babitsky stated that he had been detained in the Chernokozovo "filtration camp" where he had been beaten with truncheons by Russian guards and heard the screams of other detainees, including a woman, being tortured. He also said that the Russian authorities had handed him over to unidentified Chechens, whom he believed to be collaborating with the Russian authorities, against his will.
Torture in 'filtration camps'
Russian forces continued to detain people in Chechnya at checkpoints and in the territories under their control. Most people were detained during so-called "cleansing operations" in newly occupied towns or during identity checks on civilian convoys travelling from Chechnya to neighbouring Ingushetia. People apprehended by Russian forces were sent to secret "filtration camps" where they were held without access to their relatives, lawyers or the outside world. Survivors of "filtration camps" stated that torture was routine and systematic. There were numerous reports of detainees being raped, beaten with hammers and clubs, given electric shocks or tear gassed. There were also reports that some detainees had their teeth filed down or were beaten around both ears simultaneously to burst the ear-drums. Senior Russian officials continued to deny the existence of "filtration camps" and to claim that no detainees in Chechnya were tortured.
O Witnesses stated that a 14-year-old girl, originally from Urus-Martan, died in detention in Chernokozovo at the beginning of the year, allegedly as a result of torture; she had been repeatedly raped by Russian guards. She had reportedly been detained at a checkpoint while travelling on a bus. According to the witnesses, the girl was among 60 women held together in cell number 25 in Chernokozovo, who were subjected to beatings by the guards. Q Musa (not his real name), a former detainee in Chernokozovo, stated that a 16-year-old boy called Albert, originally from the village of Davydenko, was brought to his cell after being gang-raped and severely beaten by prison guards. One of his ears had been cut -off- Musa believed that up to 10 men were raped in the camp during his 21-day detention. His other cellmates included a man whose hands had been severely burned by prison guards with cigarette lighters and a 17-year-old youth whose teeth had been filed with a metal file and whose lips were shredded, leaving him unable to eat, drink or speak. Internally displaced people
An estimated 300,000 civilians remained displaced by the conflict, both inside Chechnya and in neighbouring republics. About half were in Ingushetia living in very poor conditions; many lacked adequate shelter and
199	Amnesty International Report 2001

RUS
sanitation. Arbitrary official restrictions prevented most from travelling to other territories of the Russian Federation, placing a major strain on Ingushetia's own population.
Persecution of Chechens
Chechens and other people from the Caucasus continued to be arbitrarily detained, ill-treated and tortured in Moscow and other parts of the Russian Federation. In Moscow, Mayor Yury Luzhkov used unconstitutional measures, including the so-called propiska (residence permit) system, to expel thousands of Chechens and to deny registration to internally displaced Chechens who had fled the conflict zone. Reports continued to be received that in some cases police fabricated criminal charges against Chechens and planted drugs or weapons on them. In Moscow alone, more than 50 Chechens were sentenced to prison terms despite compelling evidence that the charges against them had been fabricated.
Abuses by Chechen fighters
Dozens of civilian hostages were reportedly held by armed Chechen groups. Two former hostages said they witnessed the killing in February of Vladimir Yatsina, a Russian news agency photojournalist who had been kidnapped in Ingushetia by a Chechen group in July 1999.
The international community
The Russian authorities refused to allow the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights to visit a number of secret "filtration camps" made public by Al. The reasons given were bad weather and security problems.
In April, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe voted to suspend the Russian delegation's voting rights and called on its Committee of Ministers to immediately invoke a procedure for the suspension of Russia's membership.
Al urged the UN Commission on Human Rights to call for an international investigation. However, the Commission called for the establishment of a national, broad-based, independent commission, in accordance with recognized international standards; none of the bodies established by the Russian authorities measured up to these standards.
Former prisoners of conscience
Q In November the Supreme Court ordered that the case of Grigory Pasko, a journalist and naval captain arrested in 1997 after exposing the Russian navy's illegal dumping of nuclear waste, be reconsidered, Q In April the Supreme Court upheld the acquittal in December 1999 of human rights defender Aleksandr Nikitin. He had been charged with espionage and revealing state secrets for his writings on the risks of radioactive pollution from Russia's Northern Fleet. An appeal against the acquittal by the Prosecutor General was dismissed in September.
Conscientious objectors
There was no civilian alternative to military service and conscientious objectors continued to face imprisonment. Young men who claimed conscientious
objection to military service based on their religious beliefs and membership of banned organizations, such as the Jehovah's Witnesses, were often not considered to be legitimate conscientious objectors by the courts. In some cases judges who ruled in favour of the conscientious objectors risked government pressure and retaliation by the authorities.
Q Prominent reformist judge Sergey Pashin was stripped of his post in the Moscow City Court in October because of a scholarly paper in which he questioned the legality of Dmitry Neverovsky's conviction for draft evasion. Dmitry Neverovsky — a student from Kaluga Region and a conscientious objector who refused to serve in the army during the war in Chechnya because of his pacifist beliefs — had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment in November 1999. He claimed that while in pre-trial detention he was systematically ill-treated by the guards. In April 2000 he was released from prison after his conviction was overturned on appeal.
Torture/ill-treatment
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police custody, during pre-trial detention and in the armed forces continued to be reported. Q Feodor Avdeev, a 68-year-old retired navy aviation major, was reportedly beaten to death on 28 November 1999 in the local market by a police officer in Podolsk, He was apparently selling chocolates at the market without a licence to trade. After Feodor Avdeev failed to produce a passport during an identity check, a police officer reportedly beat him repeatedly even after he had fallen to the ground. A criminal case against the officer on charges of "abuse of power" opened by the Office of the Procurator was closed in March, apparently for lack of evidence. Q New developments were reported in the case of Sergey Mikhailov who was sentenced to death in April '995 by the Arkhangelsk Regional Court for the rape and murder of a girl. Sergey Mikhailov claimed that he was subjected to torture and ill-treatment in order to force him to confess to the crime, and maintained his innocence. In April 2000 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation cancelled the previous court decision to sentence Sergey Mikhailov to death and returned the case for further investigation to the Office of the Procurator of Volgograd Region's Masked law enforcement officers reportedly ill-treated staff and visitors during a raid on the Moscow offices of the human rights organization, Glasnost Foundation, in August, Officers reportedly ordered everyone present, includinga lo-year-old girl, to lie face down on the floor at gunpoint. Officers allegedly kicked several of those present, including Sergey Grigoryants who was kicked in the head and back for not lying down quickly enough. The activists were kept lying on the floor for about 30 minutes. Armed forces
Widespread torture and ill-treatment in the armed forces resulted in a number of deaths of soldiers and officers-
200
Amnesty International Report 2001
RUS
Q In August, four discharged soldiers who served during the war in Chechnya—Vladimir Murashkin, Igor Koshelev, Larisa Klimova and Victor Khmyrov— reported the systematic use of torture and ill-treatment in the 72nd regiment of 42nd army division stationed around Stanitsa Kalinovskaya. They alleged that conscripts were systematically beaten by fellow officers and senior soldiers from the intelligence unit; that soldiers were kept for days in special zoo-like cages in front of the barracks; and that injured soldiers were shot at using automatic rifles. The four soldiers reported that private Vladimir Demakov was forced to spend 15 days in a cage and beaten with belts and a crowbar after writing a complaint to the unit commander about the ill-treatment of fellow soldiers.
Conditions of detention
Conditions in penitentiaries and pre-trial detention centres, which held up to a million people, did not improve and amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Hundreds of thousands of people awaiting trial continued to be held in grossly overcrowded conditions. Thousands had to sleep in shifts, often without bedding. Many cells were filthy and pest-ridden, with inadequate light and ventilation. Food and medical treatment were often inadequate. Tuberculosis and skin diseases were widespread. It was reported that on average more than 10,000 inmates died each year and more than 100,000 suffered from tuberculosis.
In May a new law designed to grant amnesty to detainees and prisoners sentenced for minor crimes was adopted by the State Duma (parliament) lower house to mark the 55th anniversary of the end of the Second World War in Europe. It was not clear how many people were freed under the amnesty, although the authorities reported in November that more than 168,000 people were released.
Politically motivated killings
Q Despite the conviction in November 1999 of three men in the Republic of Kalmykia in connection with the murder in June 1998 of Larisa Yudina, human rights groups in Kalmykia continued to maintain that the journalist was killed on the orders of Kalmykian President Kirsan Ilyumzhinov. According to Russian press reports, criminal investigators had indicated that President llyumzhinov's brother had ordered the killing.
Q In january police in St Petersburg detained Larisa Plaskova in connection with the murder on 20 November 1998 of prominent member of parliament Galina Starovoitova; she was released in February.
The death penalty
No steps were taken to abolish the death penalty in law.
There were several calls during the year by senior officials for the lifting ofthe de /acfo moratorium on the death penalty. In September some 60 deputies of the State Duma appealed to President Putin to lift the de facto moratorium on the grounds of rising crime throughout Russia, the series of apartment bombings in 1999, and a number of contract killings.
Refoulement
Legal provisions for asylum-seekers remained inadequate. Many people were at risk of refoulement (forcible return) to countries where they could face grave human rights violations. Q In December 1999 the Russian authorities forcibly returned seven North Koreans, recognized as refugees by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, to the People's Republic of China, apparently without giving them access to asylum procedures. At the beginning of 2000 the Chinese authorities forcibly returned the seven refugees to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea where they were at risk of grave human rights abuses.
Q Polvonnazar Khodzhayev was detained by officers of the Russian Special Services in the town of Samara on 5 April. He was subsequently handed over to Uzbek law enforcement officers and was forcibly returned to Uzbekistan. On 14 May he was sentenced to death by Tashkent Regional Court for attempting to overthrow the constitutional order of Uzbekistan in order to create an Islamic state.
Al country reports and visits Reports
•	Russian Federation: Environmental activist Crigory Pasko faces new imprisonment risk (Al Index: EUR 46/045/2000)
•	Russian Federation: Only an international investigation will ensure justice for the victims (Al Index: EUR46/023/2000)
•	Russian Federation: Continuing torture and rape in Chechnya (Al Index: EUR 46/036/2000)
•	Russian Federation: What future for Chechens-citizens or subjugated people (Al Index: EUR 46/044/2000)
Visits
Between March and June Al visited the country several times to carry out research on violations of human rights and international humanitarian law and to inten/iew people affected by the Chechen conflict.
201	Amnesty International Report 2001

