UKRAINE
UKRAINE
Head of state: Leonid Kuctima Head of government: Viktor Yushchenko Capital: Kiev Population: 50.7 million Official language: Ukrainian Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children inarmed conflict;Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court; Protocol No. 6tothe European Convention on Human Rights concerning the abolition ofthe death penalty
Ukraine removed the death penalty from its criminal code. There were a significant number of allegations of police ill-treatment and torture of detainees. Allegations that military conscripts were subjected to violent treatment known as "hazing" were also received. An independent journalist apparently "disappeared". The Ukrainian coastguard reportedly used excessive force a gainst Turkish fishermen in the Black Sea, resulting in one death. Ukraine lacked a genuine civilian alternative service to military service.
Death penalty
The Constitutional Court ruled on 30 December 1999 that articles in the criminal code providing for the death penalty were unconstitutional. Following the Court's decision, on 22 February 2000 the Ukrainian parliament, Verkhovna Rada, removed the death penalty from the criminal code. It also ratified Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention on Human Rights in line with Ukraine's commitments to the Council of Europe, which it had joined in 1995.
Torture/ill-treatment
Ill-treatment and torture of detainees by law enforcement officials appeared to be relatively widespread. A delegation of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment undertook a 16-day visit to Ukraine in September, after having visited the country in 1999 and 1998. Reports of the visits had not been made public by the end of 2000. Q Anatoly Voskoboinikov was allegedly forced to sign a confession at the Ministry of the Interior in Enakievo in November 1998. According to the Kharkov Group for Human Rights Protection, police officers handcuffed his wrists under his knees and slotted a length of wood between his arms and chest, then lifted him up by the piece of wood and hung him between two tables. The police officers allegedly then punched and kicked him while he was suspended in this painful position.
There were reports of ill-treatment and torture of young conscripts in the Ukrainian army. Each year a
number are reportedly driven to suicide and desertion as a result of hazing at the hands of other soldiers and officers.
Q Between May 1998 and September 1999,18 recruits who had deserted from their units appealed for help from the Kharkov Union of Soldiers' Mothers. Sixteen of them stated that they had deserted because they had been subjected to hazing.
Possible 'disappearance'
Georgiy Gongadze, a 31-year-old investigative journalist, failed to return home on the evening of 16 September. He was editor of the Internet newspaper Ukrayinskaya Pravda and an independent radio journalist, and had criticized members of the government and their allegedly corrupt relationship with powerful interest groups. In June he reportedly wrote an open letter to the Procurator General after being forced into hiding by police harassment Al called for an immediate and impartial investigation into his apparent "disappearance".
On 3 November a decapitated body was found in a shallow grave in woodland in the Tarashcha Rayon area, near the capital, Kiev, The body was later reportedly identified as the missingjournalist. Later in November the former presidential candidate and leader of the Socialist Party of Ukraine, Olexandr Moroz, claimed to have in his possession an audiotape recording of President Kuchma, allegedly made by a former officer of the Ukrainian State Security Service, in conversation with the Minister of the Interior, Yury Kravchenko, and the Chairman of the Presidential Administration, Volodymyr Lytvy. The recording allegedly implicated them in the "disappearance" of Georgiy Gongadze. President Kuchma and his colleagues vociferously denied the allegations and threatened Olexandr Moroz with libel action.
Excessive use of force
In March the Ukrainian coastguard fired shells at Turkish fishing vessels in the Black Sea in two separate incidents. Al expressed concern that the use of shells by the coastguard to stop fishing vessels may have represented unreasonable and excessive use of force. Q On 22 March a Turkish fisherman, Gurmiz Cinar, was killed and one of his colleagues was injured by a shell fired by the Ukrainian coastguard. The Turkish vessel was fishing illegally in Ukrainian waters around 200km from Odessa.
Harsh prison conditions
Conditions in prisons and pre-trial detention centres continued to fall below international minimum standards, and amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Prisoners were poorly fed, received inadequate medical care and were held in poorly heated and ventilated conditions in overcrowded cells.
Conscientious objectors
The alternative civilian service to military service in Ukraine extends only to those who object to military
Amnesty International Report 2001
253
UNI
service on religious grounds and belong to religious organizations registered with the state. At 36 months, it is also twice as long as military service. Q On 12July AndriJ Tvardijevych, an 18-year-old conscientious objector, was given a suspended one-year prison sentence and fined by a court in Kiev for refusing to serve in the army for reasons of conscience.
Al country report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Ukraine (Al Index: EUR01/003/2000)
