HONDURAS
REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS
Head of state and government: Carlos Flores Facusse
Capita I: Tegucigalpa
Population: 6.5 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
Indigenous peoples staged renewed demonstrations to promote long-standing demandsfor land, justice and improved services, but despite an agreement signed with authorities, most of the issues of concern remained unresolved. The National Police employed excessive force against demonstrators. Human rights defenders were again subjected to attacks and threats. Children were victims of grave human rights violations. Despitean important Supreme Court ruling, impunity was still prevalent in cases of past human rights violations.
Background
Among measures taken to deal with a reported rise in crime was a decision to allow the army to join the police force in law enforcement. The police force itself was often accused of involvement in criminal activities from drug-related offences to abuse of authority. A process to purge the force took place during 2000.
The government reduced the budget of the Office of the National Commissioner for the Protection of Human Rights. At least five regional offices had to be closed and staff were reduced in others. This followed an ultimately unsuccessful attempt in 1999 to amend the law regulating the Office, which would have reduced its scope for action and the period in office of the current Commissioner. The Office has played a crucial role in the protection of human rights and in exposing corruption since its inception in 1992.
In November the government finally provided compensation to families of victims of human rights violations in the 1980s. Relatives of 17 "disappeared" people, out of 184 officially acknowledged, received financial compensation following proceedings before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Some of the beneficiaries, however, stated that this action did not absolve the state from its responsibility to properly investigate the violations and bring those • responsible to justice.
Indigenous groups
Indigenous groups organized further demonstrations calling on the authorities to tackle the impunity surrounding the murders of indigenous leaders, to find solutions to land disputes and to improve health and education services. In September they organized a hunger strike to protest against the dismissal of Gilberto Sánchez Chandías, Special Prosecutor for Ethnic Affairs in the Public Ministry. His dismissal raised concern that the representation of indigenous
Amnesty International Report 2001
121
HON
people at an official level would be diminished. On 6 September both sides came to an agreement in which the authorities made a number of commitments, including the defence of the interests of indigenous groups, the creation of a Special Programme of Investigation into the killings of indigenous leaders and others, and the formation of a commission to guarantee the follow-up of previous agreements. However, by the end of 2000. there had been little, if any, progress-
There were further death threats, harassment and intimidation of indigenous leaders. In March, three leaders of the Coordinating Body of Popular Organizations of Aguan (COPA) received death threats, allegedly from armed groups with links to the authorities. One of them had been shot at three times in April and September 1999 and his house was set on fire. COPA works to promote the rights of peasant farmers, environmental protection and participation in elections.
In June Salvador Zúñiga and Berta Cáceres were harassed and intimidated, reportedly because of their work with the Civil Council of Popular and Indigenous Organizations (COPIN) in defence of indigenous people. Their house was broken into twice, and they were subjected to intimidatory surveillance. They opposed the building of the EI Tigre dam, which would displace indigenous people and flood their ancestral lands. Update
In October 1999,45 members of different indigenous groups were injured in demonstrations. On 12 October 2000. the victims finally received compensation from the state. Among the beneficiaries was 61-year-old Domingo Gómez, a Lenca peasant, who lost his right eye as a result of a wound from a bullet fired by the police.
Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders continued their efforts to protect human rights despite attacks and threats against them.
Q Julio César Pineda Alvarado, an outspoken journalist and human rights defender, received anonymous threatening calls at his home. In April he was shot at outside his house. His wife and two children were with him when two men got out of a car and, without speaking, one of them put a gun to his head and shot. He was wounded but the fact that he was wearing his motorbike helmet saved his life. In May his wife was approached and threatened by two men on a bus. An investigation into the shooting was initiated only after pressure from the National Commissioner for the Protection of Human Rights, but moved extremely slowly and by the end of 2000 had reported no findings. Al called on the authorities to investigate the threats, to bring those responsible to Justice and to guarantee Julio Pineda's safety.
Children
In January, 17-year-old Edy Nahum Donaire Ortega was killed by a police officer. He had been detained for alleged theft and held in the police station in San Juan Antonio de la Cuesta, municipality of San Jerónimo, department of Comayagua. This was in violation of the
law which prohibits the detention of minors in adult detention centres such as police stations. He escaped on his way back from being taken before a local judge. An officer of the National Preventative Police fired what he claimed to have been a "warning shot' into the air, but the bullet severed an artery in Edy Nahum Donaire Ortega's leg and he died from loss of blood. The officer was arrested on a charge of murder.
Also in January Francisco Javier Espinoza, a 17-year-old street child, died in custody after the police failed to provide medical attention following a severe beating by a bus driver and conductor in Tegucigalpa. They suspected Francisco Javier Espinoza had stolen some earrings from a passenger and beat him over the head with a metal tube. Police officers took him into custody but he died after receiving no medical attention for eight hours, despite profuse bleeding. Update
In the case of Alexander Obando Reyes, shot dead by a police officer in April 1999, a warrant was issued in October for the arrest of the police officer suspected of being responsible.
The National Police
The police force was responsible for human rights violations. In March, around 100 people whose houses had been destroyed by natural disasters staged a demonstration against an order to evict them from a housing project- At least 10 demonstrators were Injured when they were violently ejected by the police. Others, including children, were overwhelmed by tear gas.
The Special Human Rights Prosecutor in the Attorney General's Office reported allegations against the police for human rights violations including torture, unlawful arrest, abuse of authority and murders. The Office stated that it had initiated court proceedings against police officers.
Amnesty decrees declared unconstitutional
In June the Supreme Court of Justice issued a judgment declaring two amnesty decrees unconstitutional- The appeal against the amnesty decrees had been filed by the Attorney General's Office in January 1999. They related to the case of six university students—three women and three men - who were arrested without warrant in 1982 by armed men in civilian clothes. The students were taken to a police station and then on to an unidentified location where they "disappeared" for four days during which time they were tortured. Four of the students were released on the fourth day, and two were charged, but the case was thrown out by the court after 18 months. The Supreme Court's decision ordered the case against those responsible for the "disappearance" and torture to be returned to the First Criminal Court for further proceedings but no progress had been made by the end of 2000.
In July the Attorney General's Office requested clarification, as it considered that the decision should be applicable to all military personnel suspected of human rights violations in the 1980s, especially 184 "disappearance" cases, and not just one specific case.
122
Amnesty International Report 2001	122
HUN
In 1995,10 military officers were charged with attempted murder and illegal detention. The accused argued that amnesty decrees 199/87 and 87/91, which granted "full, unconditional amnesty", protected them. When arrest warrants were issued against them, the officers went "underground" and some were still in hiding at the end of 2000.
Al country report
• Honduras: Human rights violations against children (update) (Al Index: AMR 37/002/2000)
