CAMBIA
REPUBLIC OFTHECAMBIA
Head of state and government: Yahya Jammeh
Capital: Banjul
Population: 1.2 million
Official language: English
Death penalty: abolitionist in practice
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict
At least 14 people were killed and dozens injured in April when securityforces used excessive and indiscriminate force to break up student demonstrations. Members of the opposition faced harassment and arrest Civilians and soldiers suspected of plotting against the government were arrested and held incommunicado for long periods without charge or trial. Arbitrary detentions, ill-treatment and torture by the security forces were frequently reported.
Background
Politkal tension remained high throughout 2000. The government claimed to have foiled two coup plots in January and in June. Harassment and repression of political opponents continued unabated. In July President Jammeh was reported to have stated publicly that "anyone bent on disturbing the peace and stability of the nation would be buried six feet deep".
In December, the UN Panel of Experts investigating the trade in arms and diamonds in Sierra Leone identified Gambia as a transit country for conflict diamonds from Sierra Leone and called for an immediate embargo 'on trade in all so-called Gambian diamonds". The Gambian authorities, accused by the UN experts of not cooperating with the investigation, reportedly denied any lack of cooperation and any involvement in diamond trafficking.
Excessive and indiscriminate use of force
On 10 and II April, at least 14 people were killed and dozens injured, some severely, when security forces used excessive and indiscriminate force to break up demonstrations. Several of the dead were less than 18 years old. The unauthorized demonstrations were organized by the Gambian Students Union in Banjul, Brikama and other towns. They were called in protest at two incidents in March; the death, allegedly after torture, of a student, Ebrima Barry, and the rape of a 13-year-old schoolgirl, Binta Manneh, by a police officer. The demonstration in Banjul on 10 April became violent after the security forces tried to disperse crowds, including by using tear gas, batons and rubber bullets. It appeared that some demonstrators threw stones at security forces, burned tyres and set fire to buildings, including fire stations and police stations. The security forces reportedly fired into the crowd and autopsies
Amnesty International Report 2001
105
CAM
apparently confirmed that live ammunition was used-Omar Barrow, a journalist and Gambia Red Cross volunteer, wearing Red Cross insignia, was among those killed as he went to help injured demonstrators.
Neither the findings of a Commission of Inquiry subsequently set up by the government nor those of the inquiry carried out by the Coroner were made public by the end of 2000. In September, the Chair of the Commission of Inquiry was reported to have publicly acknowledged that security force officers were found to be largely responsible for the deaths and injuries of the students.
Torture/ill-treatment
Torture and ill-treatment were frequently reported. Many of the students arrested during and after the mid-April demonstrations were tortured and ill-treated in custody by members of the security forces, including the National Intelligence Agency. Q On 9 March, Ebrima Barry, a 19-year-old student, died in hospital allegedly after torture by Brikama Fire Service personnel. Officers suspected of responsibility for his death were arrested. Their trial had not concluded by the end of 2000.
The practice of female genital mutilation reportedly remained widespread, especially in rural areas.
Arrests of opponents
On 18 June, Ousainou Darboe, Secretary General of the opposition United Democratic Party (UDP). was arrested with scores of UDP members in the Basse region, east of Banjul, while campaigning for local elections. He was released on bail after being charged together with 24 others, including members of the National Assembly, with the murder of a supporter of the ruling Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and Construction (APRC). Ousainou Darboe's arrest followed what appeared to be an ambush of his convoy by members of a pro-government militia, the "22 July Movement". Although officially disbanded in 1999, the militia reportedly continued to operate.
At the end of 2000 the murder charges were dropped against all but five people, including Ousainou Darboe and other prominent UDP members. It appeared that this prosecution was intended to silence the UDP and prevent Ousainou Darboe from standing in presidential elections in 2001, as no credible evidence was reported to have emerged against the five. On 18 July, the European Union urged the Gambian authorities to respect fully the independence of the courts in the proceedings against Ousainou Darboe and members of his party.
Unlawful detention of suspected plotters
Civilians and members of the military arrested in January and in June on suspicion of plotting a coup were held incommunicado for long periods without being charged.
Q Lieutenant Landing Sanneh was arrested in January on suspicion of plotting to overthrow the government. He was held incommunicado for several months and charged in June with treason. It appeared that at least
one of his confessions was obtained after a death threat. Landing Sanneh was detained at State Central Prison (Mile II) awaiting trial before the High Court. However, in early December the authorities announced that he would be tried by the Court Martial. Q Momodou Ousman Saho and five others— Lieutenant Latojaiteh, Lieutenant Omar Darbo, Ebrima Barrow, Momodou Marena and Ebrima Yarbo—were arrested at the end of June and held incommunicado for more than four months. For at least three weeks the authorities denied to their families that they were being detained. The six were charged in mid-July by a magistrates' court which did not have jurisdiction to hear the case. Their lawyers were not present in court. Three others were charged in absentia. At the end of 2000, the six were being held at Mile II prison, where detention conditions were reportedly harsh.
Intimidation of journalists
Journalists continued to face arbitrary detentions and threats of violence by the security forces. Decrees 70 and 71, which unduly restrict freedom of expression, remained in force. Proposed legislation on the National Media Commission, which would have imposed further restrictions on the news media, was not passed by the National Assembly during 2000. Q In July, BabaGallehJallowandAlhagieMbyeofthe Independent were arrested, briefly detained and released on bail after being charged with libel for reporting on a prison hunger strike-
Death penalty
Appeals against death sentences passed by the High Court for treason had not been decided by the end of 2000. They related to four political prisoners sentenced to death in 1997 after an armed attack on Farafenni military camp in 1996, and to three others sentenced in 1999 after an armed attack on Kartong military post in 1997.
Al country report
• Gambia: Fourteen people killed and at least 28 injured (AI Index: AFR 27/001/2000)
106
Amnesty International Report 2001
