BOLIVIA
REPUBLIC OF BOLIVIA
Head of state and government: Hugo BanzerSuarez
Capital: La Paz
Population: 8.3 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: Abolitionist for ordinary crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Human rights violations vt/ere reported in Cochabamba Department In the context of a state of siege. Scores of people were arbitrarily detained and human rightsactivistsand journalists were harassed and intimidated. Conditions in prisons and detention centres constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Human rights violations were reported in El Chapare region.
Background
A state of siege was declared on 8 April following demonstrations against a government waterworks project in the city of Cochabamba, Department of Cochabamba. Scores of union and community leaders were arrested; most were held in incommunicado detention and sent into internal exile. Five people, including an army officer and a minor, were reportedly killed during violent confrontations between protesters and the military. A media blackout was imposed and local radio stations were forced off the air. The state of siege was lifted on 20 April after the government reached an agreement with peasant and trade union organizations. All those arrested were released without charge.
Police brutality
Demonstrations called in January and February by th5 Coordinadora Departamen tal de Defensa del Agua y ¡a VIda, Coordinating Committee for the Defence of Water and Life, in Cochabamba, were met with excessive use of force by the police and the military. The security forces indiscriminately fired tear gas, rubber bullets and pellets into the crowds. There were also reports of disproportionate use of force by the security forces against demonstrators in April. Scores of people were injured and four died, including a minor. Q In February, 14-year-old Wanderley Sinani Cardoso was doused with tear gas and sustained a fractured coccyx as a result of a beating by members of the
Amnesty International Report 2001
49
BOL
security forces. A few days later he collapsed at school and had to be taken to hospital where it was confirmed that he had suffered a brain haemorrhage. Q In April, 17-year-old Hugo Daza was shot dead in Cochabamba at the time that an army officer in civilian clothing was seen firing into the crowd during a demonstration, investigations were reportedly initiated by the army into the incident.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Scores of people were detained in February; all were reportedly beaten by the security forces.
Hours before the state of siege was declared in April, hooded police officers raided the homes of union leaders and members of the Coordinating Committee for the Defence of Water and Life in Cochabamba, arresting the leaders, beating members of their families, stealing household goods, and shooting at neighbours with pellets. There were also reports that people, including minors, were detained in La Paz Department and tortured to coerce them into incriminating community or union leaders. No investigations were initiated into these incidents. The government denied that minors had been ill-treated. Q Sixteen-year-old Pedro Alejandro testified that in February he had been subjected to electric shocks on his testicles while he was under arrest at a police station.
Q Sixteen-year-old David Goitia Benito was arrested in April in Cochabamba by police and taken to the offices of the Grupo Especial de Seguridad, Security Special Group, where he was badly beaten with a chain and hose. His nose was broken and his torso badly bruised. He managed to escape a few hours later.
Freedom of expression
Several journalists and human rights activists who were perceived as critical of the government or who had publicly criticized the authorities' actions in Cochabamba were threatened and intimidated. Q Journalists Osvaldo Rioja and Jhenny Osinaga received anonymous death threats after their television network broadcast footage of an army officer in civilian clothing firing at the crowd during a demonstration in Cochabamba in April. Q Sacha Llorenti, Legal Affairs Secretary of the Asamblea Permanente de Derechos Humanos, Permanent Human rights Assembly, received anonymous death threats in August. The threats were believed to be linked to his role in filing judicial complaints and calling for independent investigations covering human rights violations committed during the state of siege.
Prison conditions
Conditions in prisons and pre-trial detention centres fell well below international minimum standards and amounted in most cases to cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment. Most prisoners and detainees received inadequate medical care and were housed in poorly heated and ventilated, squalid and insanitary conditions. Many were forced to sleep on the floor in
overcrowded communal rooms, halls and open yards. Access to washing facilities was limited and the quality of food and water was very poor. Detainees at the high security prison of San Pedro de Chonchocoro in La Paz were reportedly tortured and ill-treated; AI delegates interviewed two inmates who had been tortured the day before their visit to the prison. No investigation was known to have been initiated into their allegations.
El Chapare
Reports of human rights violations in the context of the eradication of coca leaf crops in El Chapare increased in the second half of the year. In September and October security forces reportedly used excessive and arbitrary force against groups of demonstrators who had been blockading the main roads in the El Chapare area in protest at government policies. Ten people died and more than 100 were injured.
AI country reports and visit Reports
•	Bolivia: A shameful prison system (AI Index: AMR 18/006/2000)
•	Bolivia: The state of siege is no excuse for human rights violations (AI Index: AMR 18/002/2000)
•	Bolivia: There can be no justification for human rights violations (AI Index: AMR 18/011 /2000)
Visit
AI delegates visited Bolivia between June and July and interviewed prisoners and detainees in nine prisons and detention centres in La Paz, Santa Cruz, Cochabamba and El Chapare. The delegates held meetings at ministerial and local authority level.
50
Amnesty International Report 2001	50
