SWITZERLAND
SWISS CONFEDERATION
Head of state and government: Adolf Ogi
Capital: Bern
Population: 7.3 million
Official languages: German, French, Italian
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict
There were further allegations of ill-treatment of criminal suspects by police and of foreign nationals during forcible deportation. Some official investigations into such allegations were unsatisfactory.Acriminal investigation continued into the death of an asylum-seeker during deportation in 1999. A military appeal court confirmed that a Rwandese national was guilty of war crimes.
Background
A new Federal Constitution which came into force in January included specific prohibitions on torture and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and on the return of any individual to a state where they would risk such treatment.
in March a national referendum voted in favour of a package of reforms in the Justice system, already approved by parliament, including the eventual unification of the existing 26 cantonal codes of penal procedure and three federal laws on penal procedure. The text of a draft bill of unification was expected in 2001. In previous years both the UN Human Rights Committee and the UN Committee against Torture had recommended that Switzerland intensify its efforts to harmonize the cantonal codes, particularly with regard to the granting of certain legal guarantees providing safeguards against ill-treatment in police custody.
til-treatment on arrest
There were fresh reports of police ill-treatment of detainees, often accompanied by racist abuse in the case of non-Caucasians. Some criminal and administrative investigations into such allegations were inadequate. In its second report on Switzerland, published in March, the Council of Europe's Commission against Racism and Intolerance noted reports concerning police ill-treatment "particularly of non-citizens and Swiss of foreign origin" and stressed "the importance of setting up an independent body to investigate complaints of police ill-treatment" and of more systematic police training on "the subject of racism and discrimination". Q A criminal investigation was opened into a complaint which Rashid Abdul-Ackah, a Swiss citizen of Ghanaian origin, lodged against members of Zurich Municipal Police in December 1999. He said that while
Amnesty International Report 2001
231
SWI
walking through central Zurich, police officers subjected him to repeated, unnecessary identity checks, knocked him to the ground, handcuffed him, subjected him to racist abuse and transferred him to a pohce station where he was forced to strip. Within hours of his release, without charge, a local hospital issued a medical certificate recording bruises on his left arm and head. He maintained that there were no legal grounds for his detention and that the police had taken him to the police station in order to humiliate him. Q In January a 17-year-old Angolan schoolboy lodged a criminal complaint against three Geneva police officers. He accused them of kicking and beating him with truncheons until he lost consciousness and subjecting him to racist abuse after detaining him in November 1999 on suspicion of being involved in a street fight. He was held in a police station overnight, then charged with resisting the police, but subsequently acquitted. In April the Geneva Attorney General, who had opened a preliminary inquiry entrusted to the police, ruled that there were no grounds to justify further investigation and closed the inquiry. The boy had never been questioned about his allegations, in August, following an appeal, a Geneva court ruled that an investigating magistrate should carry out a full inquiry into the allegations, including questioning the boy and other relevant witnesses.
l-treatment during deportation
There were allegations that police officers subjected some foreign nationals resisting deportation to physical assault, death threats and racist abuse immediately prior to and during forcible deportations from Zurich-Kloten and Geneva airports. There were also unconfirmed reports that on occasion recalcitrant deportees were given sedatives in order to subdue them rather than for purely medical reasons. Some deportees claimed that they were deprived of food, 1 iquid and access to a lavatory for many hours until they reached their destination.
There were also claims that some form of mouth restraint was used in isolated cases involving deportations from Zurich. The use of any materials or methods which could block an individual's airways is highly dangerous and can result in fatalities. It was unclear whether any explicit instruction banning the use of all forms of mouth restraint was in existence and whether an internal service instruction issued to Zurich Cantonal Police in May 1998, explicitly authorizing gagging as a means of restraint during deportation, had been withdrawn. In August 1999 the Zurich cantonal government had announced that adhesive tape would no longer be used to cover deportees' mouths to prevent them shouting- In September 2000, it stated that a specially modified helmet introduced in July 1999, which had a chin-cup attached forcing the jaws closed and a cover which could be placed across the mouth, had not been used since September 1999. The government said that the helmet was no longer necessary because "forseeably difficult" deportations now took place via specially chartered flights and no longer on normal passenger flights. It added that open-faced rubber
helmets were in use to prevent recalcitrant deportees injuring themselves.
The Zurich government refused to supply AI or the Zurich parliament with copies of internal service instructions or any written guidelines issued to police officers concerning the treatment of detainees during forcible deportation. In November it stated that officers were authorized to wear masks during deportation operations, for their own protection. There was concern that, if masked officers did not display some form of identification prominently on their uniforms, this could prevent identification of alleged assailants and thus provide them with complete impunity. Q Gilbert Kouam Tamo, a Cameroonian, alleged that during his deportation from Zurich in April, masked officers kicked and punched him. beat him with batons, applied such pressure to his neck that he felt he was choking, pressed a pillow over his face and, when he was bound hand and foot and attached to an airline seat by several belts, twice punched him in the face. He also claimed that there was an unsuccessful attempt to inject him and that he was deprived of food and drink during a nine-hour flight. A hospital in Cameroon recorded extensive cuts and bruises to his face and body. Khaled Abuzarifa
In January the Bulach Public Prosecutor's office investigating the death of Khaled Abuzarifa, a Palestinian, during deportation from Zurich-Kloten airport in March 1999, announced that, in view of the findings of a post-mortem examination, three police officers and a doctor employed by the Canton of Bern, where the deportation operation began, had been put under formal investigation in connection with possible manslaughter charges.
Khaled Abuzarifa was given a sedative tablet, had his mouth sealed with adhesive tape, was bound hand and foot, and strapped into a wheelchair in preparation for deportation. The post-mortem report concluded that he died of suffocation as a result of the restraining measures to which he was subjected. It criticized the escorting police officers for losing valuable time in removing the adhesive tape after observing that he was unwell and noted that they had not received relevant training. The doctor, who assisted at the taping of the mouth and certified it as safe, even though the deportee was only able to breath through one nostril, was criticized for failing to provide them with relevant instructions. A supplementary forensic report was subsequently drawn up at the request of the accused and the criminal investigation remained open at the end of the year.
Universal jurisdiction over war crimes
In May a military appeal court reduced a sentence of life imprisonment passed on Fulgence Niyonteze, a former local government official in Rwanda, to 14 years' imprisonment. In 1999, in the first trial of its kind in the national jurisdiction of a foreign country, a military court had found Fulgence Niyonteze guilty of murder, incitement to murder and war crimes in the context of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
232
Amnesty International Report 2001
SYR
The appeal court found him guilty of war crimes and sentenced him for violation of the Geneva Conventions but set aside the charges of murder and incitement to murder, declaring that military jurisdiction was not competent to examine such offences when committed abroad by a civilian. Both Fulgence Niyonteze and the prosecutor lodged appeals against the sentence. As in the first instance trial, there was concern that the anonymity of witnesses was not adequately protected during the appeal hearings.
Al country report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Switzerland (Al Index: EUR 01 /003/2000)
