SINGAPORE
REPUBLIC OFSINGAPORE
Head of state: S.R.Nathan Head of government: Coh ChokTong Capital: Singapore City Population: 3.1 million
Official languages: Chinese, Malay,Tamil, English Death penalty: retentionist 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict
Freedom of expression continued to be curbed by an array of restrictive legislation and by the effects of civil defamation suits against political opponents. At least 29 Jehovah's Witnesses were imprisoned during the year. Death sentences continued to be imposed and 21 people were executed. Criminal offenders, including juveniles, were sentenced to caning.
Background
The ruling People's Action Party (PAP), in power since '959. continued to dominate the political scene, with 8o out of 83 elected seats in parliament. In May parliament passed the Political Donations Act, which sets tight limits on anonymous donations to political parties and prohibits civil society organizations frorn receiving foreign funding. Opposition leaders criticized the new legislation, saying it would make it more difficult for Singapore's small opposition parties to raise funds. They also expressed fears that the activities of nongovernmental organizations would be adversely affected.
Restrictions on freedom of expression and assembly
Although no new civil defamation suits were filed by government leaders, this practice continued to be misused to curb the right to freedom of expression and the right of political opponents to participate freely in public life. An array of restrictive legislation also remained in place, undermining the rights to freedom of expression and assembly.
In May police refused to issue a permit for a public forum on homosexuality, claiming it would be contrary to the public interest. Under Singapore's Penal Code, homosexual acts between consenting adults may incur lengthy prison terms. In recent years the authorities have also denied a gay and lesbian support group permission to register under the Societies Act.
In September, as part of an apparent attempt to encourage public debate on issues of national concern, the authorities allowed the creation of a new open-air forum, known as the 'Speakers' Corner". Opposition leaders voiced their scepticism about the "Speakers' Corner", reiterating concerns that there could be no true freedom of speech without reform of restrictive laws such as the Internal Security Act. which allows for indefinite detention without trial. In December, police
refused to issue a permit to the organizers of a marathon run to commemorate international human rights day.
Civil defamation suits
J.B. Jeyaretnam, the 74-year-old leader of the opposition Workers' Party, continued to face bankruptcy and the loss of his parliamentary seat. One set of proceedings stemmed from a defamation payment awarded against him, as the editor of the Workers' Party newsletter, for allegedly defaming a PAP parliamentarian and nine other members of the ethnic Tamil community in an article written by a colleague in 1995. In October, eight of the plaintiffs lodged a bankruptcy petition against J.B. Jeyaretnam, but later agreed to accept payment of the defamation award in instalments.
In December, in a separate case, a court awarded over 66,000 Singapore dollars (approximately US$38,000) to J,B, Jeyaretnam after ruling in his favour against a lawyer who had failed to pay costs previously awarded against him. Immediately following this, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and four others, including three PAP parliamentarians, applied to the courts to seize the 66,000 Singapore dollars awarded to J.B. Jeyaretnam on the grounds that a 1996 defamation award against the Central Council of the Workers' Party had not been paid in full. There were concerns that the timing of this application appeared designed to prevent J.B. Jeyaretnam from paying further instalments of damages in the Workers' Party newsletter case, thereby bankrupting him.
Conscientious objectors
At least 29 conscientious objectors to military service were imprisoned during the year. All were members of the banned Jehovah's Witnesses religious group. There was no alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors to military service.
Death penalty
The death penalty was mandatory for drug trafficking, murder, treason and certain firearms offences. At least five death sentences were reportedly passed during the year and 21 people were executed by hanging, 17 of whom had been convicted of drug trafficking. In reply to a parliamentary question, the Minister of Home Affairs revealed that 340 people were executed between 1991 and 2000, giving Singapore possibly one of the highest execution rales in the world, relative to its population. This was the first time special government statistics relating to the use of the death penalty had been made available.
Cruel judicial punishment
Caning, which constitutes cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment, remained mandatory for some 30 crimes, including attempted murder, rape, armed robbery, drug trafficking, illegal immigration offences and vandalism. Drug addicts also faced a mandatory caning sentence and imprisonment if they had been admitted more than twice to a drug rehabilitation centre.
Amnesty International Report 2001
213
