HAITI
Head of state: René Préval
Head of government: Jacques Edouard Alexis
Capital: Port-au-Prince
Population: 8.2 million
Official languages: French, Creole
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
The human rights situation deteriorated sharply, despite some positive steps towards accounting for past human rights violations. The electoral period was marred by assassinations of public figures and by violent attacks by political partisans, most often se If-described supporters of the Fanmi Laval3s(?l) party. MIegal security forces acting under the auspices of newly-elected local and regional officials emerged. Haiti also became more isolated from the international community, with the UN announcing its intention to end its field mission there.
Background
In January 1999, President René Préval failed to extend the mandates of Haitian parliamentarians. The terms of local officials expired as well, with the result that until the third quarter of 2000 there were practically no sitting officials in Haiti, and the president ruled by decree. Local and legislative elections were eventually held in May 2000. with a reported 29,000 candidates running for 7,500 posts. Turnout, estimated at 60 per cent, was the highest since 1990. The vote was declared generally peaceful by observers, with consensus that FL candidates had won the majority of contests.
However, dissension arose over the method used by electoral officials to determine whether a second round was necessary. International and some national observers declared the method used at the central level to tally votes and to determine whether run-offs were necessary in any given race to be fraudulent and biased in favour of FL candidates. Léon Manus, head of the Provisional Electoral Council, eventually fled the country for the USA, where he denounced President Préval for pressurizing him to tabulate results in favour of the FL party. The Organization of American States pulled out its election observers before the second round in July in protest. A modified Electoral Council oversaw the November presidential elections, despite some domestic criticism and lack of international support. The international community declined to support or monitor the presidential race and suspended much-needed aid.
Following a wave of pre-election violence, including anonymous bomb and grenade attacks that killed two children and wounded a reported 16 people, turnout was lower than for earlier contests. However, former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was elected overwhelmingly. His inauguration was set for February 2001.
Amnesty International Report 2001
119
HAi
The UN field mission, Mission Civile Internationale d'Appui en HaiW (MICAH), began work on 15 March. Its human rights advisers, already reduced in number from the previous level, were not deployed for several months owing to funding constraints. In November, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced that the mission, which had been present in various forms since 1993, would not be renewed the following year, stating that the UN contribution would be reduced to technical aid only. Al believed that this was due to funding or other constraints, rather than to consideration of the needs of the situation in Haiti. Al expressed great concern at the discontinuation of a human rights monitoring presence in the field when the human rights situation in Haiti was more serious than at any time since the 1994 return to democracy.
Violence in the electoral context
A number of electoral candidates, party members and their relatives were killed during 2000, most by unidentified assailants. Others went into hiding out of fears for their safety. Two children were killed in grenade and other explosions in the run-up to the presidential elections; no one claimed responsibility for these attacks. In addition, numerous arson attacks were carried out against electoral and party offices. Violence by self-described political partisans continued throughout the year. Sometimes the police failed to intervene and on a few occasions appeared to collude in the violence. In some instances the police were attacked when they intervened to stop violent demonstrators, Q Jean Dominique, a prominent radio journalist and advocate of human rights principles, was shot dead by unknown assailants outside his radio station, Radio Haiti Inter, on 3 April, The station guard, Jean Claude Louissaint, was also killed. A march of several hundred people calling for those responsible to be brought to justice was disrupted by self-described FL supporters, as was his funeral. They subsequently burned down the headquarters of an opposition party and threatened to attack the premises of a private radio station known to broadcast opinions critical of their party. That station subsequently stopped broadcasting temporarily because of security concerns and Radio Haiti Inter suspended broadcasts for one month after Jean Dominique's death. Investigations were continuing at the end of 2000, although one senator refused to comply with a judicial summons to testify, claiming parliamentary immunity.
Emergence of illegal security forces
Some of the local and regional officials elected in May and subsequent run-off elections established illegal security forces, which were responsible for a significant number of human rights violations. There is no legal basis or mechanism of control for these forces, and their members are generally supporters of the FL party to which most elected officials belong. In some instances officials claimed they were creating the forces to combat crime and bolster the Haitian National Police, which they accused of being ineffective; in others, their motivation was overtly political.
Q On 2 November, three participants and two passers-by were wounded by gunfire when a meeting of the opposition coalition Convergence Démocratique, and the grassroots organization Mouvman Peyizan de Papaye, in the town of Hinche was attacked by supporters of two local FL-affiliated mayors. The same evening, the house of the regional coordinator of the political party Espace de Concerfaf/on was set alight by armed attackers who forced their way in and stole radio equipment before setting fire to the building. The mayors themselves were reportedly present and active in some of these incidents. Members of the same group had reportedly closed a local court and threatened several judges whom they accused of belonging to opposing political parties. AI raised the incident with the Minister of Justice and Public Security, the President of the Senate and other high-ranking officials, all of whom expressed concern. The Prime Minister condemned the violence and pledged to dismantle such illegal forces.
The Haitian National Police
There were several reports of unlawful killings by police. Most of the victims were criminal suspects. Reports of ill-treatment of juvenile suspects following arrest were frequent.
Q A group of 25 children and adult men, illegally and arbitrarily detained in Petionville in mid-September by unofficial agents of the mayor's office, were reportedly beaten when they were seized. They were then handed over to the local police lockup, where they were held in such overcrowded conditions that several had to be hospitalized. When they protested against these conditions, they were reportedly beaten by police officers before eventually being transferred to the National Penitentiary.
The police were repeatedly accused of inaction in the face of politically motivated violence, and at times of complicity with partisans. In one October incident in which police tried to intervene during a political demonstration, a municipal police commissioner in Port-au-Prince attempted to disarm a well-known FL activist. The police commissioner and three accompanying police officers narrowly escaped lynching. Shortly thereafter, five police commissioners fled the country, fearing for their safety in the light of rumours, apparently unfounded, that they had been involved in a coup plot.
A rural police presence was under discussion to supplement the functioning of the Haitian National Police in the countryside. Human rights activists were concerned that its independence and impartiality should be guaranteed in light of the repressive tactics of the rural security system under previous governments, especially given the emergence of illegal and partisan security forces acting in conjunction with local officials.
In late April, the head of the internal affairs division responsible for investigating violations by police was removed; a permanent replacement had not been named by the end of 2000.
120
Amnesty International Report 2001
HON
Overcoming impunity
Some steps were taken to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations. Q The May 1999 extrajudicial execution of 11 people in Carrefour-Feuilles was the most serious human rights violation committed by members of the Haitian National Police since its inception in 1994. Several arrests were made and for the first time, police officers were brought to trial for human rights violations. Six of those arrested were released for lack of evidence before the trial began. Four police officers, including police commissioner Coles Rameau, were convicted and sentenced to the minimum penalty of three years' imprisonment and fined. Two others were acquitted. Q In October the trial began of those accused of participating in the 24 April 1994 Raboteau massacre. Raboteau, a heavily populated coastal neighbourhood outside the town of Gonaives, was targeted for repression under the de facto military government because of its activist past and its residents' allegiance to ousted president jean-Bertrand Aristide. Sixteen defendants were convicted and six acquitted. Among 37 others tried in their absence were former military ruler Raoul Cedras, former police chief Michel François, former paramilitary leader Emmanuel "Toto" Constant and former military leader Philippe Biamby.
Judicial concerns
The judiciary continued to be largely dysfunctional. Lack of progress in investigating and trying suspects contributed to severe prison overcrowding, with an estimated 80 per cent of detainees awaiting trial. In February Claude Raymond, a notorious supporter of the former government of Jean-Claude Duvalier, died in hospital after spending six years in prison without trial. Numerous judicial orders for his release had been ignored-
The Ministry of Justice and Public Security, with input from human rights and other groups, developed seven draft bills on crucial issues such as judicial reform, independence of the judiciary and the administration ofjustice.
Al country report and visits
Report
• Haiti: Unfinished business-justiceand liberties at risk
(Al Index: AMR 36/001 /2000) Visits
In MayAI met contacts in the Haitian diaspora community in Miami, USA. In October and November At delegates visited Haiti and met government officials, other authorities and members of different sectors of civil society.
