LES
LESOTHO
KINGDOM OF LESOTHO
Head of state: King Letsie III Head of government: Pakalitha Bethuel Mosisili Capital: Maseru Population: 2.1 million Official languages: Sesotho, English Death penalty: retentionist 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court
Political conflict continued during 2000 over the implementation of political reforms necessary for holding elections. Thirty-three soldiers were convicted of mutiny with violence. Concerns remained about the independence and impartiality ofthe trial proceedings and the appeals process. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment and of excessive use of force by law enforcement agents.
Background
Political tension continued during 2000, exacerbated by the failure to implement the new electoral system agreed upon by the government and the multi-party Interim Political Authority (IPA) in December 1999. Representatives of intergovernmental organizations, including the Southern African Development Community and the Commonwealth, intervened again to try to resolve the protracted conflict between the government and the IPA.
Under the November 1998 law which established the IPA, the authorities were obliged to hold elections within the following 18 months. However, elections scheduled for May were postponed, and a newly-appointed Independent Electoral Commission announced a provisional timetable for elections in 2001.
The failure to hold elections in May led to some protests. Opposition political leaders distanced themselves from calls by unidentified organizations for a stay-away from work. There were threats of violence against those who ignored the call and many businesses closed out of fear of disturbances. Heavily armed police and soldiers patrolled Maseru and five people were reportedly arrested in connection with the stay-away.
In April the government appointed a commission of inquiry into the political disturbances which occurred between 1 July and 30 November 1998-
Remaining military instructors and forces from South Africa and Botswana withdrew from Lesotho after completing their retraining program for Lesotho Defence Force (LDF) units.
Torture/ ill-treatment
There were a number of reports of torture of criminal suspects by police. Allegations included the use during interrogation of suffocation with rubber tubing, being forced to strip, cigarette burns and beatings.
Q The government settled out of court a claim for damages from Moitheri Katiso who alleged that he had been tortured in Lesotho by members of the South African National Defence Force in September 1998. He alleged that he had been kicked and beaten with gun butts, including on his face.
Excessive use of force
The security forces were involved in killings and injuries in disputed circumstances. There were allegations of excessive use of force. Q An LDF soldier. Corporal Monesapula, who was allegedly being sought by the combined police-military Counter Crime Unit (CCU) in connection with criminal investigations, was found dead with gunshot wounds to the head. He had reportedly fled from Ratjamose Barracks where he had been questioned by the Military Police on 16 January. His body was found about two weeks later at Ha Khabisi, lower down the Caledon River. An army spokesman stated that Military Police had searched him for weapons when he reported to Ratjamose Barracks, but claimed also that Corporal Monesapula had pulled a gun when he fled. There were separate reports that two army officers chased him as he fled towards the Caledon River. No inquest into his death had been held by the end of 2000,
O CCU members searching for guns opened fire with automatic weapons on Anthony Phafa, a Pitseng resident, after he denied possessing guns. During nearly three months of hospital treatment in Maseru, he was kept under guard and chained by his feet to the hospital bed railings. He was not charged with any offence until his transfer from the hospital to Leribe police station in mid-March.
Political trials
In November, 33 LDF soldiers were convicted of mutiny with violence, an offence carrying the death penalty, for their role in the junior officers' insurrection of September 1998, They were sentenced to between three and 13 years' imprisonment. Four other defendants were acquitted. In August, in a separate but linked court martial, three further LDF soldiers were convicted of mutiny and sentenced to prison terms of between five and 13 years.
Concerns remained that these court martial trials, as well as the appeal processes available to the convicted soldiers, did not meet International standards for independence and impartiality. The accused had been in custody since October 1998.
Twenty-five police officers were acquitted of the capital offence of high treason but convicted of sedition in connection with a February 1997 police mutiny which was suppressed by the army. Thirteen received prison
Amnestylnternational Report2001
157
LIB
sentences of up to three years, partly suspended. The remainder were fined. The defendants had been in custody since February 1997.
The trial continued of eight police officers in connection with the fatal shootings in Maseru Central Police Station in 1995. The arrest of these officers had sparked the February 1997 mutiny.
Human rights defenders
Benedict Leuta, a campaigner for the rights of communities affected by the Lesotho Highlands Water Project, was harassed by National Security Service members. They seized a number of documents from his home and questioned him about his activities and about his views.
Government communications
In letters to the authorities, Al raised concerns about the harassment of Benedict Leuta. In replies, the National Security Service gave assurances of their respect for the rights of freedom of association, movement and expression. Al also raised with the authorities its concerns about continuing reports of torture and excessive use of force in the context of criminal investigations.
