MOLDOVA
republic of moldova
Head of state: Petru Lucinschi
Head of government: Dumitru Braghi;
Capital: Chi^indu
Population: 4.4 million
Official language: Moldovan (Romanian)
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes (self-pro-
claimed Dnestr Moldavian Republic is retentionist)
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court
Arbitrary detention and ill-treatment by police continued. Conditions in prisons, institutions for compulsory treatment of alcoholics, and orphanages amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. At least four political prisoners remained imprisoned in the self-proclaimed Dnestr Moldavian Republic (DMR).
Background
The power struggle between President Petru Lucinschi and parliament continued throughout 2000. This impeded the adoption of legislation introducing social and economic reforms and affected international aid payments, in July amendments to the Constitution reduced the President's power to veto legislation and replaced direct presidential elections with a parliamentary vote for a head of state-
Talks on regulating the status of the DMR continued inconclusively. Efforts by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) to find a political settlement stalled after DMR representatives failed to take part as planned in the government delegation. There was no tangible progress in the reduction of Russian military stockpiles and forces from the DMR.
The Council of Europe's Commissioner on Human Rights visited Moldova in October The following month, the Council's Secretary General stated that Moldova had failed to meet a number of requirements to reform its legal system, particularly to adopt a new criminal code, code of criminal procedure, and laws concerning state prosecutors; to lift a series of press
170
Amnesty International Report 2001
MOR
restrictions; and to resolve the conflict between the Moldovan and Bessarabian orthodox churches.
Arbitrary detention and ill-treatment
Police officers continued to resort to administrative detention in order to detain suspects arbitrarily. The risk of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment was increased in July when the Constitutional Court reportedly ruled that police could keep suspects in custody for up to 72 hours before bringing them before the courts to decide whether arrest warrants should be issued. Those who are administratively detained for minor offences do not enjoy the rights to a public hearing, to be represented and to present their own defence. Such cases were routinely examined in the absence of the defendants. Q In April at least 24 students were detained in Chisinâu following protests concerning deteriorating student benefits. They were charged under the Administrative Code with participating in an unauthorized assembly and "shouting abusive words or slogans in public places". Many of the students complained about police ill-treatment at the time of arrest.
Cruel, inhuman or degrading prison conditions
The authorities failed to improve prison conditions which in many instances amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Conditions were especially harsh in pre-trial detention facilities. Q Around 1,700 people detained in Prison number 3 in Chisinâu awaiting trial were subjected to serious overcrowding and poor sanitary conditions. Iron bars and shutters blocked daylight and air from cells; most prisoners were not allowed to exercise in the one small courtyard available; and around 120 minors were kept in their cells 24 hours a day without access to any educational or recreational activity other than one hour a day in front of the television in a windowless room with no furniture.
People subjected to compulsory treatment for alcoholism and drug addiction were held in similarly deplorable conditions in psychiatric institutions or special facilities where they were compelled to undertake forced labour. Administrative procedures for ordering compulsory treatment lacked adequate judicial supervision and effective safeguards. Particularly poor conditions were reported in the psychiatric hospital in Curchi and in the Leova Rehabilitation Centre.
In January, an official administering European Union aid in Chi$inâu described the conditions in state institutions for orphans and children with disabilities as critical and "resembling Nazi camps during the Second World War". In addition to appalling standards of care, many children in orphanages in Bender and Tiraspol were subjected to a brutal regime in which they were tied to beds, kept in cages or kept isolated in locked rooms.
Political prisoners in the DMR
Hie lla$cu, Alexandru Lesco, Andrei Ivantoc and Tudor Petrov-Popa of the so-called "Tiraspol Six", convicted
of murder in 1993 by a court in the DMR, remained in prison. Their trial had reportedly failed to meet international standards of fairness and the men had allegedly been prosecuted for political reasons, in June the European Court of Human Rights began considering their application; they claimed that they had not been convicted by a competent court, that the proceedings leading to their conviction were not fair, and that their prison conditions were in breach of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. International efforts to organize a retrial in a third country continued.
