TUR
URKEY
republicofturkey
Head of state: Ah met NecdetSezer (replaced Suleyman Demirel in May)
Head of government: Biilent Ecevit
CapitahAnkara
Population: 66.6 million
Official language:Turkish
Death penalty: abolitionist in practice
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
Optional Procotol to the UN Children's Convention on
the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Human rights defenders continued to face harassment and intimidation; branches of human rights associations were temporarily closed and board members put on trial. Writers, politicians, religious leaders, human rights defenders and many others were tried and imprisoned for exercising their right to freedom of expression, particularly when they expressed opinions on the Kurdish question or the role of Islam. Torture remained widespread and the perpetrators were rarely brought to justice. Prisoners were killed and seriously wounded when protests against the replacing of dormitories with smaller cells were ended with force. There were concerns that conditions in the new smaller cells could amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Some 2,000 suspected members ofthe militant Islamist organization Hizbullahwere arrested; some were held in prolonged police detention. The bodies of dozens of people were exhumed; the killings were attributed to Hizbullah.A number of political killings were reported. The de facto moratorium on executions was upheld.
Background
Although the conditions set out in December 1999 for accepting Turkey as a candidate for membership of the European Union (EU) included an improvement in the country's human rights record, no substantive reforms or improvements were recorded in 2000. The government committed itself to a schedule for reforms, but major legal changes were envisaged only for 2001 or 2002. The Chairman of the High Coordination Board for Human Rights drafted a proposal for steps to be taken to meet the Copenhagen political criteria, a precondition for the start of accession negotiations with the EU. A revised version of this report was adopted in September.
The former head of the Constitutional Court, Ahmet Necdet Sezer, was elected President in early May and made several speeches in which he stressed the importance of human rights, the rule of law and democracy.
The armed conflict between government forces and the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) effectively came to an end in 1999 and only a few clashes between the Turkish army and dissident PKK groups were reported. Nevertheless, repression of political parties and organizations in southeastern Turkey, which has a mainly Kurdish population, continued unabated. Representatives of the pro-Kurdish People's Democracy Party (HADEP) were arrested and put on trial. Numerous associations and media companies were closed and demonstrations, meetings and other public events were banned.
Torture/ill-treatment
Torture was widespread. There were numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment of men, women and children, mainly from western cities, the southeast and the region around Adana in the south. Many of the victims were political activists, including supporters of leftist, pro-Kurdish and Islamist groups. Despite intimidation and fear of reprisals, dozens of allegations of torture were received from people arrested on criminal charges. Other victims of torture and ill-treatment included Kurdish villagers, relatives of political activists, students and women's groups. Allegations were also received from police officers and leading figures in organized crime.
Torture and ill-treatment occurred mainly in police and gendarmerie stations during the first days after arrest. The most frequently reported methods included severe beatings, prolonged blindfolding, suspension by the arms or wrists, electric shocks, sexual abuse, and food and sleep deprivation. Q Ramazan Tekin, Deputy Mayor of Diyarbakir, was arrested in January and held for lo days at Diyarbakir Gendarmerie where he was reportedly beaten, suspended by the arms, sexually abused and given electric shocks. Doctors from the Forensic Institute who examined him reportedly confirmed that his ribs were broken and his kidneys damaged. His lawyer filed a formal complaint against the security officers suspected of being responsible, but the governor of Diyarbaki r did not give permission for the two gendarmes to be prosecuted. Rape in custody
Rape and sexual assault by members of the security forces continued to be reported. During incommunicado detention in police or gendarmerie custody, women and men were routinely stripped naked. Methods of sexual abuse reported included electric shocks and beating on the genitals and women's breasts and rape, Q Azime Arzu Torun was reportedly raped by gendarmes and prison guards with a truncheon when security officers ended the inmates' protest in Burdur prison on 5 July. She was also said to have been exposed to sexual harassment while giving her testimony to an inspector.
Suspected Islamists
Some 2,000 alleged members of Hizbvllahv/ere arrested following the launch of an extensive operation against the organization by the security
Amnesty International Report 2001
247
TUR
forces in January. Subsequently, the bodies of some 67 people were exhumed; their abduction and murder were attributed to Hizbullah. Some observers claimed that Hizbullah had been acting in collusion with parts of the Turkish security forces during the armed conflict. Some of those detained in the raid against Hizbullah were held in police detention for prolonged periods during which they were at risk of torture and ill-treatment. The maximum period for police and gendarmerie detention is seven days and, in the provinces under State of Emergency, 10 days. However, several of these detainees were held for much longer periods.
Q Fahrettin Özdemir was detained in February and later indicted in the main Hizbullahxnal in which he and 14 others were charged with some 150 murders and in which the death sentence was sought. On 10 July, in the first trial session, he stated that he had been held in police custody for a total of 59 days and that he was given electric shocks and suspended by the arms, and his testicles were squeezed and beaten at the Police Headquarters in Gaziantep. Parliamentary Human Rights Commission The Parliamentary Human Rights Commission published nine reports on their investigations into torture and ill-treatment. They had interviewed prison inmates in various provinces and subsequently carried out unannounced on-the-spot visits to detention centres where there had been frequent allegations of torture and ill-treatment. For example, in Istanbul the Commission found equipment used for suspending detainees by the arms. The reports, which contained pictures of detention places, interrogation rooms and torture equipment, as well as the transcripts of interviews, represented an extraordinary step forward in official circles in documenting and acknowledging torture-Prisons
There were reports of poor medical care in prisons and beatings during transfers to and from prison. Most prisoners were housed in large dormitories holding 60 or more prisoners, but wings based on a cell system were added to many prisons and 11 new prisons with small cells were being built. There was concern that regimes of isolation already practised in Kartal and Imrali prisons might be extended to the new prisons.
From October, more than i.ooo prisoners participated in a hunger strike against the new prisons. On 19 December the security forces conducted an operation in 20 prisons in which dozens of prisoners died- Hundreds of prisoners were beaten before, during and after their transfer to three new prisons where they were subjected to solitary confinement and small-group isolation.
Q On 5 July political prisoners in Burdur prison barricaded themselves in dormitories. According to the prisoners, the security forces threw smoke bombs, tear gas and nerve gas into the dormitories and started to break down the wails with bulldozers. The prisoners said the security forces attacked them with iron poles, truncheons, roof tiles and stones, dragging
unconscious prisoners out of the dormitories with long-handled hooks. Lawyers permitted to meet some of the prisoners on 8 July noted that all had signs of severe injuries on the visible parts of their bodies, and had difficulty breathing and speaking. Impunity
The authorities remained reluctant to investigate allegations of torture. Officers accused of torture were rarely suspended from duty, and in some cases received promotions. It was difficult to establish who was responsible as detainees were almost invariably blindfolded during interrogation and custody records were often poorly maintained or non-existent. Medical evidence of torture was frequently suppressed. Medical officers who falsified reports were promoted while doctors who carried out their duties scrupulously were harassed, put on trial or imprisoned. The intimidation of witnesses and a generalized climate of fear also contributed to impunity, as did prosecutors' reluctance to investigate the work of security force officers. Judges often refused to investigate allegations of torture and accepted confessions extracted under torture as evidence, in violation of the UN Convention against Torture. Under the 1999 Law on the Prosecution of Civil Servants the permission of a senior official is required for the prosecution of suspected human rights abusers.
Q In July 1999 Cevat Soysal was reportedly abducted in Moldova, taken to Turkey and held for 10 days in incommunicado detention. He reported that at the Turkish Secret Service (MIT) headquarters he was given electric shocks, hung by the arms, forced to lie naked on ice, sprayed with pressurized water, deprived of sleep, beaten and forced to swallow a drug. At their meeting Cevat Soysal's lawyer noted needle marks, bruising and other signs consistent with his client's allegations of torture. In November 1999, the prosecutor decided not to open a trial against the alleged torturers; the Office of the Prime Minister had informed him that a prosecution would not be appropriate. In January and February 2000 the appeals of Cevat Soysal and his lawyers against the decision not to prosecute the suspected torturers were rejected. At the end of 2000 Cevat Soysal remained imprisoned on charges of separatism and being a leading member of the PKK.
No justice for women raped in custody
By November, 132 women—97 of them Kurds—had sought help from a legal aid project in Istanbul set up to bring perpetrators to justice. Forty-five of the women alleged that they had been raped and 87 reported other forms of sexual abuse. The suspected perpetrators — overwhelmingly police officers, although allegations were also made against gendarmes, soldiers, and village guards—were rarely brought to justice. Q In November 1996, a young Kurdish woman, Zeynep Avci, arrested during an operation against the PKK, was subjected to sexual harassment, rape and electric shocks at Izmir Police Headquarters. The authorities not only failed to initiate prompt, comprehensive and impartial investigations into
248
Amnesty International Report 2001	248
TUR
these allegations, but also exposed Zeynep Avci to additional gender-based discrimination. In an apparent attempt to discredit her, allegations of a previous abortion were submitted to the European Court of Human Rights to which she had meanwhile filed an application.
Prisoners of conscience
Writers, publishers, researchers, environmentalists, trade unionists, local and national politicians, religious leaders, human rights defenders and many others continued to be imprisoned or tried for exercising their right to freedom of expression, particularly on issues related to the Kurdish question or the role of Islam in politics.
Q In July the Appeal Court upheld a sentence of one year's imprisonment against Necmettin Erbakan, the former leader ofthe banned Islamist Welfare Party. Necmettin Erbakan had been sentenced in March 2000, for a speech he delivered in February 1994 during local elections. In his speech Necmettin Erbakan had criticized the representatives of other parties for "false beliefs" and being dependent on the West. He had also referred explicitly to a Kurdish electorate. There was no incitement to violence in his speech-Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders continued to face harassment and intimidation. Human Rights Association (IHD) branches in Van, Gaziantep and Malatya were closed indefinitely and those in Diyarbaki r and Konya were closed temporarily. The Urfa branch of the Islamic-oriented human rights organization Mazlum Derv/as reopened in April, but the Malatya branch remained closed. Doctors and other staff of the Human Rights Foundation in Turkey (TIHV) working on the documentation and treatment of torture in Izmir were put on trial. Doctors in Istanbul who certified torture were also harassed. Trials were continuing against a number of lawyers as well as representatives of IHD and Mazlum Der.
Q Akin Birdal, former President of the IHD, was imprisoned between March and September to serve the remainder of two one-year sentences imposed for speeches in connection with World Peace Day in 1995 and 1996. He had been temporarily released from prison on 25 September 1999 to enable him to receive proper medical treatment, but was banned from leaving the country and thus prevented from taking advantage of offers of specialized medical treatment abroad. In March 2000 the prosecutor rejected his application for the postponement of his sentence on medical grounds.
Death penalty
With the decision in January to halt the procedures related to Abdullah Ocalan's death sentence, the de facto moratorium on executions was upheld. However, at least 80 death sentences were passed in the first 11 months of the year, 28 of which were later commuted to prison terms. By the end of the year the death sentences of 71 other people had been upheld by the Appeal Court and submitted to pariiament for final confirmation.
Other concerns
A number of possible extrajudicial executions were reported.
Q Three villagers were killed on 19 October in the southeastern province of Hakkari. A fourth villager was wounded and subsequently taken into gendarmerie custody. The circumstances ofthe killings were disputed.
Numerous deliberate and arbitrary killings were attributed to armed opposition groups.
More than a hundred "disappearances" from previous years remained unresolved. Some new cases were reported,
AI country reports and visits Reports
•Turkey: Torture-a major concern in 1999 (AI Index: EUR44/018/2000)
•	Turkey: Amnesty International's recommendations to thegovemment(AI Index: EUR44/019/2000)
•	Turkey:The alleged torture of Cevat Soysal at National Intelligence Agency Headquarters, Ankara (AI Index; EUR 44/036/2000)
•	Turkey: New law on the prosecution of civil servants -nota majorsteptowardsending impunityfortorturers (AI Index: EUR44/038/2000)
•	Turkey: Torturers of mother and infant go free (AI Index: EUR44/061/2000)
•	Turkey: Amnesty International's continuing concerns and the EU Accession Partnership with Turkey (AI Index: EUR44/068/2000)
Visits
AI delegatesvisitedTurkey in April and November to research human rights violations. AI trial obsen/ers visited Turkey in February, March, May, June and August,
Amnesty International Report 2001
249
