LAO
LAOS
LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
Head of state: Khamtay Siphandone
Head of government: Sisavat Keobounphanh
Capital: Vientiane
Population: 5.4 million
Official language: Lao
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Freedom of expression, association and religion continued to be severely restricted. Tight controls on information prevented adequate international and local monitoring ofthe human rights situation. At least five people were arrested in connection with a series of bomb attacks. Three prisoners of conscience and two political prisoners continued to be held in cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions. New information suggested that scores of people were detained for their Christian beliefs. The fate of protesters arrested In October 1999 remained unknown.
Background
A bombing campaign began in March, and at least nine bombs were planted during 2000 in busy public locations, mostly in Vientiane, causing one death and dozens of injuries. No group claimed responsibility, but it was reported that the authorities had arrested five people. They were not identified and there was no information on whether they had been charged and tried. In July there was an armed attack on customs and immigration offices in the border village of Vang Tao, Champassak province, by alleged members of an armed opposition group. Six people were killed by Lao security forces, and 28 others were arrested after fleeing to Thailand. There were unconfirmed reports that at least 15 people were arrested in November following a peaceful demonstration in Sanasomboune, Champassak province. As many as 300 demonstrators were reportedly calling for social justice and democracy.
In December Laos hosted the first Ministerial meeting to be held between the European Union and the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) since 1997.
Political prisoners
Official secrecy about political imprisonment continued. At least five anti-government protesters arrested in October 1999 remained in detention. The authorities did not make public any information about charges against them or their whereabouts, heightening concern for their safety. Thongpaseuth Keuakoun, Khamphouvieng Sisaath, Seng-Aloun Phengphanh, Bouavanh Chanhmanivong and Keochay
were all members of the "Lao Students Movement for Democracy of 26 October 1999", who had attempted to publicly call for respect for human rights, the release of political prisoners, a multi-party political system and elections for a new National Assembly. Sinh Sanay and his sister Sinh Keotha were also reportedly arrested in October for involvement in the planned demonstration. The authorities denied that any protest or arrests had taken place, despite eyewitness accounts.
Two political prisoners, Sing Chanthakoumane and Pangtong Chokbengboun, detained for "re-education" without charge or trial since 1975 and then sentenced to life imprisonment after an unfair trial in 1992, continued to be detained at Prison Camp 7 in Houa Phanh Province.
Q Prisoners of conscience Feng Sakchittaphong and Latsami Khamphoui, both 60 years old, remained in Prison Camp 7, in a remote area of Houa Phanh Province. Both men were arrested in 1990 and sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment in 1992 following an unfair trial. Although they were charged with national security offences, it is believed that they were imprisoned solely for peacefully advocating nonviolent political and economic change. The conditions of their detention continued to be harsh, including being held in darkness for almost 24 hours a day and only being allowed to bathe in a river every one or two weeks. Their health was fragile and food and medical care were inadequate. Visiting rights for their families were severely restricted.
Religious persecution
Restrictions on freedom of religious expression continued with the authorities apparently regarding members of small unauthorized Christian churches with suspicion. New information suggested that scores of Christians were arrested in 1999 and remained in detention, and that possibly dozens more were arrested throughout 2000. Christians worshipping in small church groups outside state control were reportedly asked to repent their faith in writing or face imprisonment, confiscation of property and forced relocation of their families. Official closure of unauthorized churches was also reported. Incidents occurred all around the country in the provinces of Attapeu, Champassak, Houa Phanh, Luang Nam Tha, Luang Prabang, Phong Saly, Savannakhet, and Vientiane.
Three pastors arrested in July 1999 in Luang Prabang Province and sentenced to five years' imprisonment were reported to be in poor health. Pastor Boonmee, Pastor Sisamouth and Pastor On Chan were detained with 13 other pastors and village elders. Arrests reported during 2000 included Reverend Savath Heunlith, Pastor Thongla and Pastor Thongsouth in Sayaboury Province in May, and Pastor Ah Lon, reportedly imprisoned in Bolikhamsai Province for three years.
Q Pa Tood, a rice farmer and local church leader arrested with 15 others in March 1999 in Savannakhet Province remained in detention in Savannakhet City
Amnesty International Report 2001
153
LEB
Prison. He was reportedly held in stocks in solitary confinement because of his refusal to repent his faith. Q Khamtanh Phousy, a prisoner of conscience detained since 1996, remained in detention at Prison Camp 7 in Houa Phanh Province. A former army officer who converted to Christianity, he had been sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for "irresponsibility in his work" and corruption. Al believes that the charges against him were politically motivated.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Torture and ill-treatment in police stations were widespread. One person interviewed described it as "normal practice" when a relative detained on criminal charges was beaten, kicked and punched by police in order to make him confess.
Prisoners were commonly held in conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Reports of ill-treatment and torture of prisoners included beatings, being held in stocks for long periods of time, deprivation of light, adequate food, water and medication, and the use of solitary confinement cells. Access to family was also denied.
Official responses
Letters from officials in Lao embassies showed lack of knowledge about individual prisoner cases and dismissed concerns about human rights violations.
Al country report
• Lao People's Democratic Republic: The October protesters - where are they? (Al Index: ASA 26/004/2000)
In August the Ministry of Defence issued a statement outlining its position regarding the introduction of an alternative service and stating its wish to convene a round-table discussion of the issue with various nongovernmental organizations and religious groups. However, there was concern that the Ministry of Defence's model did not appear to provide for a genuinely civilian alternative service, since conscientious objectors could be forced to perform non-combatant support functions in the armed forces. No decision had been taken by the end of the year.
Al country report
• Latvia:Therighttoconscientiousobjection(AI Index: EUR 52/001/2000)
