CAMEROON
REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON
Head of state: Paul Biya
Head of government: Peter MafanyMusonge
CapitahYaounde
Population: 15 million
Official languages: French, English
Death penalty: retentionist
Several hundred extrajudiciat executions were reported by the security forces in combating crime. There were no independent investigations into these or previous such killings. Torture, ill-treatment and life-threatening prison conditions persisted. The UN Special Rapporteur on torture confirmed that torture was widespread and systematic. Members of political opposition groups and journalists were detained without charge or trial. Prisoners convicted after unfair trials in 1999 remained In prison. Some long-standing political detainees were released.
Background
The government refused to accede to renewed cal Is by opposition parties for an independent electoral commission. In 1997 international observers recommended an independent body after legislative elections were marred by irregularities and intimidation, and opposition parties boycotted presidential elections.
A1990 law ending a state monopoly on broadcasting was enacted in April and resulted in an increase in the number of private and regional radio stations.
A crack-down on crime raised public concerns about a continuing high level of killings of criminal suspects by the security forces.
Controversy continued around the project to build an oil pipeline from Chad through Cameroon, with local rights activists campaigning for environmental and minority rights to be respected.
In October there were reports of incursions by gendarmes into the coastal Bakassi region resulting in loss of life and property. The area, believed to be rich in oil, has been the subject of international legal dispute between Cameroon and Nigeria for several years.
Extrajudicial executions
Hundreds of criminal suspects were reportedly killed in and around Douala, the economic capital, and in northern Cameroon in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed by the security forces. There has been no independent investigation into these killings or similar large-scale killings which have occurred in previous years.
In its final conclusions following consideration of Cameroon's periodic report in November, the UN Committee against Torture called for special security units accused of gross human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions, to be disbanded. Douala
In February a special security unit, known as the Commandement opérationnel iCO), the Operational Command, was set up to combat street crime in Douala and Yaoundé, the capital, it was reportedly responsible for killing scores of criminal suspects, as well as for carrying out beatings, rapes and other ill-treatment of detainees.
Q On 9 April the mutilated body of Alain Dikala was found in Douala with bullet wounds to the head. He had been arrested by the unit on 18 March and, four days before his death, transferred to the naval base in Douala.
â In May the bodies of nine people reportedly killed by CO officers were found in Petit Dibamba, a village near Douala.
In June Cardinal Christian Tumi, Catholic Archbishop of Douala, complained to the Minister of the Interior about the killings of more than 500 people by the security forces. In early September a local human rights organization named 29 of those killed. In November a mass grave containing at least 36 bodies was discovered in a Douala cemetery, and there were concerns that they included victims of extrajudicial execution. An eyewitness and others have cast doubt on the government's statement that these were authorized burials. The eyewitness subsequently received anonymous threats. The government promised an inquiry but no information was available on its progress by the end of 2000. Northern Cameroon
A joint army and gendarmerie anti-robbery unit, known as the brigade anti-gang, which has been responsible for extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects in recent years, reportedly carried out further killings. In early December, 13 detainees held without charge or trial were alleged to have been executed shortly after the brigade anti-gangreceived an order from the Ministry of Defence to release 77 detainees from its detention centre in Maroua, Far-North Province. The fate of two nationals from neighbouring Chad, Toki Soromoukou and Adam Yahya, detained since their arrest in Garoua, North-Province, in September 1998, remained unknown.
Photographer Aminou Aliou was released without charge by the brigade anti-gang 'm September. He had been feared killed or secretly detained following his arrest and subsequent "disappearance" in October
64
Amnesty International Report 2001
CAM
1998 after he distributed photographs of victims of extrajudicial executions.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Cases of torture and ill-treatment in police, gendarmerie and prison cells continued to be reported throughout the country. Prison conditions remained so harsh as to amount to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Political prisoners were held incommunicado and dented access to health care, resulting in a high level of illness and death.
In February the UN Special Rapporteur on torture published a report in which he described the practice of torture in Cameroon as "systematic and widespread". During his visit to the country in May 1999 he had been refused access to the detention centre of the brigade anti-gangin Maroua, Far-North Province. In November 2000 the UN Committee against Torture confirmed the Special Rapporteur's assessment and called for "energetic investigations into all allegations of human rights violations and torture" and "a publicly accessible register of detainees".
Q In late January Mboua Massok, a leading member of the political party Programme social pour la liberté et la démocratie, Social Program for Liberty and Democracy, and student leader Guy Simon Ngakam were arrested and reportedly beaten by police. Their arrests followed student protests in Douala about education policy. They were released uncharged after a few days.
Q On 14 September Mathew Titiahonjo Mboh died in Bafoussam prison. West Province, after being denied access to medical treatment. He was a member of the Southern Cameroons National Council (SCNC), a group supporting independence for the English-speaking North-West and South-West Provinces. He had been arrested in May with nine other SCNC supporters in Ndop, North-West Province, and held without charge or trial. The other detainees were subsequently released on bail.
Prisoners held for political reasons
Political opponents, journalists and others were detained on charges which were apparently politically motivated.
Members of the political opposition
Opposition leaders from English-speaking areas of Cameroon were arrested as suspected secessionists and detained without charge or trial. Q From a group of 36 prisoners convicted in October 1999,18 remained in prison, all held at the Central Prison, Nkondengui, in Yaoundé. The charges against them, including murder and robbery, were in connection with armed attacks in North-West Province in March 1997 in which 10 people died. The authorities blamed the attacks on the SCNC, although no evidence substantiating this accusation was produced in court. Their trial by military tribunal was unfair and they had no right of appeal to a higher or independent court. Several were seriously ill as a result of medical neglect. In May Philip Tete had a stroke and was left partly paralyzed after being denied timely hospital treatment.
In December student Julius Ngu Ndi was reportedly close to losing his sight from being detained in unhygienic conditions and almost permanently in the dark.
Q Following the radio broadcast of a declaration of independence for the Southern Cameroons in the early hours of 31 December 1999, as many as 36 members and supporters of the SCNC and its youth branch, the Southern Cameroons Youth League (SCYL), were reportedly arrested between January and May in the South-West, West and North-West Provinces. They included justice Frederick Ebong Alobwede, a High Court judge. Chief Ayamba Etta and James Sam Sabum. At least II detainees had not been charged or tried by the end of 2000.
Q Three more SCYL supporters — Richard Lukong, George Yuvenyu and Mevanga Weikam—were arrested in Nkwen in early November and remained in detention in Bamenda, North-West Province, at the end of 2000. Journalists
Journalists were detained, beaten and sentenced to terms of imprisonment after they published criticisms of government policy and officials. Their concerns included human rights violations by the security forces and corruption by government officials. Q In February Chris Oben, Jean-Mathias Kouemeko and Thérèse Forbin, journalists with Radio Buea, were briefly detained for interrogation by police after they broadcast interviews with exiles who accused the government of human rights violations against English-speaking Cameroonians.
Q In April Michel Pekoua, publisher of the newspaper Ouest-Echos, was sentenced to six months in prison on charges of defamation for publishing allegations of embezzlement at the state-owned fuel company, the Société nationale des hydrocarbures (SliH). Q In July journalists Daniel Atangana and Thierry Mbouza from the journal Dikalowere sentenced to six months' imprisonment for defamation. Célestin Biaka Difana, the editor, received a suspended six-month prison sentence. They had published accusations of corruption against the head of the Syndicat camerounais des transporteurs routiers. Cameroonian Road Transport Union.
Q In November Richard Touma of Le Messager newspaper was beaten by the security forces during a demonstration in Yaoundé by members of the opposition Social Democratic Front party to press for an independent electoral commission. Releases
Nana Koulagna, a former National Assembly deputy for the opposition party, the Union nationale pour la démocratie et le progrès. National Union for Democracy and Progress, was released in early September. Arrested in 1997 by a private militia of the LamidoofRey Bouba, head of a traditional area in North Province, he had been detained without charge or trial as a prisoner of conscience at the Central Prison in Garoua, North Province.
Five members of the SCNC arrested as suspected secessionists in 1995 and 1997 were released in
Amnesty International Report 2001
65
CAN
November after several years' detention without
charge or trial.
Al reports
•	Cameroon: Fearof "disappearance" orextrajudicia! execution of MauriceTchambou (AI Index: AFR 17/001/2000)
•	Cameroon: Fearof torture and ill-treatment of members of the Southern Cameroons National Council (AI Index: AFR 17/002/2000)
•	Cameroon: United Nations expert confirms that torture is "widespread and systematic" (AI Index: AFR 17/004/2000)
•	Cameroon: Impunity in face of large-scale extrajudicial executions in the Douala area (AI Index: AFR 17/005/2000)
