China
Amnesty International has continued to work for the release of prisoners of conscience. It has been concerned about new arrests and the trials of people for the non-violent exercise of their human rights, and by a large number of executions since October 1979.
During the year there were important developments in the legal system with the adoption of new laws but there was, at the same time, a curtailment of civil liberties.
On 1 January 1980 the new Criminal Law and the Law of Criminal Procedure, as well as other laws adopted by the National People's Congress (NPC) in June 1979, came into effect. However, the reforms brought about by the new laws are in some respects limited as regards protection of human rights. The new Criminal Law still includes provisions which may be used against people exercising their constitutional rights to freedom of expression, who can be accused of "spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda" if they disagree with the current policy of the government. Furthermore, according to a resolution passed in November 1979 by the NPC Standing Committee, all laws and decrees enacted since 1949 are to remain in effect except those conflicting with the new laws and constitution. Thus, various old laws which limit freedom of expression are still in force. These include the Act for the Punishment of Counter-Revolution, a law adopted in 1951 specifically to punish political offenders; the Provisional Regulations on Guarding State Secrets (1951), under which virtually any information not printed in the official press can be considered a state secret; the Decision on the Question of Re-education-Through-Labour adopted by the State Council in 1957, which permits the detention of petty criminals and dissenters whose cases are not considered sufficiently serious for them to be charged with a crime and brought to trial. In November 1979, the NPC Standing Committee adopted supplementary regulations on Re-education-Through-Labour establishing"management committees" to control the system of re-education-through-labour under the supervision of the people's procuratorates. The supplementary regulations fix a term for re-education of from one to four years and prohibit discrimination in employment or schooling after release for those concerned or their families. The supplementary regulations, however, do not change the main provisions of the 1957 law in allowing people to be detained without charge or trial for up to four
189
years for expressing their opinions.
One of those held under these provisions is Wei Yuehua who has been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. She was assigned to "re-education-through-labour" in January 1980, accused of "disturbing law and order" because she had displayed big-character posters and banners in the streets of her native city, Hangzhou. She was accused also of "launching vicious personal attacks" against some local cadres and of going to Peking to present her "unreasonable" demands to the central authorities. These demands seem to have involved her personal grievances against the local administration. According to the official account of her case, she had undergone a first period of "re-education-througl>labour" from 1972 to 1974 but continued to "create trouble" after her release. The provincial Public Security Bureau, with the approval of the people's Procuratorate of Zhejiang province, had then decided that she should once again undergo "re-educad on-through-labour", but no information has been disclosed about the length of the punishment
Two well-known dissenters were brought to trial in Peking in October 1979. One is Wei Jingsheng, a 29-year-old editor of Tansuo (Exploration), one of the unofficial magazines which were banned in Peking in 1979. He has been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. At his trial by the Peking Intermediate People's Court on 16 October 1979, Wei Jingsheng was convicted of passing on "military secrets" to a foreigner and of conducting "counter-revolutionary propagada and agitation" through his writings. He was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment with an additional three years' deprivation of civil rights. Amnesty Intemational has expressed concern about the conditions under which the trial was held. The hearing, which lasted only a few hours, was not open to foreigners or to the public, but was limited to a selected audience who were provided in advance with tickets which allowed them into the courtroom. Reports on the proceedings by the official press dealt mainly with the prosecution case against Wei Jingsheng, but an unofficial transcript was circulated a few days after the trial. This is the first transcript of a dissenter's trial ever to have become available outside China. According to it, three judges conducted all the proceedings, including the examination of the defendant, Wei Jingsheng, and of the two prosecution witnesses. No defence witnesses were called. There was no defence lawyer, apparently because Wei Jingsheng had requested to conduct his own defence. The first charge of "passing on military secrets to a foreigner" related to information on the China-Viet Nam border conflict which Wei Jingsheng was accused of having given to a foreigner in Febmary 1979. During the examination of the defendant the question of whether or not this
190
information was secret was not even mentioned by the judges. Wei Jingsheng said in his own defence that he never thought such information was secret as it was already circulating widely among Chinese citizens. The second charge," conducting counter-revolutionary agitation and propaganda", was based entirely on the criticism of the leadership and of China's social system made by Wei Jingsheng in several of his articles. Wei Jingsheng was sentenced under the 1951 Act for Punishment of Counter-Revolution, in particular Article 6, paragraph 1, which provides punishment for "supplying intelligence to a domestic or foreign enemy", and Article 10, paragraphs 2 and 3, which provides punishment for "provoking dissension" and "conducting counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitation". As far as Amnesty International is aware, Wei Jingsheng was not in fact convicted of committing the offence specified in Article 6(1); instead Article 16, which embodies the principle of analogy, was applied and the court found him guilty of an action which was "comparable" to the offence specified in Article 6( 1). Wei Jingsheng appealed against the verdict to the Peking High People's Court on 6 November 1979, but that court confirmed the verdict and the sentence against him. Chinese law allows only one appeal and the judgment of the High People's Court is final.
Appeals were made by Amnesty International also on behalf of Fu Yuehua, a 35-year-old woman detained since January 1979. She was brought to trial in Peking on 17 October 1979, on charges of " slander", for accusing a cadre at her former work place of raping her, and of"disturbing public order" by leading a demonstration in Peking a few days before her arrest The trial was adjourned after the first day's hearing on account of the "discovery of new evidence", and the charge of slander was later dropped. On 24 December 1979, however, Fu Yuehua was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on the charge of "disturbing public order". In January 1980, in an attempt to justify the sentence against her, the official New China News Agency (NCNA) accused her of being a thief, a cheat and a trouble-maker who did not deserve the sympathy which had characterized descriptions of her abroad.
A few other political trials have been reported. Some of them reveal that, contrary to the spirit of the new legislation, "mass meetings" and rallies are still used to try cases. According to a radio broadcast from Zhengzhou, Henan province, on 18 December 1979, the Xinxiang municipal "political and legal organs" held a rally on 9 December "to arrest and pass judgment" on "17 counter-revolutionaries and criminals who were sentenced by the Municipal Intermediate People's Court". One of them, Guo Shuzhang, was accused of having sent "counter-revolutionary letters" and of putting
191
up "counter-revolutionary posters" in support of Wei Jingsheng on 25 October 1979. For this, Guo Shuzhang was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment and deprived of civil rights for 13 years. Other "mass public trials" have been reported, as well as some cases of people sentenced to long prison terms as alleged "followers of the gang of four". The latter are usually accused of instigating "large-scale violence" for political reasons.
Amnesty International has been concerned also about continuing arrests. On 11 November 1979. three young men were arrested by the police at the "democracy wall" in Peking while distributing the unofficial transcript of Wei Jingsheng's trial. Others were arrested later when they went to the police station to inquire about the three earlier arrests. They included Liu Qing, a 33-year-old technician and Editor of The April Fifth Forum, one of the rare unofficial magazines which continued to appear in Peking in late 1979. Liu Qing was reported to be still in " administrative detention" in April 1980. As far as is known, he has not been charged. One of the three arrested on 11 November, Zhao Jianming, was also said to be still in detention in early 1980. In Shanghai, several demonstrators who had occupied the offices of the municipal administration to present petitions were arrested by the police in early November 1979. At about the same time, the People's Daily reported that three "agitators" arrested during demonstrations iaFushun in north-east China would soon be tried for having "illegally put up big-character posters and gathered petitioners to organize disturbances" between 16 October and 3 November 1979.
These arrests, and other measures taken by the authorities, such as the closure in December 1979 of the "democracy wall" at the Xidan crossroads in Peking, were part of an official campaign to "restore law and order", to put an end to unofficial publishing and discourage potential dissenters. Other restrictions were announced in early 1980.
In a key speech addressed to several thousand cadres on 16 January 1980 in Peking, the Vice-Premier, Deng Xiaoping, stated that the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) was preparing to submit a motion to the National People's Congress (NPC) that the provisions allowing wall-posters should be deleted from the constitution. Commenting at length on the need to curb certain freedoms in the interests of stability and unity, the Vice-Premier stated:
"Factionalist elements still exist. . .. There are also so-called democrats and dissidents who openly oppose the socialist system and the CCP leadership, such as Wei Jingsheng and his
192
ilk . . .. Although they sometimes say that they support Chairman Mao and the CCP, they actually want to oppose the CCP leadership and socialism . . .. They are quite capable of banding together under certain conditions and forming a sabotage force capable of causing a great deal of turmoil and damage — •'It is the unswerving principle of our Party to persevere in developing democracy and the legal system. However... they must be carried out step by step and in a controlled way. Otherwise, they may only encourage turmoil and impede the four modernizations, democracy and the legal system ....
^'It is absolutely impermissible to publicize any freedom of speech, publication, assembly or to form associations which involve counter-revolutionaries. It is absolutely impermissible
for any persons to contact these people behind the Party's back____
For instance, certain secret publications are printed beautifully. Where does the paper come from? These people do not have printing presses. Are there any Party members in the printing works who print these things? Some of the people who support these activities are Party members and quite a few of them are even cadres. We must tell these Party members clearly that their standpoint is very erroneous and dangerous and if they do not correct it immediately and completely they will be liable for Party disciplinary punishment."
According to the NCNA of 14 April 1980, the NPC Standing Committee had adopted the motion proposed by the CCP Central Committee to amend Article 45 of the constitution by deleting the stipulation that citizens "have the right to speak out freely, air their views fully, hold great debates and write big-character posters". These guarantees are known in China as the "four greats" or "four freedoms": they were a slogan of the cultural revolution to invite popular participation in political debates. The NCNA reported that the motion would be presented for decision to the third session of the full NPC in August 1980. If adopted. Article 45 would simply read: "Citizens enjoy freedom of speech, correspondence, the press, assembly, association, procession, demonstration and the freedom to strike." Yang Xiufeng, the Deputy Chairman of the Commission on Legislative Affairs of the NPC Standing Committee, stated in an official commentary that the inclusion of the "four greats" in the constitution " had provided an opportunity for a small number of bad people" — including "people like Wei Jingsheng" — "to take advantage of it from the legal angle".
Amnesty International has renewed appeals for the release of other adopted prisoners of conscience. They include Ren Wanding,
193
the leader of the "Chinese Human Rights Alliance", detained since April 1979; Chen Lu, a 37-year-old technician and member of the same group, who was arrested on 29 March 1979 (very little has been heard of either of them since their arrest and the charges against them are not known); Kung Pengmei, the 79-year-old former Roman Catholic Bishop of Shanghai who is still imprisoned after 25 years in detention despite his old age; and Tsering Dhondup, one of the Tibetan prisoners whose cases have been taken up by Amnesty International. Arrested in 1966 in Lhasa on accusations of being a "rightist", he was last heard of in 1973 when he was reported to be working as a "prison labourer" in Sangyip prison near Lhasa. It is not known, however, whether Tsering Dhondup's case has been reviewed in the course of the movement started in 1978 to rehabilitate people "wrongly labelled as rightists".
An important development during the past three years has been the official review of a considerable number of cases involving miscarriages of justice. According to official sources, several million people have had their reputations and jobs restored, of whom some three million had been either sentenced to imprisonment or subjected to other formal punishments. These figures were given by Vice-Premier Deng Xiaoping during his speech to Party cadres on 16 January 1980 in Peking: "According to incomplete statistics, 2,900,000 people have now been rehabilitated, and many more have been rehabilitated whose cases were not put on file or tried."
While such extensive rehabilitations were taking place, Amnesty International also learned of a few individual releases, including that of Wang Mingdao, a Protestant pastor imprisoned since 1957, who was released in early 1980; Lin Xiling, a former student, arrested in 1957 at the age of 20, who reappeared in Peking in 1979 and is said to have been rehabilitated; Zheng Chaolin, a former Trotskyist leader detained since 1952 in Shanghai who was released in June 1979 with other Trotskyist sympathizers arrested during the same period.
Amnesty International has been concerned about the extensive use of the death penalty since the autumn of 1979 and has continued to appeal to the government for the commutation of all death sentences on humanitarian grounds. Some 60 death sentences — many of them followed by execution — were reported from October 1979 to January 1980 and executions continued in February, March and April 1980. In December 1979, for instance, the following cases were reported: in the southern city of Kunming four people, including the leader of a smuggling gang, were shot by firing-squad after a " mass trial" on 10 December; six young criminal offenders were executed in Nanking on 24 December, some of them charged with rape and others with murder; five people were executed in Changchun and Taiyuan
194
(in the northeast) on 23 December for criminal offences; in Shenyang (Liaoning province), two men who had murdered a driver in order to steal his jeep were executed on 6 December, while a third man was sentenced to death, with suspension of execution for two years: in Peking, a woman and her ex-husband were shot by firing-squad on 29 December for murdering a black-marketeer, while a week earlier a man was executed for rape and murder after his appeal had been rejected by the Peking High People's Court. Some death penalty cases were given much publicity by the official news media, in particular that of twin brothers from Hangzhou who were convicted of gang rape and blackmail during a "public trial" on 14 November 1979: the execution of one of them was shown on television. The majority of executions were of people convicted of murder or rape, but others were reported, such as that of the manageress of a fuel company in Heilongjiang province who was executed in October 1979 for embezzlement In December 1979 it was reported that the Supreme People's Court had discussed the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Law dealing with review procedure in death penalty cases. The nature of these discussions was not however, revealed. On 25 February 1980, the People's Daily published an article by two members of the Law Faculty of Peking University, who justified the continuing use of the death penalty by its deterrent effect but who also said that it should be resorted to as little as possible to avoid "mistakes" which "can never be corrected".
