Equatorial Guinea
The main concerns of Amnesty International were detention without trial, prison conditions, extrajudicial executions and the death penalty. President Masie Nguema, whose 10 years in power had been characterized by serious and large-scale violations of human rights, was overthrown in a military coup on 3 August 1979. After the coup, a Supreme Military Council was established under the leadership of Colonel Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who had been Defence Minister under Masie Nguema.
One of the first actions of the new government was to order the release of all political prisoners, although it is not known precisely how many prisoners were freed. Among those known to have been released was the country's best known prisoner of conscience, Ildefonso Obama, the acting Roman Catholic Bishop of Bata, who had been detained without trial on repeated occasions since 1976. Salvador Ela Nseng, who was also freed, was immediately appointed to the Supreme Military Council and subsequently served as Second Vice-President until his resignation in February 1980.
Initially, the coup led by Colonel Mbasogo was carried out without bloodshed. However, the deposed President refused to surrender, and instead launched a counter-attack from his headquarters near Mongomo in the eastern part of the country's mainland province, Rio Muni. He also ordered the execution of anyone suspected of disloyalty to him. Hundreds of people were killed when forces under control of Colonel Obiang Nguema Mbasogo clashed with soldiers remaining loyal to President Masie near Niefang in central Rio Muni. President Masie's troops were defeated and the deposed President fled. He was not arrested until 18 August, more than 10 days later.
In September 1979 the new government decided to create a Special Military Tribunal to try the deposed President and 10 others accused of genocide, mass murder and the systematic violation of human rights. The trial began on 24 September 1979 and lasted four days. The deposed President was offered the services of a defence lawyer but largely undertook his own defence. He repeatedly justified all his past actions on the grounds thathe was head of state and refused
44
to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the court. Substantial evidence was presented to indicate that President Masie Nguema had been responsible for the deaths of hundreds of prisoners and had directly intervened to cause some killings. Although not all the other charges were fully proved, President Masie Nguema was sentenced to death. The charges against some of the other defendants, who included a former Vice-President and several prison guards, also involved complicity in murder. However the public prosecutor demanded the death penalty only for the deposed President, and in the case of Miguel Eyegue, the former Vice-President, asked merely that he be imprisoned for one year. Nevertheless, after two days' deliberation the court passed seven death sentences and sentenced four others to periods of imprisonment. Miguel Eyegue was among those condemned to death. There was no right of appeal against these sentences, and the seven men condemned to death, including President Masie Nguema, were executed by firing squad less than five hours after they had been sentenced.
In addition to the seven executions on 29 September, at least one other former government official is known to have been executed in the aftermath of the August coup. Many others were briefly detained, including a number of refugees returning to Equatorial Guinea from abroad, in spite of an amnesty for all refugees granted by President Obiang Mbasogo in October 1979.
In November 1979 a Special Rapporteur — appointed in March 1979 by the United Nations' Commission on Human Rights — visited Equatorial Guinea to study the human rights situation. Although tJie Special Rapporteur had been appointed while President Masie Nguema was still in power, the new government invited him to see that the situation had improved He established that people were still being held for political reasons and recommended that the Commission on Human Rights should keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under review.
In December 1979 a former Minister of Finance, Daniel Mba Oyono, was arrested and detained after he refused to acquiesce in the requisition of a butchery which he owned. He was held in detention incommunicado for 11 days. Amnesty International was informed by Equatorial Guinean authorities, in response to an inquiry, that he had been fined and released. Later in December 1979 four members of an opposition political party, the Alianza Nacional de Restauración Democrática (ANRD), National Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy, were beaten up by former members of the militia (once known as the "Youth Marching with Macias"), and claimed that this had been done with official connivance.
45
