Pakistan
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the government's practice of trying large numbers of civilians, among them political detainees before military courts which apply summary rules of procedure and deny the defendant the right to defence by lawyers as well as the right to appeal. Despite releases of leaders of political parties, other prisoners of conscience remain detained under preventive detention legislation. Many people, including political prisoners, have been flogged; others have been sentenced to amputation, although there are as yet no known cases where this sentence has been carried out. Amnesty International is also especially concerned about the high number of death sentences imposed by the criminal and military courts and allegations that a number of prisoners have died in the custody of the police.
On 16 October 1979 President Zia ul-Haq announced that the general elections scheduled for 21 November 1979 were again to be postponed, this time indefinitely. All political parties were banned and membership of them declared illegal. The government at the same time banned all trade union activity and imposed total censorship on the press. The constitution was amended by Presidential Order so that the verdicts of military courts would be final and could no longer be challenged by the civilian courts. Well known opposition leaders, including Air Marshal (Ret'd) Asghar Khan, the leader of the Tehrik-ir Istiqlal, and the leaders of the Pakistan People's Party, Begum Bhutto, Benazir Bhutto and Secretary General Farooq Leghari, were arrested under the detention provisions of Martial Law Order No. 12. Whereas most arrests were of members of the Pakistan People's Party, they also included members of other opposition parties such as the National Democratic Party and the Muslim League. Several members of the former National Assembly and the Provincial Assemblies were also among them. According to Amnesty International estimates, in the days following the 16 October announcement some 300 political prisoners were arrested under martial law
222
provisions, adding to the many already imprisoned by military courts. In April 1980, Asghar Khan, Begum Bhutto and Benazir Bhutto were released.
At the end of April 1980 Amnesty International was working on the cases of 120 political prisoners; nearly all have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. Some of them are held under the detention provisions of Martial Law Order No. 12, allowing detention for "activities prejudicial to public order". Others have been convicted by summary military courts under martial law provisions for engaging in peaceful political activities. Martial Law Regulation No. 33 prohibits all political activity, while Martial Law Regulation No. 13 provides that"No person shall... bring into hatred or contempt or excite or attempt to excite disaffection towards the Armed Forces or any members thereof. On several occasions Pakistan Embassies have responded to Amnesty International inquiries with details of the imprisonment and, in some cases, notification of the release of the prisoner involved.
Amnesty International sent a cable to President Zia ul-Haq on 18 October 1979 urging the government to release immediately all prisoners of conscience. On 1 November 1979 it sent him a detailed letter pertaining to the extensive violations of human rights in Pakistan and proposed a number of specific recommendations which included the restoration of the rule of law. On 4 November 1979 it issued a press statement expressing concern about the deterioration of human rights in Pakistan, with specific reference to its recent letter to the President. The Amnesty International letter advanced legal grounds for its opposition to the government measures which had resulted in the ill-treatment of prisoners and abuse of human rights. It stated: "The powers of the military courts in Pakistan have been further extended to a degree which has been described in the international press as unprecedented at the cost of further limiting the jurisdiction of Pakistan's judiciary". It went on to express concern about the passing of the Constitution {Second Amendment) Order on 16 October 1979, which prevents the civil courts, including the widely respected High Courts, from reviewing the decisions of the military courts whose decision was now final. In the letter to President Zia it points out that the implementation of the constitutional amendment could exceed the limitations on martial law determined by the Supreme Court in a judgment in November 1977. The court ruled that martial law had a legal basis only insofar as the civil courts retained the right "to judge the validity of any act or action of the martial law authorities". The letter urged the government immediately to restore the supervisory jurisdiction of the civil courts over the military courts as a step towards abolishing the trials before military
223
courts of civilians, and political prisoners in particular.
Before the amendment adding Article 212A to the constitution, the civilian courts had used their powers of supervisory jursidiction to set aside some of the decisions of military courts such as the sentence of flogging. The letter notes that the amendment further eroded the powers of the civil courts to protect prisoners from such infringements of human rights and that in the two weeks after the 16 October 1979 amendment. Amnesty International estimated that 80 people had been flogged Other observers reported the actual number to be about 200. In several cases cited by Amnesty International the protective covering, usually applied to the victim's lower back to shield the kidneys from permanent damage, had not been used In many instances prisoners were reported to have fallen unconscious while being whipped The letter made it clear that Amnesty International considered flogging to be "cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment", prohibited under Article 2 of the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. It urged the government to set up an independent review of the cases of all political prisoners held without trial, to release immediately all those against whom there was no evidence that a criminal offence had been committed and to abolish the punishments of flogging and amputation. The letter was augmented by worldwide appeals from Amnesty Intemational members urging the government to implement the recommendations contained thereia
Although the number of public floggings apparently declined after November 1979, Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that several prisoners were flogged every month inside jails after conviction by summary military courts of offences such as cormption, hoarding and smuggling. It also received reports that several prisoners were sentenced to amputation of a hand after conviction of theft by Shariat (Islamic law) courts and by sessions courts. Amnesty International continued to learn of such sentences up to December 1979. Some of the accused were said to have made appeals to the High Courts against the sentence and in several cases Additional Sessions judges are known to have ordered suspension of the sentence. Amnesty International appealed many times to the authorities not to carry out amputations on convicted prisoners Maju Shah, Ghulam Ali, Mohammad Yakub, Fid Hussain, Majoo Shah, Mustafa Shah, Ghulam Mustafa and Allah Ditta. To the knowledge of Amnesty Intemational, no amputation has so far been carried out in Pakistan.
Amnesty Intemational also received several reports during 1979 that prisoners had died while in the custody of the police, allegedly as a result of torture. On 10 December 1979 Amnesty Intemational sent
224
a cable to Mahmoud A. Haroon, the Minister of the Interior, to express its concern that Shaukat Shah had died in police custody in Jaranwala on 24 November 1979 and requested that an independent inquiry be held into the circumstances of his death. On 24 April 1980 it again wrote to the Minister of Home Affairs and also to the Inspector General of Police, Sindh, inquiringwhetherthe investigation had taken place and expressing concem about reports that another prisoner, Kalu Brahmani, a college student, had died in the Khairpur Nathanshah Police Station during 1979, allegedly as a result of torture. It drew the attention of the government to Articles 9 and 10 of the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture and Cruel. Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on the necessity of establishing impartial investigations into allegations of torture. It asked to be informed about the steps taken by the govemment to investigate the deaths of these two prisoners and whether any measures had been taken to bring the text of the United Nations Declaration as well as the text of the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials to the notice of all law enforcement personnel in Pakistan.
During the year Amnesty Intemational addressed a number of appeals to the President to commute the numerous death sentences imposed on prisoners by the Pakistan courts, including the special military courts. On 24 July 1979 Amnesty Intemational made an urgent appeal to the President to save the lives of Mian Muhammad Abbas, Arshad Iqbal, Ghulam Mustafa and Rana Iftikar Ahmad, who had been sentenced to death together with former Prime Minister Bhutto. They were nevertheless executed the next day. In May 1979 it appealed for clemency for Ghulam Rasool, Mohammed Asraf and Munir Ahmad, who had been sentenced to death by a special military court and in November 1979 it appealed on behalf of Sayed Hussain, sentenced to death by a military court for hijacking a plane. On 28 January 1980 it urged that clemency be granted to Safar Iqbal, a college student, sentenced to death by a special military court in Rawalpindi. On 19 March 1980 appeals for clemency were made on behalf of Mohammad Ashraf, Mohammad Sadiq and Nazir Ahmed. The intemational press has reported that in all cases where clemency petitions have been addressed to the President by condemned people and their families and lawyers they have been rejected.
Pakistan Press International reported on 18 September 1979 that there were 1,275 prisoners awaiting a final decision in death cells in the Punjab, one of Pakistan's four provinces. According to Punjab prison sources, most of the condemned prisoners were waiting for decisions on their appeals either in the High Court or in the Supreme Court.
225
