Central African Republic
Jean-Bedel Bokassa, self-styled Emperor of Central Africa, was overthrown by a bloodless coup in September 1979. He was absent from the country at the time and was replaced by David Dacko, a former President whom Emperor Bokassa himself had ousted in early 1966. Since September Amnesty International concerns have been detention of political opponents without trial and the death penalty.
Emperor Bokassa's 14 years in power were marked by large-scale violations of human rights. Hundreds of people disappeared and were killed in prison; hundreds of others were held without trial for political reasons, often for long periods and in appalling conditions. He was overthrown only a few months after what was probably the most brutal incident of his violent reign, the killing of some 100 schoolchildren at Ngaragba prison between 18 and 20 April 1979. These killings, which followed the arbitrary arrest of many schoolchildren and students in Bangui, the capital, caused a storm of international
36
protest and condemnation and led to the creation of a unique five-nation inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the incident.
Three months before the killings, hundreds of students and schoolchildren in Bangui demonstrated against Emperor Bokassa's decree that they should all buy and wear a special uniform. The five-nation commission of inquiry found that as many as 150 of the demonstrators had been killed by government security forces.
The wave of arrests in April was carried out with great brutality by members of Emperor Bokassa's imperial guard. Most of those held were aged between 12 and 16 but they also included children aged between eight and 12. Some were killed on the way to Ngaragba prison; others were taken to three special unventilated cells at the side of the prison where as many as 30 detainees were crammed into a space measuring only about two metres square. According to one eyewitness who survived this experience, 22 out of 30 detainees in his cell died because of severe overcrowding and lack of air and water. Later, when more detainees were brought to the cell, 11 more deaths occurred. In addition to those who died from suffocation within cells, others are reported to have been deliberately tortured and killed. Some eye-witnesses claim that the Emperor himself visited the prison at this time and participated personally in the killings.
Amnesty International first publicized the killings at Ngaragba prison on 14 May 1979, reporting that between 50 and 100 deaths had occurred. At first, the government denied that any children under
16	had been arrested or that any of those held had been killed and on
17	May the Emperor even claimed commitment to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. A week later, however, while attending a conference in Rwanda of French-speaking African heads of state, he admitted to the press that some young people had been killed in April. Almost simultaneously, his ambassador in Paris, Sylvestre Bangui, held a news conference at which he publicly confirmed the accuracy of the report by Amnesty International.
At the conference in Rwanda, five governments — Ivory Coast, Liberia, Rwanda, Senegal and Togo — undertook to send a commission of inquiry to Bangui to investigate the alleged killings. The commission, the first of its kind in Africa, visited Bangui almost immediately and obtained eye-witness testimonies and other evidence confirming the killings. Members of the commission also visited London and held formal discussions with Amnesty International. The commission reported confidentially to the heads of state who had attended the Franco-African summit conference in Rwanda. A month later, on 16 August, the commission's report was made public. By that time several of those who had given evidence to the commission were reported executed or arrested. The Emperor who had become almost
37
totally isolated left for Libya to solicit assistance. During his absence French troops arrived in Bangui and installed David Dacko as the new President. The former Emperor successfully sought asylum in Ivory Coast.
President Dacko's government took swift action to remedy abuses of human rights. Political prisoners were released from Ngaragba and a major reorganization of the security forces was begun. A commission of inquiry was established to investigate violations of human rights under Emperor Bokassa. In October and November 1979 a number of politicians formerly prominent in his administration were arrested but, by the end of April 1980, they had not been broiight to trial. However, 34 former officials and members of the security forces also arrested in late 1979 were put on trial before the central criminal court in February. At the trial, which was held in Bangui's main sports stadium, six of the accused were sentenced to death and most of the others received prison sentences ranging from six months' suspended sentence to life imprisonment. Three of those sentenced to death were alleged to have murdered political prisoners and killed children held in Ngaragba prison on the personal instructions of the former emperor. In view of the fact that death penalties were imposed on six of those convicted. Amnesty International appealed to the Deputy Public Prosecutor to ensure that their right of appeal would be respected.
Despite the significant improvements affecting human rights made by the Dacko government, new problems arose in October following the return from exile of Ange Patasse, a former Prime Minister who had been a major political opponent of Emperor Bokassa. On his return, Ange Patasse, leader of the Mouvement de libération du peuple centrafricain (MLPC), Central African People's Liberation Movement, entered into negotiations with President Dacko about the possible formation of a government of national unity. The negotiations were short-lived and unsuccessful and Ange Patasse and other MLPC leaders including former Health Minister Simon Bedaya Ngaro were placed under house arrest or detained. Almost immediately there were major demonstrations in Bangui to demand further negotiations and to protest against the restrictions imposed on the MLPC leaders. During one of these demonstrations on 29 October, 30 people are reported to have been injured and subsequently many more were briefly held. The government held Ange Patasse and the MLPC leaders responsible for both the demonstration and the injuries.
In November 1979 charges were brought against most of the MLPC leaders in prison. They were charged with offences including grievous bodily harm and Ange Patasse was accused of distributing drugs and endangering state security. Some of the detainees were
38
officially "released" and assigné à résidence, placed under house arrest, in towns such as Birao, Mboki and Yalinga, hundreds of kilometres away from Bangui. Several of the prisoners were eventually released: they included Simon Bedaya Ngaro and the former student leader Albert Ndode, who played a leading role in organizing opposition to Emperor Bokassa in early 1979. Ndode was freed in January 1980. At least eight others were still being held in April 1980, when Amnesty International urged that they be released. All, including Ange Patasse, were believed to be prisoners of conscience.
