Philippines
The main concerns of Amnesty International have been detention without trial under martial law, torture, disappearances and extrajudicial killings, and the death penalty. On 21 September 1979 President Marcos entered his eighth year as president under martial law. As opposition to martial law has become more pronounced by various elements of Philippine society — the church, the pre-martial law parliamentary opposition, peasants, trade unionists, students and the guerrilla movements, the New People's Army (NPA) and the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) — the role of the armed forces in suppressing dissent has grown. As arrests and imprisonment without trial continued, reports of military abuses, including extrajudicial killings, have increased.
Government officials assert that there are no political prisoners but only "public order violators". These are individuals accused of subversion, sedition and rebellion including the possession or dissemination of subversive material and illegal assembly. In a census undertaken in October 1979 by the Office of Detainee Affairs on the orders of President Marcos, it was found that 1,852 people were being held in military detention, 579 of whom were "public order violators". But many others who Amnesty International believes were detained without trial for non-violent expression of their political beliefs have been held without trial for alleged criminal offences, including murder and illegal arms possession. At the time of writing. Amnesty International believed that more than 2,000 people were being held for political reasons.
Reports received by Amnesty International indicate that among those imprisoned were individuals simply caught in the conflict between the army and the guerrilla movements. Mass arrests of peasants have occurred in areas such as Samar, Pampanga and Mindanao, where the military was engaged in operations against the NPA and MNLF. In September 1979, a unit of the Philippines armed forces entered the town of Pikit in Mindanao, southern Philippines, in search of members of the Moslem secessionist MNLF. Having failed to find any secessionists, they arrested 27 peasants and students. Amnesty International issued an appeal on their behalf. They were subsequently released after a sit-down strike by their relatives.
Among those arrested during the year under review were persons accused of bill-posting during the local elections, tribesmen protesting
226
against development projects on their ancestral lands, students demonstrating against United States policy towards Iran, organizers of the urban poor and clergy. Two members of the church — Rafael Labutin, a lay worker from Samar, and Jerry Aquino, a minister of the independent Aglipayan Church, arrested with three others in Mountain Province in September 1979 — were still in detention in April 1980. Both have been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
A number of detainees continued to be held for long periods without trial — in some cases they had been arrested before martial law was declared — for alleged subversion and rebellion. Many have been held as co-defendants in several well-known cases, such as People of the Philippines v. Father Ed de la Torre etal; People of the Philippines v. Jose Maria Sison et al, and the People of the Philippines v. Luzvimindo David et aL Several of these detainees have been released during previous years; more were released during the period May 1979 to April 1980. These included t\^o principal defendants, Luzvimindo David and Father Ed de la Torre, and also Eufemio Villanueva, Augustin Pagusara, Tomario Rivera, Ernesto Luneta, Domingo Luneta, Francisco Luneta, Anacleto Ocampo, Manuel Chiongson, Edgar Pilapil, Peter Mutuc and Winifredo Hilao. All had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Some of these, however, were granted only "temporary release" with charges still pending and the defendants required to report regularly to the authorities. Among those granted permanent release was Pepito Lopez, an Amnesty Intemational adopted prisoner of conscience, who had been arrested in May 1973. After seven years in confinement, Pepito Lopez was released in March 1980 when the municipal court in Tarlac where he had been arrested confirmed, after an inquiry from the Amnesty Commission, that there were no charges pending against him. The same court confirmed that no charges had been brought against another Amnesty Intemational adopted prisoner of conscience, Roberto Sunga, but, as of the end of April 1980, Roberto Sunga still remained in detention Two presidential amnesties were announced on 10 and 15 September 1979 respectively in commemoration of the seventh anniversary of martial law and President Marcos' birthday. The two amnesties affected a total of 1,910 prisoners, a few of whom were reported to be " public order violators".
During the year Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of arrests made without regard to proper legal procedure. Reports of arrests by military authorities without an Arrest, Search and Seizure Order(ASSO) which must be issued by the President or the Ministry of Defence, have been particularly frequent Amnesty Intemational has also learned of abductions of people by the military.
Ill
In April 1979 Sixto Carlos Jr, ^former teacher of political science, was taken away by military personnel in a suburb of Manila. For more than four months his father,^ Sixto Carlos Sr, formerly a military Judge Advocate General, and his mother used their influence to try and trace their son. It later became known that during this period Sixto Carlos Jr had been held for interrogation in a "safe house" where he had been tortured severely.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment have been especially frequent in areas of guerrilla activity, such as Samar and Mindanao. However, torture is also still believed to occur in the prisons visited in December 1975 by an Amnesty Intemational delegation whose findings on torture were published in the Amnesty Intemational Report on the Philippines, April 1976. One of the prisons is Bicutan, since renamed Bagong Diwa, which the government has put forward as a model prison. On receiving reports that a number of the 15 people arrested with Eduardo Olaguer had been tortured in Bicutan, Amnesty International appealed to the government in December 1979 concerning their safety. They were allegedly associated with members of the pre-martial law opposition who were said to have planned a wave of terrorism. Eighteen students arrested in June 1979 and detained in Camp Crame were also reported to have been subjected to torture by electric shocks and beatings.
Reports received by Amnesty Intemational gave cause for concern about abductions by the military followed by extrajudicial killings, a practice known as "salvaging", which has, in recent years, become more widespread. Some individuals known to have been taken by the authorities have disappeared without trace; in other instances the body has been found. Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of six " disappeared" individuals, including Herman Lagman, a labour lawyer, and Jessica Sales, a student
Also of concern to Amnesty Intemational are the 814 people who, in July 1979, were reported to be held in prisons under sentence of death; some had been condemned more than 20 years ago. Of these, the cases of 775 people were reported to be still under review by the Supreme Court. A bill seeking to abolish the death penalty, co-sponsored by the then Minister of Information, Francisco Tatad, was introduced in the Interim National Assembly in May 1979. However, a series of martial law decrees introduced in early 1980 extended the number of offences liable to the death penalty. Under these decrees the death penalty became the maximum sentence for individuals convicted of selling drugs to minors; for the importation, sale or manufacture of a number of controlled dmgs, in addition to narcotics; and for fraud involving rural banks and co-operatives, and the misappropriation of funds sohcited by corporations from the public.
228
