Brazil
The concerns of Amnesty International were political killings, "disappearances" and torture. These concerns have, however, altered during the year. This alteration has resulted from reforms to the Law of National Security, which took effect in January 1979 and reduced penalties for crimes of subversion, and from an amnesty formally approved in August 1979. Althou^i both measures fell short of opposition demands for a general amnesty and the dismantling of the law of national security, they have nevertheless brought about in the space of one year the release of most political prisoners and the return of most exiles. The amnesty immediately benefited 14 Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience.
On 24 August 1979 Amnesty International cabled President Joao Baptista de Oliveira Figueiredo to welcome the amnesty as "a positive step towards a return to the rule of law in Brazil", and urged President Figueiredo to consider granting a pardon to those prisoners and exiles who had been excluded. It reaffirmed the hope that the problem of the "disappeared" prisoners would be investigated by a special commission of inquiry. In March 1979 it had submitted a list of about 60 cases of people who had"disappeared" after arrest, many of whom were believed, on the basis of sworn testimonies, to have died under torture in official custody.
In September 1979 Amnesty International began a campaign on behalf of 30 political prisoners (out of a total of 56) who would be excluded from the amnesty because they had been convicted of crimes of violence. Although most of these prisoners could not be considered for adoption as prisoners of conscience, many had been subjected to torture and unfair trials. Amnesty International made a special appeal for their release on humanitarian grounds in accordance with Article 2(1) of its statute which states that Amnesty International shall "promote and support the granting of general amnesties of which the beneficiaries will include prisoners of conscience". Political prisoners throughout the country staged hunger-strikes in protest at the
114
arbitrary terms of the amnesty and Amnesty International interceded with the authorities on their behalf In August 1979, it sent telegrams urging the authorities to review the cases of 14 political prisoners in Rio de Janeiro who had gone on hunger-strike in July 1979. Rholine Sonde Cavalcanti and Luciano Almeida, who were prisoners in the Itamaracá penitentiary in northeast Brazil and who had originally been sentenced to life imprisonment plus 65 years and 80 years respectively, began a hunger-strike in December 1979. Their health deteriorated seriously and in January 1980 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to speed up the process of review. By April 1980 all but one prisoner had been given conditional freedom after readequaqào das penas, a review of the cases, by the Superior Military Tribunal. The remaining political prisoner, José Francisco Sales de Oliveira, is expected to be released in May 1980.
In the past year there have been relatively few arrests. Those that have occurred have led to short-term detentions after a strike or a political demonstration. Police violence was responsible for the death of a number of strikers. In October 1979 Santo Días da Silva was shot dead by the police. He was a well-known and Respected member of the Roman Catholic Church labour commission in Sao Paulo. His death gave rise to fears that union activists might increasingly become targets of repression. These fears were substantiated in April 1980, when the president of the Sao Bernardo metalworkers' union, Luis Ignacio da Silva, and 16 union officials from Sao Bernardo and Santo André were arrested after a strike by metalworkers in Sao Paulo had been declared illegal by an industrial court. One of the chief objectives of the strike had been to achieve job security for workers in the car industry. On 28 April 1980 Amnesty International, in telegrams to the authorities, expressed concern that the trade unionists had been held incommunicado in the Sao Paulo police headquarters. Departamento de Ordem Politica e Social (DOPS), the Department of Political and Social Order, and deplored the fact that they had been charged under Article 36 of the Law of National Security, which punishes "incitement to strike" with a sentence of from two to 12 years' imprisonment for the non-violent exercise of legitimate trade union rights. All the amnestied trade unionists were subsequently released on bail. It is not known whether they will be brought to trial.
Although Amnesty International has received no allegations of torture in connection with these last mentioned arrests, it would be incorrect to assume that torture has ceased to be a problem. The Roman Catholic weekly newspaper, O Sào Paulo, in an editorial in its issue of 15/21 February 1980, stated that: "The enormous abuses which still exist are perpetrated against common prisoners". According to the paper, suspects when arrested soon come to know "the routine
115
practice in our police stations. Pau-de-arara, electric shocks, beatings, blows and kicks . . . impunity engenders the practice of torture".
One recent example of the routine brutality was described in a letter printed in the left-wing paper Reporter in April 1980. Two workers, Adao Rosa, aged 56, and Alfredo Henrique Batista, aged 34, were arrested by military police on 5 March 1980 after having failed to pay for a drink in a bar. They were taken to a barracks in Vila Americana, Volta Redonda, and there tied up; their mouths were forced open and a truncheon was rammed down their throats. They were beaten about the ribs, head and chest The military police officers eventually took them to hospital but on the way beat them again. Adao Rosa lost his spleen and his liver was perforated. Alfredo Henrique Batista's spinal column was injured and he suffered serious bruising to his throat and oesophagus.
In February 1980 Dr Tomas B. Ferreira, a member of the Amnesty International Canadian Medical Group involved in the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture, visited Brazil to attend disciplinary hearings of physician Dr Harry Shibata, the head of the Sao Paulo Medical Legal Institute, which supervises all forensic medical work in the city of Sao Paulo. Dr Shibata was accused of signing two false medical certificates. One of the complaints before the Medical Council concerns the case of Vladimir Herzog, the Brazilian journalist who died on 25 October 1975, hours after presenting himself for questioning at the Departamento de Operaqdes de Informaqoes — Coordenaqao da Defesa Interna (DOI-CODI), the Army Intelligence headquarters. Dr Shibata signed a death certificate giving suicide as the cause of death, but pictures of Vladimir Herzog's body taken by the police led medical experts to challenge this verdict During this mission Dr Ferreira obtained information on another 10 cases of physicians accused of similar malpractices. The result of confidential deliberation by the Medical Council is not yet known.
The Roman Catholic Church land commission has reported that squatters and small-holders in rural areas, mostly in the Amazonia region, are being systematically tortured, detained and flogged as a means of forcing them to leave their property. Similar practices affect Indians. In December 1979 and January 1980 two Indian chiefs, Angelo Pereira Xavier and Angelo Kerta, were killed. Both had protested about unlawful invasion by large companies of Indian lands.
116
