El Salvador
Amnesty International concerns before and after the 15 October 1979 military coup that overthrew the government of General Carlos Humberto Romero included the torture and murder of prisoners, the "disappearance" and probable murder of suspected political activists and violence directed against individuals and institutions involved in monitoring and defending human rights.
Archbishop of San Salvador Oscar Amulfo Romero, an outspoken critic of human rights violations who offered sympathy, support and a hearing to victims of torture and imprisonment and to the relatives of the murdered and "disappeared", was shot dead by an unidentified assassin on 24 March 1980 as he was saying mass. Prior to the assassination Amnesty International, in a press statement of 17 March, gave warning that the Archbishop had been made the target of death threats since the start of a campaign of political murder and abduction begun by the government after its imposition of a state of siege on 9 March 1980.
In a communication to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on 21 March, Amnesty International called attention to the dangers faced by Archbishop Romero and other defenders of human rights in El Salvador and to the placing of a bomb in the sacristy of the San Salvador cathedral on 16 March. In its later public statement of 25 March, condemning the murder of the Archbishop, who had been denounced by government and military for his critical stance towards them. Amnesty International stated that he "had been martyred in the cause of human rights", and stressed the evident dangers facing members of the church and others associated with the Archbishop in El Salvador. It called particular attention to the bombing earlier in March of the Salvadorian Human Rights Commission.
On Sunday 23 March, the day before his murder, the Archbishop said in his.homily, broadcast nationwide on the church radio stations, that security forces in the countryside were "sowing terror" and called on soldiers to refuse to obey orders to kill that" were against the law of God". A military spokesman immediately condemned the call to disobedience as a "crime".
The Archbishop was not the only defender of human rights threatened or attacked with violence for anti-government criticism. All members of the Salvadorian Human Rights Commission have repeatedly been threatened with murder should they continue their activities. On several occasions Amnesty International has appealed
132
to the authorities to ensure their safety. In July 1979 Amnesty International appealed for the protection of Commission member José Napoleón González, who was later forced into exile. The office of his newspaper, La Crónica, was burned to the ground in late July 1979 and its new premises were destroyed by bombs in March 1980. The offices of the Commission itself have been attacked with gunfire, and immediately after a bomb attack on 13 March 1980 documentation on human rights abuses was confiscated by police.
Amnesty International appealed also for the protection of lay religious leaders, catechists and "Delegates of the Word" in rural areas and for clergy persecuted for their teaching of a doctrine of "social justice", such as Father Rafael Palacios, killed on 20 June 1979 in Santa Tecla. Several days earUer, a white hand — a symbol of death squads in some countries of Central America — had been painted on his door. Another priest, linked by authorities to peasant organizations, Father Alivio Napoleón Madas, was shot dead on 5 August by unknown gunmen while saying mass in the village of San Esteban Catarina. As in the case of Archbishop Romero, he was killed at the altar, while lifting up a chalice. Several priests and nuns were arrested and summarily expelled from El Salvador in 1979.
Amnesty International issued many urgent appeals on behalf of "disappeared" prisoners during the last six months of the government of General Romero. Most of the "disappeared" were subsequently found dead; several survivors of "disappearance" and witnesses of summary execution told of the murder by beheading with machetes of members of trade unions and peasant organizations supporting political opposition movements.
A Christian Democrat campesino, peasant farmer, detained on 19 May 1979 by the National Guard near San Vincente was tortured by electric shock in the local Guard headquarters and then taken with others to the Pacific shore, where he was hacked nearly to death and then thrown into the sea. He survived to give sworn testimony to the "execution" by beheading of his four companions, whose bodies were later found at a nearby beach resort.
Most of the victims of "disappearance" and murder were individuals believed to be linked to die three opposition movements, all largely trade union based, the Bloque Popular Revolucionario (BPR), Popular Revolutionary Bloc; the Ligas Populares 28 de Febrero (LP-28), Popular Leagues of 28 February; the Frente de Acción Popular Unificada (FAPU), Popular Front of Unified Action. Moves to crush the opposition movements were met by increasingly militant activity. Left-wing guerrilla organizations also stepped up anti-government activity, including kidnappings and killings.
133
Throughout the final months of the Romero administration and even now up to the time of writing the Salvadorian authorities refused to recognize the mass political organizations FAPU, BPR and LP-28 as lawful political organizations, orto negotiate with their leaders. By October 1979, after months of street demonstrations and increasingly militant protest actions by the opposition, including bloody actions by guerrilla groups, polarization between government and opposition was extreme.
On 15 October a military coup overthrew the government of President Romero. He and chief security officials fied to Guatemala. The coup leaders, Colonels Adolfo Majano and Jaime Abdul Gutiérrez, announced an amnesty for political prisoners, the restoration of human rights and the implementation of agrarian reform. A junta was formed with the two colonels and three civilian representatives of centre opposition parties. The political organizations that had called for the overthrow of Romero were not represented.
In a memorandum to the new government, on 19 October 1979, Amnesty International welcomed the statement of the junta that human rights would be restored and political prisoners released. It presented documentation on 257 Salvadorians murdered or detained or who had "disappeared" because of their political, trade union or religious activities in 1979. The documentation included 60 cases of prisoners who had not been acknowledged to be in detention and were considered "disappeared" and 114, almost all campesinos, whose murder by official or semi-official security forces was confirmed. The memorandum did not include all of the cases reported in 1979; the Salvadorian.Human Rights Commission compiled documentation on 312 "political killings" alleged to have been perpetrated by official forces between January and July 1979, including individuals killed in demonstrations, and on 267 political arrests between January and August 1979. In February 1980 Amnesty International confirmed that 27 of the 60 "disappeared" cited in the memorandum had been released and that eight had been murdered in official custody.
The major opposition groups denounced the new junta as a continuation of military government. Security forces acted with the same brutality as those under Romero. One day after the coup security forces of police and army moved to dislodge striking workers from several San Salvador factories, detaining 78, some of whom were then tortured, andicilling 18. Within a week, the new government was held responsible for more than 100 killings of demonstrators and striking workers who had been occupying farms and factories.
Although the new government was composed largely of civilians with longstanding commitment to social change, some of them former exiles and political prisoners, from its first days it manifested a high
134
level of governmental violence. The mass resignation of most of the civilians from the government on 3 January 1980 came when civilian ministers, most of whom immediately went into exile, denounced the unchecked violations of human rights that were beyond their power to control.
In the weeks after the resignations and the appointment of a new cabinet, the major opposition groups increased their protests against government policies. Authorities responded with violence, killing at least 52 when a street demonstration was dispersed by gunfire on 22 January, and at least 11 in attacks on another demonstration on 12 February; they also carried out hundreds of arrests and abductions.
During this period violent take-overs of embassies and public buildings and occupations with the threat of violence were among those methods used by the mass political organizations to demand the release of their "disappeared" leaders. In addition, guerrilla groups demanded prisoner releases, ransoms and the publication of political manifestos in exchange for the lives of their kidnapped victims.
On 6 February 1980 Amnesty International sent cables to the government and to Archbishop Romero in connection with official killings and three kidnappings in which left-wing guerrillas had threatened "execution" of their "prisoners" and several cases in which hostages were threatened with violence. The cables requested the church and government to make it clear that Amnesty International "condemns every case of the execution of prisoners, kidnap victims, or hostages by governments or other organizations of whatever political orientation". The text of the cable was read the next day by Archbishop Romero in his sermon, broadcast on nationwide radio; the Archbishop had himself condemned kidnapping and the taking of hostages on several occasions. But killings by left-wing guerrilla forces continued as did many more by the government.
In mid-February press reports indicated that the United States of America (USA) would provide military assistance to El Salvador. Advisers were to be provided to train the army in "logistics, communications and intelligence". In a letter to President Carter on 17 February, Archbishop Romero sharply criticized the proposal and asked that it be withdrawn "to avoid a greater spilling of blood in this suffering nation".
On 29 February Amnesty International wrote to US Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher noting that the provision of some 200,000 dollars worth of training and material for crowd control by the USA in November 1979 was followed by scores of deaths when demonstrations were dispersed. In the conditions prevailing in El Salvador after 3 January, the nature of the newly proposed aid, believed to be for the police and public order operations of the
135
military, could be expected to lead to further violations of human rights. The letter requested official information on the nature and intent of the assistance. No reply was received.
On 17 March Amnesty International pubUcly urged the Government of El Salvador to call a halt to the campaign of murder and abduction of peasants which followed the announcement on 9 March of agrarian reform and a state of siege. Hundreds of men, women and children were reported "disappeared", shot dead, or forced to flee to the capital, where they had sought refuge under the protection of the Roman Catholic Church. In Chalatenango Department, underbrush was set on fire around one village, the inhabitants of which were supporters of opposition unions, to prevent local people escaping; troops then entered the village, killing at least 40 people. Other villages were razed and crops destroyed in the countryside, particularly in Morazán, Cuscatlán and Chalatenango departments.
The authorities stated that troops moved into the rural areas to occupy plantations intended for expropriation in the agrarian reform. Local sources said, however, that villages supporting peasant unions, such as the Christian Federation of Salvadorian Peasants and the Union of Rural Workers, were attacked by troops, and the land seized was handed over to members of government organizations, including the Unión Comunal Salvadoreña, the Salvadorian Communal Union farmers organization and the Organización Democràtica Nacionalista (ORDEN), a movement organized to use clandestine terror against government opponents.
In a submission to the Inter-Ameri can Commission on Human Rights on 21 March, Amnesty International described human rights violations that had continued or worsened since the October coup. These included 32 cases of unacknowledged detention — "disappearance" — and 131 cases in which individuals in the hands of security forces were reported summarily executed, all occurring between 3 January and 13 March. Most were peasant farmers said to be supporters of opposition peasant unions. The cases did not include "persons killed when street demonstrators, some of whom may have borne arms, were attacked by government and auxiliary forces"; nor did it include any case in which there was the least evidence "that the victim was either the attacker, bearing arms, or resisting arrest".
Several cases concerned the murder of children. The 29 individuals detained and killed by combined National Guard and ORDEN forces in the Las Vuehas area of Chalatenango between 29 December and 16 January included three young brothers, Adán Recinos aged 11, Santos Recinos aged 16, Francisco Recinos aged 18, and another boy, Alfonso Navarro aged 14.
The submission noted that Amnesty International was studying a
136
total of 102 cases of people reported killed in rural areas and 30 in urban areas in January; 248 rural and 23 urban killings in February; and 130 killings, largely in rural areas, reported in the first week of March alone, which may have been summary executions.
The submission commented on the progress towards implementation of recommendations made in the Commission's own report of November 1978. Amnesty International paid particular attention to the following recommendations: that the paramilitary organization ORDEN be dissolved; that campesinos be protected in the full exercise of their rights; that reports of individuals killed, arrested, tortured or missing after arrest be investigated and the authorities responsible be investigated, tried and punished; that the persecution of members of the Roman Catholic Church be halted.
In a news conference on 7 November 1979, junta member Dr Guillermo Ungo (who resigned on 3 January 1980) said that ORDEN had been a part of "the repressive machinery" and that a staff of 40 people had directed ORDEN from offices in the Presidential Palace, although ORDEN "had neither statutes nor legal status, that is to say that legally it did not exist". Although a decree of 6 November ordered ORDEN to be dissolved, it continued to be a principal auxiliary of lawful security forces. Local ORDEN pereonnel were named in innumerable reports since November 1979 as having assisted security forces in identifying suspected " subversives" and in their detention and murder of these individuals. No concrete measures were taken to dismantle the ORDEN organization nor to break the relationship between the police and military and ORDEN. No arms were confiscated from the tens of thousands of ORDEN members nor was any member reported arrested for abuses of human rights.
The plight of the campesinos clearly worsened after 3 January 1980. Amnesty International emphasized that at the time of the Commission's own 1978 report and thereafter the authorities continued to regard campesino organizations as "subversive" and to subject them to the same repression as members of avowedly violent guerrilla groups.
The submission noted that a Special Commission of Inquiry, created by the junta in November 1979 to investigate the whereabouts of political prisoners and the "disappeared", reported the discovery of 67 unidentified bodies and identified 25 bodies of the "disappeared". The Special Commission recommended that trial proceedings be opened against the individual military officers who it claimed had been responsible for the human rights abuses. In its final report on 3 January 1980, the Special Commission stated that although none of the "disappeared" had been found alive it had acquired "proof of the capture of many of them, by various public security forces, or in
137
several cases, of their detention in the barracks of the same forces____
We have found a great quantity of cadavers, among which those that have been identified correspond to disappeared persons . .
The junta's Special Commission concluded that all the individuals who "disappeared" under the Romero and previous governments should be considered to have died in the custody of security forces. The Amnesty International submission, while not disputing the findings of the junta's Special Commission, noted that the government had taken no steps to bring to justice individuals named by the Special Commission as responsible for torture and murder of prisoners.
Amnesty International recommended that the threat to dignitaries of the Roman Catholic Church should be understood within the larger context of the threat to all organizations and individuals who conscientiously monitor and report on human rights; and that all such organizations and individuals should be protected from threats of this kind The submission called special attention to the threats against the person of Archbishop Romero, members of the Socorro Jurídico, Legal Aid, department of the Archbishopric of San Salvador, the Salvadorian Commission of Justice and Peace and the Salvadorian Human Rights Commission.
Many individual appeals were made on behalf of members of trade union and political opposition groups. In several cases the authorities at first denied the arrests, notably those of Juan Ángel Chacón, Secretary General of the Popular Revolutionary Bloc (BPR), detained with his wife and baby on 27 February, and Enrique Alvarez Cordova, Secretary General of the Frente Democrático Revolucionario, the Revolutionary Democratic Front (which brings together most opposition groups from the BPR to social democrats), detained on 21 April. National Police later acknowledged custody of these prisoners and released them after mass protests. Amnesty International appealed for the safety of a "disappeared" prisoner. Norma Guevara, Youth Secretary t)f the Unión Democrática Nacionalista (UDN), the Democratic Nationalist Union, who "disappeared" after arrest by the National Police. While police denied the arrest, the army-linked "death squad" Unión Guerrera Blanca (UGB), the White Warrior's Union, said Norma Guevara was in their custody and would be "executed" if hostages then held by an opposition group were not released. On 26 February police admitted that they were holding her. She was subsequently released for lack of evidence.
A total of 44 cases of "disappeared" prisoners having been investigated by Amnesty International groups since 1977 were closed in February 1980 when it became evident that these "disapppeared" had been killed.
On 30 November 1979 El Salvador ratified the United Nations
138
International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights.
