Ghana
The main concerns of Amnesty International were the death penalty, unfair trials and continued detention after acquittal.
On 4 June 1979 the government of General Frederick Akuffo was overthrown by a coup after heavy fighting in the capital, Accra, and was replaced by a new military administration called the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC). The coup, led by Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, said to be the leader of a previous but unsuccessful uprising on 15 May 1979, was supp>orted by the bulk of the lower ranks of Ghana's armed forces. The coup leaders stated that their aim was to redeem the image of the armed forces by punishing corrupt officials of previous military governments prior to a planned return to civilian rule in 1979.
In the first measures of the so-called "house-cleaning" exercise, the AFRC ordered the arrest of some 100 wealthy businessmen and former high officials, both military and civilian, who had occupied executive and managerial positions in previous administrations. On 16 June 1979 former Head of Stale General Ignatius Acheampong and a high-ranking officer were executed for "using their position to amass wealth while in office and recklessly dissipating state funds to the detriment of the country". Ten days later, two other former Heads of State, Generals Frederick Akuffo and Akwasi Afrifa, and four senior officers were also executed. None of the executed was allowed a fair trial or the right of appeal. At the same time the "house-cleaning" exercise was being pursued throughout the country in a vigorous but arbitrary manner by the lower ranks of the armed forces; traders, minor officials and individuals suspected of personal links with officials of previous military governments were variously flogged publicly, beaten and detained in army camps. In mid-June Amnesty International urged Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings to call a halt to executions and to ensure that fair and open trials were given to all those detained.
On 24 June 1979 the AFRC published a decree which established military Special Courts for the trial of individuals accused of "economic crimes", which ranged from "doing any act with intent to sabotage the economy of Ghana" to "selling above the controlled price". Penalties ranged from three years' imprisonment to death by firing-squad. The offences for which each penalty would be imposed were not specified The Special Courts held hearings throughout July.
50
August and September 1979. During this period at least 55 military officers, former officials and wealthy businessmen were sentenced to heavy prison sentences, ranging from six months to 95 years, at the principal Special Court at Peduase Lodge, near Accra. A large number, possibly as many as 100, were reported to have been sentenced to imprisonment by regionail Special Courts. All trials are believed to have been hurried, with insufficient judicial investigations being conducted before the hearings. Defendants were allowed neither defence counsel nor the right of appeal, and a number were beaten by troops. Shortly before the return to civilian rule in September 1979, a list of 68 individuals sentenced in absentia to death by firing-squad or to various terms of imprisonment was published by the AFRC.
On 24 September 1979 civilian government was restored in Ghana, after the July elections in which Dr Hill a Limann's PNP party obtained a majority of votes. The civilian government established a new tribunal, under Justice LK. Abban, to supervise the continuation of the "house-cleaning". This tribunal is reported to have sentenced at least five individuals to various terms of imprisonment for corrupt practices. A number of appeals for the quashing of sentences passed by the AFRC and for the return of confiscated property have been lodged before this court. However, such reversals of judicial decisions taken during the period of AFRC rule are prohibited by the "Transitional Provisions" clauses of Ghana's new constitution and only four individuals are reported to have had confiscated assets returned.
In late February 1980 Amnesty International urged President Hilla Limann to effect a judicial review of all sentences passed by the AFRC in view of the retrospective nature of the legislation invoked and of the unfair trials of the defendants, and to release those prisoners acquitted by the Special Tribunals who nevertheless remained in detention. There has been no response to these appeals. On 21 September 1979, 258 prisoners arrested before the 4 June coup and held in Nsawam prison were amnestied, including some 40 whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty International.
51
