Mexico
The findings of an Amnesty International mission to Mexico in January 1980 confirmed the concerns noted in previous Amnesty International Reports. These concerns include irregular detention procedures, including prolonged periods of detention incommunicado and torture; convictions reportedly obtained solely on the basis of a confession extracted under torture without other supporting evidence; unrecognized arrests or "disappearances"; and the authorities' failure to investigate complaints against the security force called the Brigada Blanca, White Brigade.
The Amnesty International delegates on the mission to Mexico
151
were Salvadorìan lawyer Roberto Cuéllar and a member of the International Secretariat of Amnesty International. The mission met defence lawyers and other jurists, journalists, members of parliament, church people, organizations of campesinos {pQd^sssit farmers) and of indígenas, native Indians, local defence committees for political prisoners and a national committee for prisoners and the "disappeared", and people who had themselves been victims of unacknowledged arrest and "disappearance". The delegates visited two prisons: the state penitentiaries of Cuemavaca (in the State of Morelos) and of Puebla ( in the State of Puebla) which are common prisons but hold a number of prisoners considered to be held for political reasons.
The mission reported its particular concern about the high incidence of such unlawful activities in rural areas, by the army and several police forces as well as by groups of pistoleros, gunmen, attached to local landowners.
The legal and political structure formally provides safeguards against violations of human rights: excellent constitutional and legal provisions to guarantee individual rights; a political reform carried out by the administration of President José López Portillo which has provided for parliamentary seats for several opposition parties, including the Communist Party; a visible freedom of the press to publicize violations of human rights; considerable opportunities for voicing public complaints. Nevertheless, the mission noted scepticism among victims and their advisers about the effectiveness of safeguards and remedies in political cases. The mission considered this scepticism justified, in particular with regard to amparo, {habeas corpus) and investigation, carried out by law enforcement agencies, of abuse of authority in regard to political suspects.
During 1979 the government continued to implement the amnesty law of September 1978. The fifth phase (August 1979) benefited 919 people, including 832 people listed as campesinos. Several prisoners investigated by Amnesty International were released during this period: Pedro Pérez Castillo, sentenced to 20 years and five months; Agripino Juárez de la Cruz, sentenced to 13 years; Juan Martinez Perea, sentenced to 20 years and five months; José Carlos Luciano Tapia, sentenced to 20 years and five months. The last was killed in uncertain circumstances shortly after his release. Amnesty International investigated a further nine cases from the Cuemavaca prison. Although all were convicted on charges of serious non-political crimes, their convictions were reportedly based solely on confessions extracted under torture, and the accusations are alleged to be false. One such prisoner in Cuemavaca, Simón Hipólito Castro, whose case Amnesty International was investigating, was able to publish a book after his release in 1979 containing a detailed account of his
152
arrest, torture and harassment in prison. He had been sentenced to 36 years but was released after three and a half.
Amnesty International estimates that there are from 50 to 100 political prisoners. However, this figure does not include possibly large numbers of campesinos and indígenas held in local jails in provincial towns, about whom very little information is available. From just one region — the Huasteca Hidalguense — 14 campesinos have reportedly been imprisoned, 26 "disappeared" after arrest, one died in prison as a result of torture, and four have been murdered by local hired killers since August 1979. In the past year Amnesty International approached local authorities concerning the imprisonment and treatment of several groups of campesinos and indígenas.
In view of the evident failure of federal and state attorneys general to initiate investigations into alleged abuse of authority by army and several police forces. Amnesty International made relevant information available to lawyers in various countries. This information included Mexican press reports presenting official documents on the Brigada Blanca, whose existence the government has persistently denied in recent years. The documents identify the Brigada Blanca as the ninth army brigade, based in Campo Militar No. 1 in Mexico City. This is the detention and torture centre that is most commonly cited in testimonies by victims of incommunicado detention and torture. Amnesty International also provided the lawyers with testimonies by victims of" disappearances", among them that of Bertha Alicia López Garda de Zazueta. She and several of her elatives were arrested without warrant in April 1979, held incommunicado in secret detention centres and tortured. The methods included beatings with fists and truncheons; la chicharra, torture by electric shock to all parts of the body including eyes, teeth and genitals; forcing mineral water up the nostrils; immersing the head or the whole body in dirty water until the victim is near dro.wning. Bertha Alicia López Garda de Zazueta alleges that her one-year-old daughter was given electric shocks in her presence. All those released after several months' abduction were able to identify other people held in secret detention at the time or who had previously been held in the same cells of the Campo Militar No. 1. They have also indicated that doctors were present at the torture sessions. Recent lists compiled by a Mexican committee founded by relatives of "disappeared" prisoners contain 470 names of people "disappeared" since 1972. The list does not include numerous peasants from remote areas who are reported to have suffered the same fate.
In April 1980 Amnesty International wrote to the Mexican President Jose Lopez Portillo presenting the conclusions and recommendations of its mission. While emphasizing the government's
153
"notable role in promoting instruments for the protection of human rights" in the international field and the assistance given to refugees from other parts of Latin America, it outlined its serious concerns regarding the protection of human rights within Mexico itself. On the basis of the mission and other-information it recommended that the Mexican Government: review further political cases under the amnesty laws, in particular where the interrogation was alleged or proved to have taken place under torture; implement Article 12 of the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment "Any statement which is established to have been made as a result of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment may not be invoked as evidence against the person concerned or against any other person in any proceedings"; establish independent inquiries into allegations of torture and punish or remove from office law enforcement personnel found to be responsible for such abuse of authority; provide remedies [compensation] to victims of unlawful arrest and torture and. in case of death, to the victim's family; establish a full enquiry into the Brigada Blanca and its activities and make public the findings and measures taken; pay particular attention to the human rights of campesinos and indígenas as the most vulnerable sectors of society; and study the possibility of including education and training in questions of human rights in the curricula at different levels of the educational system. The letter also noted Mexico's recent ratification of the International Covenant on the Repression and Punishment of the Crime oí Apartheid but pointed out that Mexico has not ratified the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, nor the American Convention of Human Rights.

