Italy
Amnesty International remained concerned about the lengthy periods spent in detention while underjudicial investigation by individuals holding minority political views. The usual reason given for their detention is to permit investigation into their suspected links with members of political groups which use violence. The offences are largely covered in the penal code under Article 270
280
(subversive association). Article 305 (political conspiracy by association) and Article 306 (participation in an armed band). In many investigations the degree of participation in or association with crimes is unclear or tenuous. In most of them the detained person has eventually been released by the investigatingjudge because of lack of evidence, after a lengthy period in custody and without ever being brought to trial.
Special powers of search, surveillance and detention are frequently used. It was therefore a matter of concern to Amnesty International when the govemment introduced a new decree law on 15 December 1979 dealing with "urgent measures for the protection of the democratic order and security of the public". With a few modifications the decree law was approved by the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate and became Law No. 15 of 6 Febmary 1980.
Four articles are of particular interest; Article 3 introduces a new offence of "association for purposes of terrorism and the destruction of the democratic order" which becomes Article 270 (bis) of the penal code and lays down substantial penalties on conviction: four to eight years for those who participate in acts of terrorism and seven to 15 years for those who organize them. This is in addition to Article 270 on subversive association.
Article 6 is a norma straordinaria, extraordinary measure, which lapses at the end of one year. It authorizes the detention (fermo di polizia) of individuals suspected of being about to, or likely to, commit an offence under Article 305 (mentioned above) or Article 416 of the penal code. The detainee may be searched and held in a police station for 48 hours; the Procurator of the Republic must be immediately informed and reasons for the detention given within a further 48 hours.
Article 9 increases the powers of search and permits them to be used in urgent cases without obtaining the authorization of the competent magistrate. The Procurator of the Republic must be informed without delay.
Article 10. in cases involving terrorism, extends by one third the maximum period spent in preventive detention at every judicial stage. This means that the procedure may, in the mdst extreme cases, now legally take up to 10 years and flight months.
It is the view of Amnesty Intemational that these new measures, legal in themselves, represent a diminution in the rights of citizens, especially since the already existing legislation gave sufficiently wide powers to the police and the judiciary. Further delays are permitted in bringing people to trial in a country which is already notorious for its lengthy legal procedures. This also represents a considerable reduction of the value of the right under Article 25 of individual petitions against
281
violations of the European Convention on Human Rights. Such applications can be admitted only after the exhaustion of all domestic remedies.
A case which Amnesty International has been following closely concerns the people arrested on 7 April 1979 and held on suspicion of connection with the kidnapping and murder of the former Prime Minister. Aldo Moro. Many suspects have since been released for lack of evidence, after being held for several months on a charge of, among other things, "subversive association". For example. Alisa Del Re. a lecturer at the Institute of Political Science ofthe University of Padua, was freed in December 1979 after 10 months in custody.
Giustino Cortiana, a marketing adviser, was arrested in Milan on 2 February 1979 and has since been awaiting trial on charges of subversive association with and participation in an armed band. He has now been held for more than a year in a number of different prisons throughout Italy, and, for a short time, in a psychiatric asylum. The only evidence against him known to Amnesty International is that of his co-defendant who subsequendy stated that he wished to alter his original testimony. Although Amnesty International cannot at this stage evaluate the evidence against Giustino Cortiana, it is investigating his case in view of the length of time he has been held awaiting trial.
Amnesty International had nine adopted prisoners of conscience during the year, all ofthem conscientious objectors or total resistersto military service. There are three types: those who apply for the status of conscientious objector and are willing to undertake alternative civilian service but are refused on the grounds that their religious, philosophical or moral objections to military service have not been sufficiently proved: those who have already been recognized as conscientious objectors and who have carried out alternative service for at least the 12 months required of regular conscripts but refuse to serve the extra time (eight months) required in alternative service; those who refuse either military or alternative civilian service and who are adopted as prisoners of conscience on the grounds that the length of alternative service may be considered punishment for refusal to perform military service.
Amnesty International adopted a total resister. Sergio Andreis, who has been serving a 13-month sentence in Gaeta military prison since 10 July 1979. He now faces a further charge under military law since he obtained and attempted to publish information of a confidential nature concerning the reclusorio militare, military prison. This charge arises in connection with his campaign against prison conditions at Gaeta. which he holds to be in breach of international norms and of the Italian Prison Reform Law of 1975. A report he wrote on prison
282
conditions in Gaeta has been published in German and Italian newspapers: so have extracts of letters sent by him to the President of the Italian Republic. Alessandro Pertini, and to the former Minister of Defence. He protested about "arbitrary and indiscriminate" isolation of prisoners, inadequate medical treatment and insanitary conditions. Sergio Andreis maintains that he is being subjected to especially restrictive measures in prison because of his campaign.
During the year Amnesty Intemational interceded in three cases under Article 1(c) of its Statute concerning cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. On 12 November 1979 it wrote to the giudice di sorveglianza. a judicial official with responsibility for the surveillance of prisoners, at Pisa to express concern about the medical condition of Alberto Buonoconto. It requested precise information about his prison conditions and medical state and asked what measures were being taken to improve his health if the description given in medical reports were accurate. Arrested in October 1975 as a member of the Armed Proletarian Nuclei and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for "participation in an armed band", he had reportedly been suffering from a steady deterioration in health. According to medical experts, he was suffering from serious physical and mental problems which ensued from, and were aggravated by lengthy periods of isolation and consequent sensory deprivation. He was incapable of walking or sitting upright or of eating without the aid of a cellmate.
On 20 November Dr Antonio Barsotti, i\\egiudice di sorveglianza, replied thai "nothing had been omitted to ensure that the conditions of the prisoner were being carefully supervised" by the competent authorities. On 12 December 1979 he was released on the grounds of grave physical infirmity and his sentence was deferred.
Amnesty International also interceded in the cases of Alberto Galeotto and Ivo Galimberti, who were held for a year in Padua prison in connection with an inquiry into the Autonomía movement and who are at present being held in the neurological clinic of Padua University. On 18 April 1980 Amnesty International wrote to the investigating judge. Dr Giovanni Palombarini. about these two prisoners in the light of reports by several doctors and experts who had found them in a "serious state of physical and mental exhaustion". The letter referred to the judge's own decision of 4 March 1980 to grant the prisoners provisional liberty on health grounds, and asked why this decision had been rejected by the General Procurator of Venice. Dr La Monaca. No answer has been received.
