Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
During the year Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the following: harassment, arrest, trial and imprisonment or forced detention in mental hospitals of people holding views — whether political, religious or nationalist — disapproved of by the authorities; administrative procedures, lacking necessary safeguards, which are used to suppress dissent; about trial procedures that fall short of international norms; the conditions of detention of political prisoners; the death penalty. Amnesty International worked on about 350 adoption or investigation cases.
Dissenters in various categories have been arrested and imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their human rights and sentenced to imprisonment, frequently under criminal legislation which explicitly restricts the non-violent exercise of human rights. Since the signing of the Helsinki Final Act in 1975, Amnesty International has learned of more than 500 people newly imprisoned or restricted for exercising fundamental human rights. That total does not include those already imprisoned in 1975. Amnesty International believes that there are many more prisoners of conscience than those of whom it knows. The real number is, however, obscured by official censorship and secrecy regarding penal practices and by the threat of retaliation against those who speak out about political imprisonment
At the time of writing. Amnesty International still has not heard of a single case in which a Soviet court has acquitted anyone charged with political or religious offences.
During the year under review, inmates of the country's penal institutions were still being subjected to a regime of chronic hunger, inadequate medical care and difficult often dangerous, compulsory labour. Inmates of psychiatric hospitals continued to be deprived of virtually every right that would enable them to protect themselves against ill-treatment by medical or other methods. Soviet citizens who expose and protest against these human rights violations risk imprisonment
The year was characterized by a marked increase in the number of
303
dissenters arrested, put on trial and sentenced to imprisonment Although many of those arrested were explicity charged with political offences, such as "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda", a large number of others faced criminal charges, such as "resisting the police", "hooliganism" and even "attempted rape", which Amnesty International believes to have been without foundation. Moreover, trials of dissenters continued to be marked by frequent violations of internationally accepted standards for fair trial.
Apart from the arrest trial, imprisonment or forced detention in mental hospitals of many dissenters. Amnesty International also received information about the widespread harassment intimidation and short-term detention of many others. It also received numerous reports about dissenters being physically ill-treated by unidentified assailants.
In a news release issued on 24 June 1979 which coincided with the first anniversary of the trials of the "Helsinki monitors" in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR), Amnesty International drew attention to the growing number of Soviet citizens who had been imprisoned, exiled or forcibly confined to psychiatric hospitals for exercising their human rights since the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. It condemned the authorities' treatment of those members of unofficial groups set up by citizens to review their country's compliance with the human rights provisions of the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference.
During the summer of 1979 a further four Helsinki monitors were arrested. Edward Arutunyan, a 51-year-old economist and member of the Armenian Helsinki monitoring group was arrested on 13 July in Erevan and charged with "circulation of fabrications known to be false which defame the Soviet state and social system" (hereafter abbreviated to "anti-Soviet slander"). The other three arrested monitors were members of the Ukrainian group: Vasyl and Petro Sichko, who were charged with " anti- Soviet slander" and Yuri Litvin who, it is believed, wasfalsely charged with "resisting the authorities". The latter two had previously been imprisoned for political offences.
Among those adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience during the year are people imprisoned for trying to emigrate (including Jews, Germans, Ukrainians and Pentecostalist believers), for writing and preparing books, journals or leaflets whose political or religious content was disapproved of by the authorities and for expressing nationalist sentiments (in particular Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Latvians and Estonians).
During 1978 the authorities strengthened measures to expel Tatars who have resettled in the Crimea, their ancestral homeland from which they were forcibly deported in 1944, and to prevent others
304
from returning there. During the year Amnesty International adopted 11 Crimean Tatars as prisoners of conscience after they had been arrested or tried and imprisoned for peacefully seeking the right to live in the Crimea. Among them were Eldar Shabanov, who was sentenced in May 1979 to three years' imprisonment on a false charge of "malicious hooliganism" and Mamedi Chobanov, who in July
1979	was convicted for a third time for his participation in the Crimean Tatar movement and given three years' imprisonment for "anti-Soviet slander".
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of prisoners of conscience belonging to unofficial workers' groups. In August, Nikolai Nikitin, a member of SMOT, the "Free Interprofessional Association of Workers", was arrested in Leningrad and in October 1979 sentenced to one and a half years' imprisonment for "anti-Soviet slander". In September, Anatoly Poznyakov, a member of a similar group, "The Association of Free Trade Unions of Workers in the Soviet Union", was arrested in Moscow, ostensibly for "hooliganism", and subsequently forcibly confined for an indefinite period to a psychiatric hospital. Another member of SMOT, Mikhail Solovov, was arrested in December 1979 and sentenced in April
1980	to three years' imprisonment after being convicted of making remarks on a Moscow trolleybus that insulted President Leonid Brezhnev. In June, Mikhail Kukobaka, a Byelomssian worker and long-standing dissenter, who has spoken out in defence of workers' rights, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "anti-Soviet slander".
During 1979 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience members of two unofficial groups in Leningrad that were broken up by the authorities. In April 1979 two members of a "Left Opposition" student group were tried for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda": Arkady Tsurkov was given a sentence of five years' imprisonment and two years' internal exile, and Alexander Skobov was ordered to be confined to a psychiatric hospital. In July, another member of the group, Alexei Khavin, was sentenced to six years' imprisonment on a charge — believed by Amnesty Intemational to be false — of "possessing or marketing narcotics". In October three members of a group calling itself "The Movement of Revolutionary Communards" were arrested. They were tried in December, ostensibly for "hooliganism". Alexei Stasevich and Vladimir Mikhailov were both sentenced to three years' imprisonment and Alevtina Kochneva to one year and three months.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of conscientious objectors who have been imprisoned for refusal to do military service. They included: a Roman Catholic, TeetPapson; a Baptist, Alexander
305
Savin; a Pentecostalist, Pavel Lupanov; a Jehovah's Witness, Yuri Bohdan; a Seventh Day Adventist, Pavel Schreider, a Jew, Boris Kalendarov.
A considerable number of those arrested, or tried and imprisoned, between spring and autumn 1979 for the peaceful exercise of human rights, were religious believers, particularly Baptists, Seventh Day Adventists and members of the Russian Orthodox Church. In June 1979, for example, the Baptist Valentin Naprienko was sentenced in the Ukraine to three years' imprisonment for circulating unofficial religious literature. In August, Galina Vilchinskaya and Pavel and Vladimir Rytikov were imprisoned in connection with organizing a holiday for Baptist children. They are still awaiting trial.
Three Seventh Day Adventists were tried in Stavropol Territory in June 1979 for operating an unofficial printing press. Rikhard Spalin was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment and his co-defendants, Yakov Dolgotyor and Anatoly Ryskal, to four years' each.
Several Russian Orthodox believers were imprisoned in connection with their religious beliefs. In the summer of 1979 Tatyana Shchipkova and Vladimir Poresh, both members of an unofficial seminar of Orthodox Christians in Moscow, were arrested and subsequently sentenced to three years' and to eight years' imprisonment and exile respectively for " hooliganism" and " anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". Two of the group's members previously arrested, Sergei Ermolayev and Igor Polyakov, were sentenced in September 1979 to four years' and three and a half years' imprisonment respectively for "hooliganism". A further three members of the group have since been arrested. Amnesty International leamed also of the trial in Moscow in March 1979 ofValeriya Makeyeva, a 50-year-old Russian Orthodox nun, who was charged with illegally producing religious handicrafts. She was sentenced to forcible confinement in Kazan Special Psychiatric Hospital and is reported to be undergoing treatment with powerful neuroleptic drugs.
Throughout the year Amnesty International continued to receive information indicating that the practice of compulsory confinement in psychiatric hospitals for political or religious beliefs rather than for authentic medical reasons was continuing. In November 1979, for example. Amnesty International issued a paper in which it stated that during the previous 12 months it had received detailed information on 20 new cases of political abuse of psychiatry. By the end of April 1980 it had learned of a further 18 cases. Several of them — for example that of the Ukrainian journalist Pavlo Skochok and of the Lithuanian human rights campaigner Arvidas Chekhanavichius — have been arrested under criminal law procedures and confined to a special psychiatric hospital for an indefinite period. Special psychiatric
306
hospitals constitute the most severe form of psychiatric detention and are intended for people who "represent a danger to society". Much more common, however, have been cases of confinement to ordinary psychiatric hospitals, for example Aleksander Komarov, Vladimir Lisov and Georgy Fedotov.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports about the ill-treatment of prisoners of conscience in psychiatric hospitals, particularly with powerful drugs. This happened, for example, in the cases of losif Terelya, Vladimir Rozhdestvov and Valeriya Makeyeva. Several prisoners of conscience, including Dr Mykola Plakhotnyuk, remained confined in psychiatric institutions, even though doctors recommended their release.
On 4 September 1979 a representative of Amnesty International presented an oral statement on the problem of psychiatric abuses, notably in the USSR and Romania, to a session in Geneva of the United Nations Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. On 8 November Amnesty International wrote to the members of the World Psychiatric Association's Executive Committee and to the Chairman of its Committee to Review the Abuses of Psychiatry, expressing its deep concem about the use of psychiatry for political purposes, particularly "the continuing high level of abuses in the USSR" and urging them to continue their efforts to prevent such abuses.
On 10 October 1979 Amnesty International issued the text of an open letter to President Brezhnev, appealing for the unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience in the USSR. On 12 October TASS (the official news agency in Moscow) responded by describing the letter as "a very obvious attempt to defame the Soviet Union on the eve of the Olympics by means of the most flagrant misinformation". The TASS statement did not mention any of the charges of abuse of human rights levelled by Amnesty International.
Towards the end of 1979 the Soviet authorities launched a major drive against all categories of dissenters, which resulted in a significant increase in the number of known arrests and trials. On 15 January 1980 Amnesty Intemational expressed concem, in,an international news release, that more^than 40 people were known to have been arrested or tried for non-violent exercise of human rights, during the last three months of 1979, in what appeared to be a country-wide crackdown on dissenters.
Among those arrested in Moscow were the prominent human rights campaigner Tatyana Velikanova (arrested on 1 November), the Helsinki monitor Viktor Nekipelov (7 December) and the well-known religious rights campaigner. Father Gleb Yakunin (1 November) and Lev Regelson (24 December). In the Ukraine those arrested included
307
the Helsinki monitors Vasyl Striltsiv ( arrested on 25 October), Petro Rozumny (19 October), Yaroslav Lesiv (15 November), Vitaly Kalynychenko(25 November) and an associate of the group, Mykola Horbal (23 October). In December, four other members of the Ukrainian Helsinki monitoring group, Yuri Litvin, Petro Sichko, Vasyl Sichko and Oles Berdnyk, were tried and given sentences ranging from three to nine years' imprisonment and internal exile. In Lithuania, two well-known human and national rights activists, Antanas Terleckas and Julius Sasnauskas, were arrested.
Among others imprisoned were Reshat Dzhemilev, a campaigner for the rights of the Crimean Tatars (sentenced in December to three years' imprisonment), IgorKorchnoi, a would-be emigrant(sentenced in December 1979 to two and a half years' imprisonment) and three editors of an unofficial literary journal: Valéry Abramkin, Viktor Sokirko and Yuri Grimm.
Amnesty International drew particular attention to the severe sentences given to several human rights activists: Yuri Badzyo, a Ukrainian writer, sentenced on 21 December 1979 to seven years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda"; Oles Berdnyk, a Ukrainian science fiction writer and a Helsinki monitor, sentenced on the same date and charge to six years in prison and three years' internal exile; the Baptists Ivan Kiriliuk, Vyacheslav Zayats, Viktor Lytovchenko and Viktor Draga, sentenced on 3 December 1979, to 12, 10, seven and three years' respectively after being convicted on allegedly false criminal charges ostensibly unrelated to their religious activity. Another Baptist, Anatoly Runov, was reported to have been forcibly confined in a special psychiatric hospital in December 1979, after attempting to distribute leaflets on religious themes.
The crackdown continued during the early months of 1980. By the beginning of April the total known to Amnesty International of those arrested, or tried and sentenced to imprisonment since the beginning of October 1979 was more than 100.
On 22 January 1980 the Soviet scientist and human rights campaigner, Andrei Sakharov, was taken into custody in Moscow, stripped of decorations and awards previously conferred upon him by the government and sent to live in the city of Gorky. He was not charged with any criminal offence or brought before a court On the same day, Amnesty International stated in a letter delivered to the Soviet Embassy in London that all the known facts indicated that the action was taken because of Dr Sakharov's public activities in defence of human rights and that it contravened international human rights instruments subscribed to by the USSR.
The authorities continued to arrest dissenters who are particularly
308
well-known within the USSR and abroad. Among them were the prominent Russian human rights campaigner Malva Landa (sentenced in March 1980 to five years' internal exile); the Russian Orthodox activists, Father Dimitry Dudko and Viktor Kapitanchuk; Vyacheslav Bakhmin and Dr Leonard Temovsky, both members of the unofficial Moscow-based Working Commission to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political Purposes; Zinovy Krasivsky and Olha Matusevych, members of the Ukrainian Helsinki monitoring group; Algirdas Statkevichius and Vytautas Skuodis, members of the Lithuanian Helsinki monitoring group; Rollan Kadiyev, a leading Crimean Tatar activist (sentenced in January 1980 to three years' imprisonment); Vladimir Borisov, a long-standing Leningrad human rights campaigner and founding member of SMOT who, in April 1980, was again forcibly confined for a short period in a mental hospital.
A large number of those arrested or tried and imprisoned during the intensive drive against dissenters were religious believers: Pente-costalists. Baptists, Russian Orthodox believers. Seventh Day Adven-tists and a Ukrainian Orthodox priest.
In addition, there was also a considerable number of arrests or trials of human and national rights activists in the Baltic republics, including those of Mart Niklus and Yuri Kukk (Estonians); Yustas Gimbutas and Povilas Pechiulionis (Lithuanians); and Maris Lukia-novich (Latvian).
Particularly disturbing are reports of a number of cases of further charges being prepared against prisoners of conscience before the expiry of their sentences of imprisonment or internal exile, in order to extend their detention. The Russian Orthodox activist, Alexander Ogorodnikov, for example, was not released in November 1979 on the expiry of his one year term of imprisonment for religious activities and is reportedly facing a further charge of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". The leading Ukrainian human and national rights campaigner, Vyacheslav Chomovil, was rearrested in April 1980 and reportedly falsely charged with a serious crime, three months before the expiry of an eight year term of imprisonment and internal exile. Amnesty International issued urgent appeals in these and similar cases.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about conditions in Soviet corrective labour colonies and prisons, where there was no noticeable improvement in the principal forms of ill-treatment: systematic underfeeding; difficult, often dangerous compulsory labour and inadequate medical treatment. Amnesty International received a detailed report on conditions in Soviet corrective labour colonies compiled by four political prisoners, Dr Yuri Orlov, Mykola Matusevych, Zinovy Antonyuk and Valéry Marchenko. It also learned about a
309
strike by at least nine political prisoners in Perm Camp No. 35, protesting against arbitrary treatment and demanding that foreign correspondents and representatives of the Human Rights Committee, set up under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, be admitted to the camp. The strike, which began in April 1979, was originally intended to last for 10 days but is known to have still been continuing in July 1979. The camp administration responded to the strike by putting those who took part in punishment cells for up to five' months.
An important development was the apparent evacuation of political prisoners from the "special regime" (most severe category) corrective labour colony in Mordovia described in the Amnesty International Report 1979 and from Mordovia Camp No. 19, and their transfer to other penal institutions.
During the year Amnesty Intemational interceded on behalf of a number of prisoners whose poor state of health was giving cause for particular concern. Among those on whose behalf it issued urgent appeals were: Boris Evdokimov (who died in October 1979), Yevhen Pronyuk, Igor Ogurtsev, Zinovy Antonyuk, Mykola Slobodyan and Alexander Bolonkin. In January 1980 it leamed of the death in imprisonment of the 84-year-old leader of the unregistered wing of the Seventh Day Adventists, Vladimir Shelkov. Amnesty Intemational also continued to receive disturbing reports of hardships facing prisoners of conscience sentenced to internal exile in remote areas.
On 29 April 1980 Amnesty Intemational published a second edition of its 1975 vQ^on Prisoners of Conscience in the USSR: Their Treatment and Conditions. In the years since the 1975 report was first published the abuses it describes have remained official practice. The 1980, 200-page report documents the continuing official intolerance of freedom of conscience, the conditions under which convicted prisoners serve sentences of imprisonment, the forcible confinement of dissenters in psychiatric hospitals and their conditions and treatment there.
In accordance with its normal practice. Amnesty International submitted the second edition of the report to Soviet judicial authorities for comment, but no reply had been received by the date of publication.
On 27 April 1979 five prisoners from the Soviet Union were released in exchange for two Soviet citizens who had been convicted of spying and sentenced to long terms of imprisonment in the United States of America. The five were Alexander Ginzburg, Valentyn Moroz, Georgy Vins — who had all been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience — and Edward Kuznetsov and Mark Dymshits. At the time of the exchange Amnesty Intemational
310
emphasized that it works for the unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience throughout the world and does not take part in the exchange of prisoners.
At the beginning of 1980 Amnesty International launched a program of action aimed at achieving the abolition of the death penalty in the USSR, as part of its general campaign against the death penalty in any circumstances throughout the world. Although the Soviet Govermnent is publicly committed to the eventual abolition of the death penalty, the country's criminal law permits it for 18 different offences in peacetime, some of them not involving any use of violence. In the calendar year 1979, Amnesty International learned of 43 people sentenced to death, most of them for war crimes during the Second World War or offences involving murder. Among those executed was Tonya Makarova, who was convicted of war crimes; this is the first time in recent years that Amnesty International has learned of a death sentence being passed on a woman in the USSR.
