Bahrain
The main concerns of Amnesty International were political imprisonment, detention without trial, unfair trial procedures and the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
The state of Bahrain is ruled by the al-Khalifah family. The present constitution was adopted by a government-appointed Constituent Assembly on 9 June 1973. The Bahraini National Assembly (provided for by the constitution) has been dissolved since August 1975 when the Bahraini Government claimed the discovery of a communist-inspired plot to assassinate the Interior Ministers of the Arabian Gulf States. In addition to suspending the operation of parliament, the government has introduced legislation that further curtails freedom of expression and participation in political activity. The Law of Assembly of October 1973, contrary to Article 28 of the constitution, requires a police permit for an assembly and makes the permit-holder responsible for whatever happens during the gathering.
324
Despite provisions to the contrary in Articles 19 and 20 of the constitution, the State Security Law of October 1974, allows the Minister of the Interior to order the administrative detention of any person for up to three years without charge or trial on suspicion of their being a threat to the security of the state. The period of detention usually lasts the full three years. It was after its opposition to this law that the National Assembly was dissolved. The Labour Law of January 1976, contrary to Article 27 of the constitution, does not ensure the legality of trade union activity. The press law of August 1979, contrary to Article 23 of the constitution, enables the state to order the arrest of journalists on charges of demeaning the status and integrity of the ruler of Bahrain and other high-ranking officials, diplomats and foreign heads of state, of damaging the Bahraini economy, or of endangering the security of the state.
As a result, much political activity has become illegal. Amnesty International has adopted 14 prisoners of conscience, but the number of political detainees is believed to be larger, possibly as many as 50. Occasional amnesties keep the number of detainees fairly constant. Some prisoners have been arrested and released several times. Among 10 prisoners released in February 1980, two had been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience: Yusif al-Ajaji, who was detained in June 1974 without being charged after a strike by the workers of the Bahraini Aluminium Company over trade union rights, and Ibrahim Muhamad Bashmi, a journalist arrested in August 1975 under the Penal Code of 1955 and the Publication Ordinance of 1965 as a result of articles in a newspaper of which he was an acting editor. Most of those adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience are clerical employees, industrial workers, journalists, lawyers or ex-members of parliament.
Also of concern to Amnesty International were the trial procedures, prison conditions and the treatment of prisoners. Amnesty International has received reports of witnesses and lawyers acting on behalf of the accused being imprisoned at the end of a trial.
Amnesty International also had information about the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. There are four prisons known to Amnesty International: al-Qala'a prison (the Fort prison), Jedda Island prison. Safra anti-riot camp, and Joe prison. It appears that in Safra camp prisoners were shut up in wooden boxes for varying lengths of time, subjected to solitary confinement and occasional beatings by guards; in Joe prison family visits were frequently denied.
On 3 March 1980. when President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing visited Bahrain, the French national section of Amnesty International issued a news release requesting the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience in Bahrain.
325
