German Democratic Republic
The main concern of Amnesty International continued to be the arrest and imprisonment of people for their non-violent exercise of human rights, in particular the right of the individual to leave his or her country and the right to freedom of expression and information. During the year its groups worked on behalf of more than 200 people under adoption and investigation. Almost all the people involved were detained under legislation which explicitiy restricts the exercise of human rights. On 30 June 1979 theThirdCriminalLawAmendment Act, a major piece of legislative reform, was passed by the People's Chamber, the supreme legislative body of the German Democratic Republic (GDR), and came into force on 1 August This Act imposed further restrictions on the exercise of human rights, in particular the right to freedom of information. Amnesty International is concerned also about certain aspects of the judicial process, the treatment of political prisoners and the retention of the death penalty, although no executions were reported during the year under review.
The majority of people adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience were imprisoned as a result of their efforts to exercise their right to leave their country. To leave the GDR, except to go to other Warsaw Pact countries requires special permission which is very difficult to obtain. Those caught leaving without permission face prosecution under Article 213 of the penal code for "illegal crossing of the border". Because of the difficulties involved in crossing the heavily guarded border dividing the two Germanies, many would-be emigrants seek the help of professional escape organizations, an activity proscribed by Article 100 of the penal code. The Third Criminal Law Amendment Act extended the maximum punishments under Article 213 from five to eight years' imprisonment and under Article 100 from five to 10 years' imprisonment.
Those who attempt to emigrate legally are also liable to arrest and imprisonment During the year those who persisted in their efforts to obtain exit permits, and who thereby came into conflict with local government officials, were arrested on charges such as "impeding the activity of public bodies" (Article 214 of the penal code). One such prisoner is Klaus Dieter Wolf who was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment under Article 214 after trying for more than a year to obtain permission to emigrate. The Third Criminal Law Amendment
270
Act extended the maximum sentence for this offence from two to three years' imprisonment. Many would-be emigrants who had applied repeatedly but without success for permission to emigrate, sought help from organizations and individuals outside the GDR. Before the enactment of the Third Criminal Law Amendment Act such people were frequently prosecuted under Article 98 of the penal code (collecting information) for collecting and passing on to organizations and individuals, whose activity was directed against the GDR, information suited to support such activity. The new legislation has broadened the definition both of the information that may not be passed on and the recipients to whom it may not be passed. The newly formulated Article 99 of the penal code (treasonable passing on of information) proscribes the passing on of non-secret information "to the disadvantage of the interests of the GDR" to "foreign powers and organizations as well as their helpers". Article 219 (taking up illegal contacts) now proscribes distributing information "suited for damaging the interests of the GDR" abroad. The first arrest under these new laws known to Amnesty International was of Gunter Beyer on 29 November 1979. Before his arrest he had sought permission to leave the country for more than three years and had written appealing for support in his efforts to the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and to other organizations abroad. In his letters he referred to provisions concerning the right of emigration in international human rights instruments. He was tried on 14 February 1980 and sentenced to three years' and three months' imprisonment for "treasonable passing on of information".
The newly formulated Articles 99 and 219 of the penal code also facilitate the arrest of writers and authors who turn to foreign publishers because of the difficulties in getting their works published in the GDR, if they contain criticism of the country. Even before the new legislation was passed, writers whose works were published abroad without permission risked prosecution under the currency laws for any money earned. In May 1979 Robert Havemann and Stefan Heym. two well-known writers, were fined for royalties received from abroad and could have been imprisoned for up to two years. An interview with Stefan Heym was given coverage in the news media of the FRG: in it he claimed that the currency laws were effectively being used to stifle freedom of expression. On 7 June 1979 nine writers were expelled from the Writers' Union of the GDR, five of whom had publicly criticized the currency charges brought against Stefan Heym. Amnesty International has adopted as prisoners of conscience seven people arrested after criticizing government policy towards writers. These include Thomas Klein and Jutta Brabant, who
271
collected signatures for a petition to Erich Honecker, Chairman of the State Council, protesting against the expulsion of the nine writers from the Writers' Union, and Heinrich Saar, a former professor of philosophy, who wrote a letter to the authorities responsible for cultural policy, protesting against the restrictions imposed on writers.
The Third Criminal Law Amendment Act, passed in June 1979, imposed new restrictions on the exercise of a number of other rights as well as those of freedom of movement and freedom of information. Freedom of association is restricted by Article 107 of the penal code, which proscribes the founding or membership of'associations hostile to the constitution". The new version also proscribes advocating such associations or supporting them in any other way. The exercise of the right to freedom of expression is further restricted by new clauses in Articles 106 (incitement hostile to the state) and 220 (public vilification) of the penal code. Article 106 now proscribes the "discrediting" of the GDR's ties of friendship and alliance as well as conditions within the GDR itself Article 220 has a new section proscribing the dissemination of "written materials, objects or symbols which encroach upon the state or public order" or make it "contemptible", or which disturb the socialist way of life. The maximum sentence under Section 1 of Article 106 has been extended from five to eight years and under Article 220 from two to three years.
While it is not yet possible to assess the full effect of the Third Criminal Law Amendment Act, Amnesty International is concerned that it increases the likelihood of arrests and the imposition of longer prison sentences for the exercise of human rights proclaimed in the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (to which the GDR is party). Amnesty International wrote to the authorities expressing concern about the passing of this act and asking for its repeal.
On 25 September 1979 the State Council issued a decree announcing that there would be an amnesty for convicted prisoners to mark the 30th anniversary of the GDR on 7 October. According to official sources in the GDR, 21,928 prisoners were released. It is not known how many of these were political prisoners but of some 80 convicted prisoners under adoption or investigation by Amnesty International groups at the time, more than 55 were released Although the majority of these wished to emigrate, at the time of writing only four— Rudolf Bahro, NicoHiibner, Werner Schaelicke and Christine Wolf — have been allowed to do so. Those released in the GDR were reportedly still subject to certain restrictions, including police surveillance and arbitrary house searches. They were not allowed to leave the district in which they reside without permission nor to be away from home from 10 pm to 6 am. Under the terms of the
272
amnesty decree, if rearrested within three years, they will have to serve the remainder of their sentences in addition to any new sentence imposed. Amnesty International has learned of the rearrest of four amnestied prisoners.
Large numbers of political prisoners are released annually to the FRG before completing their sentences in exchange for sums of money paid by the Government of the FRG. The GDR authorities suspended this practice for five months following the amnesty but it was resumed in March 1980.
On 15 November 1979, Dr Alfred Frisch, an Austrian lawyer, went to Erfurt on behalf of Amnesty International to observe the trial of Reiner Hoefer. one of its adopted prisoners of conscience. Reiner Hoofer was arrested after the text of a letter written by him to Erich Honecker. criticizing various aspects of the political and educational system in the GDR. had been published in the FRG weekly, Der Spiegel. Dr Frisch was able to gain admission to the court-room as the trial was beginning in order to ask the Chairman of the Court for permission to observe the trial. This was refused on the grounds that the trial concerned matters of' state security", although the information available to Amnesty International indicated that the charges related solely to material already made public. The trial was then held in camera, as is usual in the case of prisoners of conscience in the GDR, and Reiner Hoefer was sentenced to four years' and six months' imprisonment for "incitement hostile to the state".
Federal Republic of Germany
The main concern of Amnesty International has been related to prison conditions. Its concern about legislation which can be used to restrict political criticism and the freedom of speech of the individual has not led to the adoption of anyone as a prisoner of conscience. However, it has occasionally interceded where it appeared likely that the prosecution of individuals might result in their imprisonment for political and conscientiously held beliefs unrelated to the use or advocacy or violence.
On 17 May 1979 Amnesty International sent a message to the public prosecutoroftheLflWi^^er/c^/Nuremberg/Furth in connection with the trial of people charged with, among other things, use of
273
insulting language {Beleidigung — paragraph 185 of the penal code, and Verleumdung — paragraph 187 of the penal code) and defamation of the state (Verunglimpfung des Staates — paragraph 90a of the penal code). The charges concerned a number of texts published by members of the Knastgruppe Nürnberg, Nuremberg Prison Group, about the case of Herr Günther Braun. Günther Braun died in Ansbach district hospital on 10 February 1978 a few days after sustaining injuries in Nuremberg Prison.
Referring to Articles 2 and 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Amnesty Intemational wrote: "Having read the paragraphs in the indictment which form the basis of the above-mentioned charges and having also read in their entirety the pamphlets and press statements published by this group, Amnesty Intemational is of the opinion that the suppression of the expression of the opinions contained in these publications would be in contravention of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights." It therefore urged that the criminal charges against the defendants which related to the contents of the publications be dropped. Although a number of people were convicted in the lengthy and complex proceedings (which were not restricted to the charges of insulting language and defamation), no one was imprisoned because of the opinions expressed in the publications and none of the accused was therefore adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International has followed closely the cases of defence lawyers charged with offences relating to their work for clients accused of politically motivated crimes. Among these was the case of Kurt Groenewold who, in July 1976. was charged with "support of a criminal association" (Article 129 of the penal code) in the course of his defence of a member of the Red Army Fraction. Kurt Groenewold was accused of. among other things, establishing, financing and running an "Info-System" between 1973 and 1976, which was said to have provided the Red Army Fraction prisoners held in Stuttgart-Stammheim Prison with information designed to maintain their "criminal consciousness". Amnesty Intemational delegated Professor C.F. Rüter, a Dutch criminal lawyer, to observe the trial, which took place in 1978. In its judgment the court held that most of Kurt Groenewold's activities relating to the defence of his clients had been legal and, indeed, that he had acted "fundamentally honourably". Contrary to the claim made in the indictment, the so-called "Info-System" and "defence lawyer's circulars" were not as such unlawful. However, a minor part of Kurt Groenewold's activities did contravene the criminal law. The court accepted that Kurt Groenewold had honestly believed that his acts were not criminal but held that this error of law did not constitute a defence. Kurt Groenewold was
274
therefore sentenced to two years' imprisonment, which was suspended, and to a fine. The court did not disbar him as the prosecution had requested. In his report. Professor Rüter expressed the personal view that Kurt Groenewold's error of law was excusable and that on this issue the court did not take sufficiently into account the highly charged atmosphere in which Kurt Groenewold had to work or the part the authorities themselves had played in creating this atmosphere. He concluded that Kurt Groenewold had nevertheless received a fairtrial with full opportunity to defend himself; that the judgment was in conformity with the law; that the court could reasonably arrive at its judgment; that the findings of the court (both in fact and law) were supported by the reasoning in the judgment; and that the sentence was not exceptionally high by standards in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). However, Professor Rüter criticized the practice of requiring all members of the public attending the trial to show their identity cards and allow the cards to be photographed.
Amnesty International continued its work on the prison conditions of people suspected or convicted of politically motivated crimes on the basis of the conclusions of its own special study project, which were submitted to the federal government in a memorandum on 13 February 1979. The memorandum concluded that the forms of isolation in which these prisoners — mainly members of the Red Army Fraction. 2 June Movement and the Revolutionary Cells — were detained had severely damaged the health of some of them and had led to intellectual and emotional disturbances as well as to disturbances of the autonomic nervous system. It urged the authorities to abolish solitary confinement and small-group isolation as regular forms of imprisonment On 5 June 1979 a meeting to discuss the subject took place in Bonn between representatives of the Federal Ministry of Justice and an Amnesty International delegation. Duringthis meeting the authorities expressed their willingness to lessen the isolation of the prisoners, but pointed out the difTlculties posed by the prisoners themselves. Amnesty International, while recognizing these, stressed its belief that it was possible to combine the demands of security with humane treatment avoiding extreme forms of isolation. After this meeting, the memorandum, already submitted to the federal government was sent to the Land authorities with the same appeal to abolish the severe forms of isolation inherent in the prisoners' conditions. Amnesty International requested that the memorandum be discussed at the 50th session of the Strafvollzugsausschuss, Standing Committee on Penal Affairs, of the Justice Ministries of the Lander, convened by the Ministry of Justice of Baden-Württemberg in October 1979. Amnesty International informed theLand authorities of its delegates' recommendation to establish an independent advisory committee
275
with authority to order medical examinations of prisoners. The delegates recommended that "if on the basis of a medical examination ordered by the Committee, with which the prisoner in question has cooperated fully, the Committee recommends changes in the prisoner's conditions of imprisonment, such as a widening of social contacts, the authorities without delay seek to implement such recommendations". In a letter of 14 January 1980 the Minister of Justice of Baden-Württemberg replied on behalf of all the Lander. The reply did not comment on the substance of the Amnesty International memorandum but rejected the proposals.
On 28 May 1980 Amnesty International published a dossier on its work on the prison conditions of people suspected or convicted of politically motivated crimes in the FRG. This contained the text of the memorandum, the report of the meeting with the federal authorities of 5 June 1979 and relevant correspondence. It was decided to publish the dossier, not only because Amnesty International believed that it described important matter relevant to the treatment of prisoners in the FRG, but also because it took the view that its material might contribute to the setting of international standards for high security imprisonment.
In late April 1979 some prisoners began a hunger-strike in which as many as 70 members of the Red Army Fraction, 2 June Movement and Revolutionary Cells became involved. On 15 June Amnesty International sent a message to the Baden-Württemberg and federal authorities about reports that the hunger-strike had reached a critical stage for a number of prisoners. It was particularly concerned about the state of health of Irmgard Möller, imprisoned at Stuttgart-Stammheim, and said that, although it could not support the specific demands made by the prisoners on hunger-strike, it had already expressed to the federal government its general concerns about prison conditions in the context of solitary confinement and small-group isolation of politically motivated prisoners.
On 13 October, a letter was sent to the Senator for Justice of West Berlin, Dr Gerhard Meyer, in connection with the hunger- and thirst-strike of prisoners held in small-group isolation in Moabit Prison. The strike was reportedly caused by a decision to transfer one of the prisoners to another jail, a move which would have further intensified the isolation of the remaining prisoners in the group in Moabit. The letter stated that alternatives could be found to solitary confinement and small-group isolation and recalled previous correspondence in which Dr Meyer had observed that where integration of prisoners in the normal prison regime was impossible, it was his aim to detain them in conditions of such security as provided them with social contacts "as closely as possible comparable to those of the other prisoners".
lib
On 6 February 1980 Amnesty International sent an urgent communication to the state govemment of Schleswig-Holstein about five prisoners who had gone on hunger-strike in the prison of Lübeck-Lauerhof after a strip-search and transfer to cells in a new high-security wing. It urged that "the prisoners be detained in accordance with the willingness expressed by the FRG authorities to lessen the isolation of prisoners" and reiterated its request, contained in the memorandum, that solitary confinement and small-group isolation be abolished as regular forms of imprisonment. It also asked that "the five prisoners be retained in hospital until sufficiently recovered and until a proper solution regarding their future imprisonment has been established in line with our recommendations". After a period in the prison hospital in Hamburg the prisoners were returned to Lübeck-Lauerhof It was reported that plans were being made to enlarge their social contacts but it is not known when or if these plans will be put into effect.
Greece
During the year Amnesty International was concerned about its adopted prisoners of conscience, all of whom were Jehovah's Witnesses, imprisoned because of their refusal to perform military service. In October 1977. the govemment introduced Law 731/ 77 which took conscientious objection into account for the first time. It gives conscientious objectors the alternative of performing unarmed military service for a period of four and a half years, twice as long as armed military service. However, Jehovah's Witnesses refuse to perform any form of alternative military service and continue to be imprisoned for their conscientious objection.
In the past, conscientious objectors were given long sentences: fbr example Vassilis Spanoyiannis was sentenced to 10 years' and Emmanuel Gazis to 18 years' imprisonment. However Vassilis Spanoyiannis subsequently agreed to perform military service and Emmanuel Gazis's sentence was reduced to four and a half years on appeal. Most sentences are four and a half years or are reduced to four and a half years on appeal. The one clear improvement in the position of conscientious objectors brought about by law 731/77 is that they now serve one period of imprisonment for their refusal to perform unarmed military service instead of the repeated sentences to which
277
they were previously subjected For conscientious objectors detained in the agricultural prison of Kassandra, every day spent on agricultural labour counts as two days of the sentence.
In April 1980 Amnesty International was working for the release of 99 imprisoned Jehovah's Witnesses.
