Malaysia
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the arrests and indefinite detention without trial of some 1,000 Malaysians under the Internal Security Act 1960 (ISA). The Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Federation of Malaysia, published in August 1979, focused on the plight of these prisoners, many of whom have suffered serious ill-treatment, in some cases amounting to torture.
Under the ISA, a person may be held if the Minister of Home Affairs decides detention is " necessary with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Malaysia". Detainees are held for an initial interrogation period of 60 days during which they are usually kept incommunicado in a Special Branch Holding Centre, where they are subjected to prolonged periods of interrogation. After 60 days, at the discretion of the Minister of Home Affairs, the detainee may be served with a two-year detention order or released. If a detention order is served, the detainee is usually transferred to one of two prisons, the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp or the Taiping Detention Camp, which hold approximately 100 and 800 detainees respectively. Amnesty International knows of detainees served with detention orders who have remained in holding centres beyond the stipulated 60 days or have been transferred to "safe houses" for further interrogation. The journalist and essayist, Samad Ismail, who was arrested in June 1976 has been kept continuously in solitary confinement in a secret place of detention in Kuala Lumpur where he has received only irregular visits from his family and is deprived of all reading material except the Koran. In its publication on Malaysia, Amnesty International urged that Samad Ismail be released immediately or that he be transferred to a recognized prison pending trial.
The Amnesty International report also contained a recommendation that the government repeal the ISA on the grounds that it violates
217
basic human rights to liberty, to the presumption of innocence and to a fair, open and speedy trial. The report recommends also that the government institute full and open commissions of inquiry into allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, and that the systematic use of solitary confinement and prolonged interrogation cease immediately. To help safeguard against such abuses the report also recommended that access to legal counsel and medical examination be permitted to all detainees.
The repHDrt further staled that the conditions in which prisoners are held beyond the 60-day interrogation period were inadequate by the standards set forth in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. In Batu Gajah conditions have deteriorated in recent years due to overcrowding and to the introduction in 1977 of harsher rules governing visits, correspondence and hours of exercise outside prisoners' cells. In both Batu Gajah and Taiping medical attention also was found to be inadequate.
The Malaysian authorities to whom Amnesty^Intemational sent the report for comment before its publication on 29 August 1979, classified it as a subversive publication under the ISA, thus prohibiting possession of the report or its dissemination. In a speech-to the Fifth Biennial Law Conference on 25 October 1979, the Prime Minister Datuk Hussein Onn said that "the price for doing away with the ISA is the destruction of our democratic system and our way of life" and that the act would not be repealed. Shortly after publication of the Amnesty International report, the leader of the opposition Democratic Action Party, Lim Kit Siang, described it as " devastating" and stated that he would seek a debate on it when parliament reconvened. Although unable to secure a debate, Lim Kit Siang did ask the Deputy Prime Minister, Datuk Sri Dr Mahattir Mohammed, in parliamentary question time on 23 November 1979, whether the government would consider amending the ISA so as to subject ministerial powers of detention to judicial control. Dr Mahattir replied that the government had to be able to resort to preventive measures for reasons of national security. On 17 December 1979, the Minister of Home Afi"airs, Tan Sri Ghazali Shafie, justified the banning of the report to members of the Dewan Negara (Upper House) on the grounds that it was misleading and could affect the nation's security.
The ISA, as noted in the Amnesty International report, had been used to detain members of legal opposition parties, including the Democratic Action Party (DAP), the now defunct Labour Party of Malaya mdih^Partai Sosialis Raky at Malay sìa (PSt^M), Malaysian People's Socialist Party, as well as trade unionists engaged in legitimate trade union activity. Kong Hoi, a former Labour Party member, has now been in detention under the ISA for more than 15
218
years. Tan Hock Bin, formerly Assistant Secretary General of the Labour Party, has been in continuous detention since July 1967 when he was arrested for demonstrating against United States intervention in Vietnam and for protesting against the government's decision to ban the United Malayan Estate Workers' Union. Two elected members of parliament representing the DAP — Chan Kok Kit and Chian Heng Kai — were imprisoned in November 1976; both retained their seats in the 1978 parliamentary elections while in detention. In November 1976, the government for the first time under the ISA arrested members of the ruling United Malays National Organization, Datuk Abdullah Ahmad, a former Deputy Minister for Science and Technology, and Abdullah Majid, a former Deputy Minister for Labour and Manpower. In April 1980 both were still in detention. Two prominent leaders of the PSRM — Kassim Ahmad, its Chairman, and Dr Syed Husin Ali, an internationally recognized sociologist — remain in detention in Taiping Detention Camp. While in prison both have managed to continue writing, but the authorities have confiscated their manuscripts.
When the Amnesty International mission visited Malaysia in November 1978, it was informed by Malaysian officials that political detainees held in Taiping and Batu Gajah were not regarded as individuals who had used or advocated violence. The Amnesty International delegates were informed also that the Minister for Home Affairs had refused to approve a standing recommendation of the Advisory Board that all detainees held in Batu Gajah since 1971 or before 1971 — a total of some 5 3 detainees — should be released on the grounds that they could no longer be considered a threat to national security. One of them, Hooi Chin Han a former member of the PSRM, was the focus of an Amnesty International campaign in December 1979, the 10th anniversary of his arrest under the ISA.
Although some people held under the ISA have been released during the year, including Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience. Law Heng Neng, Lai Sin Siang and Cheah Leong Seng, Amnesty International has learned of new arrests. It believes that the total number of people detained under the Act is still approximately 1,000 including those who have not been served with detention orders. In December 1979, two committee members of the Johore Baru Branch of the PSRM were detained, reportedly for supporting squatters. They were however released before being served with detention orders. In January 1980, 15 members of the local branch of the legal opposition Pan Malayan Islamic Party (PMIP) were detained in Kedah for allegedly being members of an underground Moslem organization, Pertubuhan Angkatan Sabillullah (PAS), Organization of Warriors of Allah. They were arrested
219
shortly after peasant demonstrations against the introduction of a voucher system for payment of rice subsidies which it was alleged they had incited and shortly before a local by-election which the PMIP candidate was regarded as having a strong chance of winning.
Amnesty International has been concerned also about the extension of the application of the death penalty in Malaysia. Since 1975, under amendments to the ISA, the death sentence has been mandatory for individuals found in possession of firearms in designated "security areas" or in circumstances "which raise a reasonable presumption that the [person] intends or is about to act, or has recently acted, in a manner prejudicial to public security". An amendment to the Narcotics Act, also passed in 1975, made drug trafficking a capital offence. Moreover, the Essential (Security Cases) Regulations introduced in October 1975 and enacted in January 1979 stripped the defendant in security cases of basic legal safeguards and abolished the distinction between adults and juveniles. At the end of 1979, 37 people were reported to have been sentenced to death under the ISA. On four consecutive Fridays between 14 March and 4 April 1980, individuals sentenced under the ISA amendments and Essential Regulations were executed During this period, a totaLof nine men were executed, eight of whom had been sentenced to death under the ISA, six for arms possession and two for murder. The ninth man had been sentenced under the Narcotics Act Amnesty International cabled Prime Minister Datuk Hussein Onn on 19 and 24 March 1980 expressing its concern about the executions. In a letter to the Prime Minister sem on 26 March 1980, it said it was disturbed by the recent spate of executions particulariy in view of the governmenfs former reluctance to enforce the death penalty. It urged the government to commute all remaining death sentences.
