France
The French Govemment has not introduced laws on conscientious objection conforming to existing intemational recommended norms. The practice has continued of imprisoning conscientious objectors who refuse to do military service when their applications for conscientious objector status have been rejected. Amnesty International considers them to be prisoners of conscience under Article 1(a) of its Statute.
The right to conscientious objection is restricted to those who, under Article 41 of the Code du service national. National Service Code, "are opposed unconditionally to the personal use of arms because of religious or philosophical convictions". Amnesty International has, however, consistently urged that France should adhere to the principles of Resolution 337 of the Parliamentary Assembly of 1967 of the Council of Europe. This declares in its basic principles that, with respect to Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights, individuals should be released from the obligation to perform armed service if they refuse to do so for "religious, ethical, moral, humanitarian, philosophical or similar motives" In early 1979 Amnesty Intemational began a campaign to bring this question forcefully to the attention of certain European governments, including that of France.
Conscientious objectors whose applications are refused face trial in a military court and a sentence of up to two years' imprisonment if they refuse to join their regiment. Between October 1979 and March 1980, more than 30 conscientious objectors were imprisoned on these grounds. This shows an increase over recent years.
In most of these cases, the objectors had submitted identical letters to the Commission juridictionnelle, responsible for deciding on conscientious objector applications, in which each declared his "unc9nditional opposition to the personal use of arms, on grounds of philosophical conviction". While some 5(K) applications for conscientious objector status on these grounds were granted by the commission between 1975 and 1978, all such applications made since that period have been systematically rejected by the commission. More than 160 applications have been refused between August 1979 and the time of writing.
Most of the objectors had appealed to the Conseil d'Etat, the French Council of State, against the rejection of their applications by
266
the commission. In March 1980 the Council of State ruled in favour of a large number of the appeals before it, with the result that all those at that time in prison were released. In its ruling, the Council of State said that the commission had been wrong to reject their applications simply because of their collective nature, without examining each case on its own merits. The Council of State thus sent the cases back to the commission for reconsideration. However, the Council of State had made an identical ruling in the case of another objector in December 1979, whose application for conscientious objector status was again refused by the commission in March 1980. Therefore, it seems possible that the commission might refuse on similar grounds the applications returned to it in March 1980. This would mean that those objectors could face re-arrest and imprisonment at the time of the next date of national call-up in June 1980.
Amnesty International has set up a special action network of adoption groups to help French conscientious objectors who are serving short sentences.
Christian Grimaux, a conscientious objector adopted by Amnesty International, went on hunger-strike in September 1979 to protest against his imprisonment. Amnesty International issued urgent appeals on his behalf in view of his deteriorating state of health. He was released in November 1979 and exempted from military service. However, at his trial in March 1980 by the Tribunal permanent des forces armées. Permanent Tribunal of the Armed Forces, on the original charges of insubordination and refusal to obey, he was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment with six months suspended
Alain Coraud, a Breton pacifist who refused to apply for conscientious objector status, was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment in September 197 8 for refusal to perform military service. At the time of his trial he had been granted provisional liberty after a hunger-strike lasting 19 days. However, in January 1980, he was re-arrested and is now in prison serving his sentence. In February 1980, two Jehovah's Witnesses, Joel Fernandez and Michel Picarotta, who also refused to apply for conscientious objector status, were sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment for refusal to perform military service. Amnesty International appealed for the release of those prisoners in March 1980.
Amnesty International is concerned about the prosecution in summary courts of people arrested during demonstrations. They are usually accused, under Article 314 of the penal code, of acts of violence and tried under the procedure known as flagrant délit, a special summary procedure governed by Law No. 75-701 of 6 August 1975. It is Amnesty International's view that the use of this special summary procedure in the interests of rapid judgments impedes the
267
conduct of a fair trial in cases where the facts of the matter are in dispute. This is principally because l'administration des preuves, the establishment of proof, is made difficult, if not impossible, for the defence, while, at the same time, the summary courts tend to give excessive weight to police evidence.
On 10 May 1979. Maître Amand D'Hondt of Brussels attended the appeal hearing in Paris of Gilles Desraisses and Pierre Le Gall who were sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment following disturbances at the demonstration of 23 March, organized by the Confédération générale du travail, the General Confederation of Labour, in support of Lorraine steel workers. Both had been sentenced at a summary hearing in March to 15 months' imprisonment for throwing stones at the police. The Amnesty International observer noted that the trials had a strong political character and that considerations of public order took precedence over consideration of the facts of the case. He concluded that the prosecution had not proved its case beyond reasonable doubt, in view of the contradictions between police evidence and the statements of witnesses for the defence.
He found that the sentences were excessive and did not take into consideration the individual circumstances of the defendants, which indicated â political influence on the court. Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice. Alain Peyrefitte, requesting a review of these two cases. The Appeal Court, however, increased the sentences and the cases were taken up for investigation by Amnesty International.
On 17 March 1980 Amnesty International sent Maître Eric Thiry of Brussels to the second session of the summary trial in Quimper of nine people arrested during a demonstration against the construction of a nuclear power station in Brittany. The trial had been interrupted because of the suspension of a defending lawyer for 10 days. The nine were accused of taking part in a clash with French police and paratroopers in the neighbouring village of Plogoff. It was the conclusion of the Amnesty International observer that while the proceedings of that part of the trial which he attended could not be said to have violated the human rights of the defendants, the deficiencies in the summary procedures mentioned above should be pointed out. Eight defendants were sentenced to terms varying from one month to 15 days' but all were immediately released. The ninth was acquitted.
In April 1979 Amnesty International undertook a research mission to Brittany to investigate the allegations of maltreatment of 25 people then awaiting trial before the Court of State Security, accused of acts which were considered to represent a danger to the state. This trial raised concerns in every aspect of Amnesty International's mandate: the imprisonment of Michel Salomon, who, in the
268
absence of any charges relating to the use of violence, appeared to be tried only for his beliefs; the fairness of the procedures of the Court of State Security when dealing with political prisoners and the substantive allegations of ill-treatment of certain detainees while held for interrogation.
Amnesty International therefore sent an observer, Maitre Amand D'Hondt of Brussels to their trial in Paris, which lasted from 17 September to 20 October 1979. Maitre D'Hondt noted three areas of concern to Amnesty International. First, he thought that the discrepancy between the powers given to the prosecution and those given to the defence, by Articles 29 and 30 in the procedure of the Law on State Security number 63-23 of 15 January 1963, was not consonant with the spirit of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Second, he expressed concern about the question of ill-treatment of detainees whose period of detention by the police for interrogation could be extended to six days. Some of the accused were continuously interrogated for very long periods. Third, he drew particular attention to the case of Michel Salomon, who was detained for 15 months. He was the only defendant who was never accused of committing any act of violence and he was acquitted. Of the 24 defendants, six were acquitted and 18 found guilty — two in absentia — and given sentences ranging from 15 years' imprisonment to two years' suspended.
France still permits the use of the death penalty and was one of the major target countries for the Amnesty International program against the death penalty. On 11 March 1980 Norbert Garceau was sentenced to life imprisonment for murder by the Court of Assizes of the Haute Garonne. In June 1979 the Court of Assizes of the Tarn had sentenced him to death but the verdict was quashed by the Cour de cassation.. Court of Cassation, and a retrial ordered. He had served a previous sentence for murder and was released in 1972. There were no executions during the year under review.
269
