Mali
The concerns of Amnesty International included political imprisonment, detention without trial of government opponents, political killings, torture, poor prison conditions and the death penalty.
The Union démocratique du peuple malien (UDPM), the Democratic Union of the Malian People, the sole political party, was officially launched at the end of March 1979 to pave the way for the return to civilian government in June 1979. On 3 April 1979 eight people were arrested in connection with the publication of a tract critical of the new party and of its leadership. Among them were several former officials of the government of the late President Modibo Keita, which had been overthrown by a military coup in November 1968. In the months following their interrogation, during which torture was reportedly used to extract confessions, four of the prisoners were released. The remaining four were brought to trial on 2 October 1979, charged with "insulting the Head of State" and "constituting a secret association". An additional charge of possessing a military firearm was brought against Dr Mamadou Gologo, former Information Minister, one of the four arrested.
After hurried court proceedings Dr Gologo and Idrissa Diakite were sentenced to four years' imprisonment, and the remaining two to one year and to six months. Amnesty International requested the
60
authorities to permit it to send an observer to the proceedings but received no response. In late February 1980, at an appeal hearing in Bamako, the sentences passed in October 1979 were upheld. During the year Amnesty International called on the government on several occasions to adhere to the freedom of expression and fair trial provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which had been ratified by Mali in July 1974. The three convicted prisoners remaining in detention at the end of 1979 were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
Unrest in schools and higher education establishments first became apparent in March 1979, when the independent Union nationale des élèves et étudiants du Mali (UNEEM), Malian National Union of Pupils and Students, refused to be assimilated into the youth organization of the newly-formed political party. On 16 November 1979 pupils and students went on strike in the capital, Bamako, and in several regional centres, calling, among other things, for a halt to government plans for standardized school curricula and common entrance examinations for the civil service. On 30 November one student was shot in the arm and some 40 others were arrested during violent clashes with the police in several towns. In early December the government announced its decision forcibly to conscript some 300 pupils and students, including 267 UNEEM members. On 15 and 16 December protest demonstrations against the order led to renewed clashes with the police, who charged the demonstrators with bayonets and opened fire. At least 15 people are believed to have died and some 50 to have been injured. After further popular protests against the forced conscription of young people, the government announced its decision to revoke the order. The student strike came to an end.
In mid-February 1980, however, new disturbances occurred in schools near the town of Segou. Police again opened fire on demonstrators, leaving two students greviously wounded, one of whom is reported to have died. Arrests were made and a teacher and a student were sentenced in camera to prison terms of eight and three months respectively. On 8 March a major demonstration by pupils and students against these prison sentences took place in Bamako, during which some shops were burnt and several cars destroyed. According to eye-witness accounts, the ensuing police intervention was of the utmost brutality — young people were indiscriminately clubbed and beaten with rifle butts in the streets of Bamako, in police stations, schools and homes. More than 300 young people were detained. Many of the injured were later taken to Djikoroni military camp, where they were reportedly stripped and given further beatings. In their attempts to force student leaders to give themselves up, f)olice
61
arrested and ill-treated their relatives, including young children under the age of 10. More than 90 students and pupils were forcibly conscripted and dispatched to military camps in the remote north of the country. Three teachers, who had organized a public meeting several 3ays before the 8 March demonstration, were arrested, tortured and transported to a remote northern location.
On 21 March 1980 the government announced the death in detention of Abdul Karim Camara, the Secretary General of UNE EM, five days after his arrest. On 25 March 1980 Amnesty International publicly called for an official inquiry into the circumstances surrounding his death. Abdul Karim Camara is said to have died afterbeing beaten repeatedly and hung by his feet. Amnesty International also called for reassurances about the conditions of several other students and pupils reported to have been tortured. It expressed concern about the forced conscription of more than 90 youths. This measure, carried out without any legal procedure, had been used in the past as a form of punishment, subjecting conscripts to a special regime of hardship.
On 29 March 1980, after strong popular protests against police brutality and a call for the return of the body of Abdul Karim Camara to his family, President Moussa Traore announced that all the pupils and students detained would be released. This order is believed to have benefited all the student and pupil detainees known to Amnesty International, although the safe return of some young people remains to be confirmed.
Conditions of detention in two of Mali's prisons, the Taoudenit "Special Re-Edjication Centre" and Kidal camp, both in the Sahara region of the country, are reported to be harsh. The extreme temperatures and the severity of the prison regime make incarceration a brutal form of punishment Prisoners are reported to have died from exhaustion, poor nutrition and chronic illness. Despite reference in previous issues of the Amnesty International Report to these conditions, they appear to have remained unchanged; no international humanitarian organizations have been given access to these prisons. Torture, including beating and the use of electric shocks, is reported to be inflicted at the Bamako police headquarters and Djikoroni military camp.
It was announced in July 1979 that the sentences passed by the State Security Court in March 1979 on several former government officials had been quashed and that new proceedings would be instituted. At the March hearing Kissima Doukara, former Minister for Defence, Interior and Security, had been sentenced to death and three others to imprisonment; all had been accused of corruption. During the year presidential clemency was-.granted on two occasions: in late July 1979, 35 prisoners were released, including several
62
convicted of political offences, and a further 65 had their sentences reduced; and on 1 January 1980 six prisoners were freed, including Malick Diallo, whose case Amnesty International had investigated. Seven other prisoners had their sentences reduced. On 3 April 1980 Amnesty International appealed for presidential clemency in the case of Nouhoun Dembele, who had been sentenced to death in March for embezzlement. At the time of writing no report of his execution had been received.
On 17 April 1980 President Moussa Traore granted Amnesty International delegates in Paris an audience during which all of Amnesty International's concerns were discussed.
