Somalia
The foremost concerns of Amnesty International were imprisonment of political prisoners without trial, poor prison conditions including solitary confinement, and the death penalty. Its attempts to send a mission to Somalia to discuss the question of political imprisonment have been unsuccessful.
Somalia gained a new constitution by referendum in August 1979,10 years after the army seized power and suspended the previous constitution. It has since been ruled by presidential decree. The new constitution declares Somalia to be a socialist state whose religion is Islam. The constitution formalized many existing governmental structures and created a legislative assembly elected on 30 December 1979; according to official figures 99.91 per cent of voters accepted the national list of candidates nominated by the sole party, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party. Major-General Siyad Barre was then unanimously elected President by parliament for a new six-year term.
Somalia appealed for international assistance for an estimated 1.3 million recently arrived refugees. Most were of Somali ethnic origin, fleeing the guerrilla war in the Ogaden desert in Ethiopia, where Somalia supports two armed movements fighting Ethiopia for control of the area Ethiopia supports a Somali opposition organization, the Somali Salvation Action Front (SOSAF), which broadcasts to Somalia, and has had some armed clashes with the Somalia army. There have been border incidents between Somalia and Ethiopia.
At least 100 people and possibly many more are believed to be held on political grounds, without charge or trial. Prominent among these are former Prime Minister Mohamed Haji Ibrahim Egal, former Brigadiers Mohamed Abshir Musse and Abdullahi Farah AH "Holif, and Secretary General of the former Somali Democratic Union Yusuf Osman Samantar (known as "Barde Ad"). The first three have been continually held over more than 10 years, since the overthrow of the
72
civilian government Other detainees adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience include Sheikh Abdirahman Abdishakur " Aswad", a lav^^er, Yusuf Ali Barre, a schoolteacher and poet; Sheikh Mohammed Moallim Hassan, Assistant Director of Religious Affairs in the Ministry of Justice and Religious Affairs. An unknown number of people who have been held without trial or have been sentenced to imprisonment by the National Security Courts in circumstances which suggest to Amnesty International that the arrests may have been politically motivated and that some of those held may be prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International has taken up for investigation more than 30 cases. They include those of civil servants, business people, students and untried military prisoners. Amnesty International has experienced difficulties in obtaining precise information on political prisoners since relatives fear reprisals for publicizing their cases. Information on releases is equally difficult to obtain and has often reached Amnesty International after several months' delay.
Many of those arrested on political grounds are not even interrogated while in custody. Prisoners are not physically ill-treated although conditions are harsh. Political prisoners are usually held either in Lanta Bur prison near Afgoi or Labatan Jirow prison near Baidowa. Both prisons provide for solitary confinement for more than 60 prisoners and can accommodate larger numbers of other prisoners. Those being held are kept in solitary confinement in small, permanently lit, basement cells. They are denied family visits and access to lawyers but by "correct behaviour" they can "earn" certain privileges such as books to read, association with other detainees and exercise in the fresh air. Diet is poor and adequate medical treatment difficult to obtain, in part because of the remoteness of the prisons. Conditions in Labatan Jirow are worse than in Lanta Bur, prominent political prisoners are kept there and are denied books and all but the minimum of the privileges previously mentioned. Some sources claim that prisoners have refused offers of release made conditional on their support for President Barre. It has been reported that tribal elders concerned about these detentions have received promises from the President that the prisoners would be released; these have not been honoured.
Conditions of sentenced prisoners held in Mogadishu general prison are less restrictive, although some prisoners are reported to have gone on hunger-strike in December 1979 in protest against overcrowding, lack of hygiene, supervision of the short weekly family visits and other complaints. Amnesty International received no reply to its cable to President Barre asking for information and for his intervention in these matters.
73
On 16 April 1980, 2,658 prisoners were freed under a special presidential amnesty. At the time of writing. Amnesty International was attempting to discover whether any of its adopted prisoners of conscience or investigation cases were among those released.
A number of death sentences were passed by security courts for offences such as murder, treason and misappropriation of large sums of government funds. Two boy and two girl students, one of whom was believed to be under 18, were sentenced to death in Garowe in June 1979 for demonstrating against the government. It is believed that the sentences have not been carried out. All four students, convicted when they had exercised the right to freedom of opinion and expression, have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
In addition to its concerns about arbitrary arrest and interrogation by the all-pervasive National Security Service, Amnesty International is disturbed that suspected political oppMjnents are being designated kaandeed, anti-revolutionaries, by party cadres or security agents during the compulsory regular attendance at local "orientation centres". This designation, against which there is no legal recourse, is frequently applied also to released detainees, and can lead to dismissal from employment, denial of the right to work and loss of other civil rights.
During 1979 Amnesty International twice attempted to send a mission to Somalia to discuss these concerns with the government The first proposed mission had to be cancelled in June when visa applications met with no response; the second mission was cancelled in November on instructions from the Somali authorities, although one of the Amnesty International delegates had been granted a visa. On 10 December Amnesty International wrote to the government expressing disappointment that the Government of Somalia should decline to accept an Amnesty International delegation to discuss the question of human rights.
74
