Viet Nam
The main concerns of Amnesty International remained the detention without charge or trial of many thousands of people held in "re-education" camps since 1975. Although no widespread releases from such camps have been reported during the year, some individuals have, however, been released Amnesty International was also concerned about subsequent arrests and detention without charge or trial of people for non-violent opposition to the government or for trying to flee the country by boat It was concerned, too, about death sentences passed since mid-1979.
Many people held in "re-education" camps are former members of the administration, army or police of the previous South Vietnamese Government led by Nguyen Van Thieu, and others are former members of political parties and organizations which were classified as reactionary after the change of government in the south in April 1975. They have now been held without charge or trial for more than five years despite the undertaking of the government that they would be released within three years of the end of the war.
This question was raised by an Amnesty International delegation visiting Viet Nam from 10 to 21 December 1979. It met Prime Minister Pham Van Dong and held detailed discussions with members of the Vietnamese Lawyers' Association and other officials. It also visited prisoners in four places of detention. After the visit Amnesty International prepared a Memorandum for submission to the government outlining its main concerns.
The exact number of people who have undergone "re-education" since 1975 is not clear to Amnesty International. The government had previously stated on several occasions that approximately one million people have undergone "re-education" during the months which followed the change of government in South Vietnam in April 1975. The figure obviously includes large numbers of people who were released after attending short-term "re-education" courses. According to information provided by the government to the Amnesty
242
International delegation, several thousand people who were detained for longer periods have also now been released. The Amnesty International delegation was informed in Hanoi in December 1979 that 26,000 people remain in detention and that 14,000 have been released since 1975. Amnesty International was told that the 40,000 detained for "re-education" since 1975 included "29,000 puppet military personnel, 7,000 civilian officials, 3,000 policemen and security officials and 900 members of reactionary parties and organizations". However, it remains to be clarified whether these four categories covered all people placed in "re-education" camps in 1975 and also people brought to those camps thereafter.
In its discussions with the Vietnamese authorities and legal representatives, the Amnesty International delegation was keen to establish why the Vietnamese Government continues to detain large numbers of people without charge or trial far in excess of the three-year period. Amnesty International was informed that since the unification of Viet Nam on 2 July 1976, the law of what was formerly the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Viet Nam) now applies to the whole country. Although decrees of the Provisional Revolutionary Government were still valid, the existing law of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam was paramount In particular, the Vietnamese authorities referred the Amnesty International delegation to Resolution 49-NQ/TVQH of the National Assembly of 1961. This Resolution provides for"re-education" for two categories of people: (a) "obstinate counter-revolutionary elements who threaten public security" and(b) "all professional scoundrels". There are no provisions in Resolution 49 of 1961 that those individuals sent for "re-education" be brought before a court or sentenced. Although the period of "re-education" mentioned is three years, the Resolution also allows for the period of detention to be extended, somethir>g for which the Provisional Revolutionary Government Policy Statement of May 1976 did not provide. Amnesty International is concerned therefore that the Vietnamese Government now states that Resolution 49 of 1961 applies to those individuals held after the cessation of hostilities in 1975.
Although the system of detention in "re-education" camps in Viet Nam may not have been regarded as administrative detention without trial in its conception, it appears that the element of "re-, education" has now receded considerably. The Amnesty International delegation was told during its visit that new and unexpected considerations of security have arisen during the last two years which have made it impossible to release all detainees in "re-education" camps within the time period first envisaged; in particular reference was made to the situation in Kampuchea and to Viet Nam's relations with
243
the People's Republic of China. Grounds for the continued detention of these people, therefore, seems to have shifted from past misdeeds and present behaviour to the external situation, namely national security. These prisoners are therefore being held in what is usually termed administrative detention without trial.
The effect of this new policy is that thousands of people who had expected to be released after three years are still kept in detention without charge or trial and without knowing when they will be released, resulting in severe hardship for the detainees and their families.
Lists of names of prisoners of conscience were also prepared for submission to the government in addition to cases of detainees who were old and weak or seriously ill and who could be released under the terms of Article 7 of the Policy Statement on "re-education" (No. 02/CS/76) issued in May 1976 by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Viet Nam. The delegation which visited Viet Nam in December 19J9 also submitted to the authorities several lists of names of political detainees.
Amnesty International later learned of several dozen individual releases. Among those released during the early months of 1980 were Doan Quoc Sy, a well-known writer, who at the time of his release was detained in a camp in central Viet Nam; Nguyen Dinh Toan, a writer and poet who had been in detention since 1977; Dang Ngoc Lan, a former military officer who had been held for five years, reportedly in poor health (having had one leg amputated prior to his detention in 1975) and Nguyen Thi Khiet, arrested in 1976 together with her son while attempting to leave the country by boat; both had been detained in the Mekong delta area since then.
Those held since 1975 on account of their past office or political affiliation include former civil servants, politicians, journalists and teachers: Truong Vi Tri, a 38-year-old former member of parliament and editor of a Chinese-language weekly, who was last known to be held in a "re-education" camp in Thanh Hoa province (south of Hanoi); Tran Cong Be, a 59-year-old pharmacist who had been an honorary adviser to a political party which supported the former South Vietnamese Government; Pham Dinh Khiem, a journalist and editor who worked as Presidential Press Attache until 1975 and is now held in a camp in Thanh Hoa province; and Le Ngoc Chan, a 65-year-old former ambassador and lawyer who is held in Ha Nam Ninh province. Others who, like the already-mentioned detainees, have been held for more than five years without charge or trial include military officers, such as Huynh Minh Quang, a 55-year-old former officer in the air force whose work until his arrest in 1975 was that of Head of the Personnel Department at Ton San Nhut Airport in
244
Saigon. Amnesty International received information about military chaplains and Roman Catholic priests held in "re-education" camps since 1975. One of them, Phung Canh, a 51-year-old military chaplain, who worked in an orphanage at Dalat for several years before commencing service as a military chaplain in the early 1960s, was sent for "re-education" in June 1975. In early 1980 he was reported still held in a camp in Vinh Phu province.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the cases of people arrested after 1975 on accountof their dissenting views or suspected opposition to the government Most have not been charged or tried and are held either in prisons or "re-education" camps. One such person is Trieu BaThiep, a 42-year-old lawyer who was arrested in April 1977 in Ho Chi Minh City after having signed a declaration criticizing the government's record on human rights which was read in public by several of its authors. Trieu Ba Thiep was first detained in prison in Ho Chi Minh City and later transferred to a " re-education" camp. He is now held in a camp at Xuan Loc, in Dong Nai province. Those arrested since 1975 include many writers, journalists and academics, such as the author Duyen Anh, who has been held without charge or trial for more than four years. Duyen Anh's books, mainly children's stories based on his own experience as an orphan, have been classified as "reactionary". His health was reported to have declined during his detention. In February 19 80 Amnesty International learned that he had been moved from the Xuyen Moc camp in Dong Nai province to another camp. Priests and monks were also among those detained Amnesty International received the names of more than 60 priests and religious leaders of the Roman Catholic, Buddhist or Protestant faiths who have been arrested since 1975.
Another matter of concern to Amnesty International was the arrest and detention of people who attempt to leave Viet Nam by boat One of them is Tran Than Thuy, a 47-year-old former teacher of English and French who worked in the Ministry of Education in Saigon until 1975 and has been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Tran Than Thuy is married and has two children; since 1971, however, his wife and children have lived abroad. According to information received by Amnesty International, Tran Than Thuy, in his capacity as a civil servant, reported to the new authorities after the change of government in South Viet Nam in 1975. His action resulted in his having to spend seven months is a " reeducation" camp. He was allowed to return to Ho Chi Minh City at the end of 1975 and his citizen's rights were restored in 1976. Tran Than Thuy subsequendy applied for permission to leave Viet Nam to join his wife abroad. He received no news of his application for several months during which time he learned that his wife had become ill. In
245
May 1978 he resolved to leave the country by boat but he was arrested during the attempt Five months after his arrest, the authorities of the district in Ho Chi Minh City where he used to live visited his house to announce that his request to leave Viet Nam had been granted. However, despite this, Tran Than Thuy was still detained at the provisional dentention centre at Ban Tranh in Ben Tre province at the end of April 1980.
Amnesty International has appealed on behalf of prisoners reported to be in poor health and more especially on behalf of Ho Huu Tuong, a 69-year-old writer and journalist detained since 1977 in the Xuyen Moc camp where his health had deteriorated; Vo Van Thanh, a former military officer reported to be suffering from a hernia and to have been struck in the eye by a fragment of wood while working in the camp where he was held in Nghe Tinh province; and Trinh Quang Quy, a 76-year-old former judge and senator suffering from various illnesses. In March 1980 Amnesty International learned that Trinh Quang Quy had beeq released The condition of other detainees on whose behalf it had appealed was not known as of April 1980.
The Amnesty International delegation which visited Viet Nam in December 1979 had the opportunity to visit three "re-education" camps and one prison. The delegation informed the authorities that it was not competent to make a general assessment of conditions in " reeducation" camps and prisons in Viet Nam, nor to make detailed comments on the places of imprisonment it visited, including the more positive aspects of what it was shown. In its subsequent memorandum to the government Amnesty International made recommendations regarding the need for detailed regulations pertaining to conditions in places of imprisonment, prisoners' visiting rights andcoirespondence, the system of medical care for prisoners and the system of prison inspections.
Since the mission Amnesty International has continued to receive complaints from relatives and prisoners regarding their conditions of imprisonment Most such complaints relate to the lack of food and proper medical care and to difficulties over access for visits.
A number of trials and death sentences have been reported. Most trials involved people accused of attempting to flee the country illegally or of" organizing illegal departures". There were also trials of people charged with engaging in violent opposition to the government; death sentences were passed in several such cases. In Ho Chi Minh City in July 1979 on two men convicted of organizing a clandestine organization, the "National Salvation Front"; in Dong Nai province on an "organizer of illegal departure", Nguyen Ngoc Tam, who was also accused of bank robbery; and in Quang Nam-Danang, on three men convicted of hijacking a boat and killing two crewmen in an
246
attempt to flee the country. Death sentences in similar cases continued to be reported in late 1979 and early 1980. Amnesty International has appealed to the government to commute all death sentences on humanitarian grounds. However, in most cases it is not known whether executions were carried out or what procedures are used for appeal and review of such cases.
