Sao Tome and Principe
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing imprisonment of several people convicted in March 1979 of plotting against the state and about the detention without trial of the former Prime Minister, Miguel Trovoada.
Since Sao Tome and Principe became independent from Portugal in 1975, the country has been ruled by the only legal party, the Movimento do Libertaqào de Sào Tomé e Principe (MLSTP), Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe, under the leadership of President Manuel Pinto da Costa. On repeated occasions since 1975 the government has alleged that the two islands were in danger of invasion or that its citizens had been plotting against the government Seven people arrested in late 1977 and early 1978 in connection with a plot to invade Sao Tome and Principe were brought to trial in March 1979. Five people were convicted, three being given lengthy prison sentences. Amnesty International believes that some of these prisoners were convicted because of their political opinions and allegiances rather than because they had actually taken part in a plot.
In April 1979 the Prime Minister Miguel Trovoada, a leading figure in the "liberal" wing of the party, was demoted to Minister for Industry and Commerce and the post of Prime Minister was abolished. In August 1979 a proposed population census had to be called off after serious disturbances arising from widespread fear that the census was merely a prelude to conscription into forced labour, as had been the practice in colonial time.
At a special meeting of the MLSTP in September Miguel Trovoada was held partly responsible for these disturbances and was accused of plotting to overthrow the government. Miguel Trovoada subsequently sought asylum at the Portugese embassy, and when this was refused he went to the offices of the only other international organization in Sao Tome, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), and remained there for 10 days. The UNDP representative, based in Gabon, went to discuss the situation with the authorities of Sao Tome, but before the discussions could be completed security forces broke into the UNDP offices and arrested Miguel Trovoada. By the end of April 1980, despite its repeated inquiries, Amnesty International had received no further details about his detention or about the likelihood of his being brought to trial.
In June 1979 the death penalty was introduced in Sao Tome for
70
the crimes of "economic sabotage' "colluding with imperialism"
"being a mercenary" and
