Angola
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the imprisonment of suspected members of armed opposition parties and other political factions in Angola. Considerable numbers of political prisoners were, however, reported to have been released during the year. It was concerned also about reports of a hunger-strike at Sao Paulo prison in Luanda, the capital, and allegations that political detainees had been ill-treated.
Major changes occurred in the government during 1979; some as a result of the death of President Agostinho Neto in September 1979. The central committee of the Movimento Popular de Libertaqào de Angola (MPLA), People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola, swiftly appointed the former Minister of Planning, José Eduardo dos Santos, as new head of state. Shortly before his death. President Neto had disbanded the Direcqào de Informaqào e Seguranqa de Angola (DISA), the security police force, and delegated responsibility for matters relating to internal security was to a newly-created Ministry of the Interior. In May 1979 the powers of the Ministry of Defence were bolstered by the appointment of five vice-ministers. In early 1980, however, the Minister of Defence, Colonel"Iko" Carreira, was dismissed from office.
In 1979 and early 1980, the government faced continuing problems of internal security, particularly in the south of the country where the guerrilla forces of Dr Jonas Savimbi's Uniào JVacional para a Independència Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, remained active and South African forces mounted a series of air attacks on Angolan military and civilian targets which, according to Angolan sources, resulted in more than a thousand casualties. It is reported that, during 1979, clashes also occurred in the Cabinda enclave, where government forces were opposed by the secessionist Freme de Libertaqào do Enclave de Cabinda (FUEC), Cabinda Enclave Liberation Front. Sporadic acts of sabotage, some of which resulted in the death and injury of civilians, were reported in Luanda.
A number of long-tei"m political detainees, including those alleged to be members of the Organizaqào dos Comunistas de Angola (OCA), Organization of Angolan Communists, and other dissident groups^ were released in 1979. However, in August some 50 detainees at Sao Paulo prison in Luanda, a number of whom had been
31
held since 1976, organized a protest against their continued imprisonment. They appealed to theProcuradorGeral, State Public Prosecutor, to order their release from imprisonment which, they claimed, was illegal. As a result some were released, but in December it was reported that 19 who were still held had gone on hunger-strike to protest against their continued detention. In January 1980, when Amnesty International appealed to the government on their behalf it was informed that at least one had been released.
Although Amnesty International was not able to estimate the number of political prisoners still held at the end of 1979, it is known to include civilians suspected of supporting UNITA or the Frente Nacional de Libertaçào de Angola (FNLA), Angola National Liberation Front, another organization involved in armed opposition to the government. It is also believed that a number of suspects arrested after the abortive coup led by Nito Alves in May 1977 are still being held.
In March 1980 President dos Santos announced that clemency would be granted to most political prisoners, though not to the leaders of opposition political groups. However, the number of prisoners released in this amnesty is uncertain.
