India
The main concerns of Amnesty International in India during this year related to the reintroduction of statutory provisions for preventive detention, the persistence of serious police brutality, giving rise to occasional reports of deaths in police custody and to the fact that several political prisoners have been held, awaiting trial, for a number of years. It has continued to be concerned also about the application of the death penalty.
In August 1979 the Lok Sabha (Lower House of the Indian Parliament) was dissolved and during the January 1980 general elections Indira Gandhi's Congress " Party obtained an absolute majority. With the support of allied political parties, the new
195
government had the two-thirds majority required to change the constitution.
In the face of rising prices and increased inflation the caretaker government of Charan Singh had in October 1979 promulgated the Prevention of Black-marketeering and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Ordinance, authorizing preventive detention for a period of three months, after which a detainee had to be brought before an advisory committee. In a cable of 5 October 1979 Amnesty International expressed concern about the government's plans to reintroduce preventive detention legislation in India and urged it to withdraw the ordinance immediately. Indira Gandhi, then leading the Congress Party in opposition, was reported to have expressed fears that the ordinance could be used against political opponents. However, when it came to power, the Congress government introduced a bill containing similar provisions, and on 14 February 1980 Amnesty International cabled President Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, reaffirming its concern about the preventive detention provisions of the new law, the Prevention of Black-marketeering and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act.
During the first half of 1979 Amnesty International received allegations of the torture of some of the 48 army officers who had been arrested in the state of Jammu and Kashmir on charges of espionage. Three of them. Captain Rataur, Captain A.K. Rana and Raghbir Singh had allegedly been tortured by being beaten on the soles of the feet; one of them had reportedly been subjected to burning with cigarettes and to having sharp objects inserted into his rectum. Amnesty International wrote to Jagjivan Ram, the Minister of Defence, on 21 June 1979 about the allegations and the Ministry of Defence, in its reply of 8 August 1979, dismissed the allegations as baseless and informed Amnesty International that the accused had the right to be assisted by lawyers of their choice and that they had access to other legal safeguards. However, in a letter of 5 December 1979. Amnesty International expressed concern that not all allegations of ill-treatment and torture had been investigated by an independent body, as it had recommended, and it asked for the report of the inquiry which the Defence Ministry was reported to have ordered into the death of Sergeant Ram Swaroop, who had died while in military custody four months after his arrest in October 1978. Atthe time of • writing Amnesty International has received no reply.
Archana Guha, a schoolteacher from Calcutta, who had been tortured in 1974 and whose case had been described in Amnesty International Report 1979, received extensive medical treatment in Copenhagen, arranged by the Danish Medical Group of Amnesty International from 9 January until 30 March 1980. As a result of
196
torture and subsequent imprisonment she was suffering from a lesion of the lower part of the spinal cord and was unable to walk. She is now able to walk short distances as a result of her treatment in Denmark.
In the wake of a Supreme Court verdict of May 1979, directing state governments throughout India to free all prisoners held for more than six months without being charged. Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh on 5 July 1979, urging that the three political prisoners in the state, who had been held for longer than this period, should be released.
At the time of writing Amnesty International was investigating the cases of four political prisoners on trial in Kerala, two in Bihar and three in Andhra Pradesh, out of a total of 28 cases which it had taken up for investigation after its 1978 mission. Of the 28, 11 have been acquitted, five have been released on bail, two cases have been withdrawn and only two of those tried have been convicted: they were given life sentences.
In a cable to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi on 18 January 1980, congratulating her on her election, Amnesty International expressed the hope that the new government would consider ratifying at an early stage the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The two international covenants had been ratified by the previous government in April 1979.
In April 1980 Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister, thanking her for replying personally to questions from an Amnesty International group in Canada about Kadavathu Peedikayil Amir, who had been held in the state of Kerala since at least July 1976. It also requested information about those political prisoners whose cases it was investigating and expressed concern that all of them had been held pending trial, since their arrest in 1976. At the same time it sent the Prime Minister an aide-mémoire, outlining its immediate concerns in India. In this it observed that an increasing number of people were being arrested under the new preventive detention legislation, introduced in February 1980 except in West Bengal, Kerala and Tripura, whose Communist Party of India (Marxist) governments have not brought in this legislation. It explained that in the experience of Amnesty International, preventive detention legislation introduced in India in the past for limited offences only, had in due course been used to detain peaceful opponents of the government. It therefore urged the new government to take steps to repeal preventive detention laws and ultimately to remove preventive detention provisions from the Indian constitution.
The aide-mémoire welcomed the Prime Minister's recent expression of concern about police violence and in particular her statement that there was "the need for a new orientation to their [the police's]
197
training so that they should not treat everybody as guilty". The aide-mèmoire said that these matters had also been of longstanding concern to Amnesty International.
In the aide-memoire. Amnesty International stated that, each year, it received reports from most Indian states about prisoners who had died in the custody of the police and that it was writing to the Chief Ministers of the states of Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, where such incidents had most recently been reported. The aide-mémoire recalled that in the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to India, 31 December 1977 - 18 January 1978, Amnesty International had already documented cases of political prisoners who had died in police custody in the states of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal. It noted that official investigations had been ordered in only a few cases in which prisoners had died in police custody ( according to a report in the Statesman of 11 March 1980, "some action" had been taken in only two out of nine cases occurring in West Bengal during 1979) and urged that all such allegations should be investigated by impartial commissions of inquiry, functioning openly and being subject to public scrutiny. Amnesty International recommended that the new government consider putting into effect the detailed recommendations for the prevention of torture made in its 1979 mission report. It recommended also that a Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials should be established in India and that the government should make arrangement? for the translation into Hindi and other Indian languages of both the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 17 December 1979, and the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Cruel. Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment It urged that these documents should become part of the routine training of all law enforcement officials in the police and prison services.
The aide-mémoire recalled that the Supreme Court, in a judgment of 21 December 1979 {Sunil Batra vs. Delhi Administration), had urged implementation of specific provisions of these two international legal documents when it found that a prisoner in New Delhi's Tihar Jail, Prem Chand, '"had been tortured". Amnesty International expressed the hope that the important directives for the protection of prisoners made by the Supreme Court would be put into effect without delay. Among other things they provided for lawyers to make regular visits to prisons where they could talk to prisoners in strict confidence, for visits by district and sessions judges to serve "as an effective grievance mechanism" and for the State to "take steps to keep up the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners recommended by the United Nations".
198
In three out of four cases involving the death penalty which came before the Supreme Court between February and May 1979, judges raised doubts about whether the death penalty was constitutional, and on 17 October 1979 the Supreme Court stayed all executions, pending judgment on a petition challenging its constitutional validity.
