Benin
The main concerns of Amnesty International were detention without trial of political opponents, political imprisonment after unfair trials and the death penalty.
Between June and November 1979, as many as 50 students were arrested during renewed unrest at the University of Benin and several other higher education establishments. These events recall those of 1978, when at least 15 students and teachers suspected of sympathy with the clandestine Parti communiste du Dahomey (PCD), Dahomey Communist Party, had been detained. In eariy 1979 university students formed the Groupe d'unità d'action des universitaires (GUAU), Students' United Action Group, to oppose the university "cooperative", a government-control led body established to represent student views and to implement government policy making agricultural work obligatory for students. GUAU also called for improved facilities and greater freedom of speech and association. A five-day strike was
32
called to protest against the arrest of seven students on 13 June. Army units occupied several university buildings and more students and teachers were arrested at mass protest rallies. It is believed that although the majority have been released, some of the students and teachers are still being held without charge or trial in prisons and police headquarters. They have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Shortly before Benin's National Day on 30 November, Amnesty International appealed to President Mathieu Kerekou to release these students and teachers, as well as a number of long-term detainees, who had also been adopted as prisoners of conscience. The government did not respond to this appeal.
Three former Presidents, Hubert Maga, Sourou Migan Apithy and Justin Ahomadegbe, have been held under house arrest without charge or trial since October 1972, when the civilian government was overthrown by a military coup. Father Alphonse Quenum and former Agriculture Minister Adrien Glele are among the 13 prisoners held in various prisons after being arrested and convicted in 1975 of participadon in coup attempts. None was given a fair trial in accordance with internationally recognized standards. Amnesty International believes them to be innocent of charges of attempting to overthrow the state.
In May 1979 it was reported that the 73-member National Council of the Revolution, sitting as a Revolutionary Tribunal, had passed 100 death sentences in absentia for participation in the January 1977 attack on the capital, Cotonou, by an airborne mercenary force. Of those sentenced to death, 89 were said to be African and European mercenaries and 11 were described as "Beninese traitors".
Although conditions at Cotonou prison appear to be much improved. Amnesty International is concerned that many prisoners are not informed of the charges against them and are prevented from attending their own trials. On several occasions prisoners have learnt only from official radio broadcasts the nature of the charges against them and the length of their sentences.
33
