Honduras
Amnesty International concerns were limited to several cases of trade unionists arrested in the course of disputes with employers and held in very poor conditions for considerable periods.
The major initiative taken by Amnesty International was on behalf of several prisoners held in connection with a strike in March 1979 at the textile factory Bemis-Handal in San Pedro Sula on the Caribbean coast. On 7 March 1979 three striking workers were killed and some 150 arrested when police moved in to clear the factory; at the same time a fire broke out which largely destroyed much of the factory. Appeals made by Amnesty Intemational in March and April 1979 urged that the detained trade unionists be formally brought to trial or released.
Although most of the Bemis-Handal prisoners were released within a matter of weeks, seven leaders of the Bemis-Handal union, their legal adviser, Adalberto Cordova Turcios, and a writer of a trade union newspaper, Tomas Nativi Galvez, remained in prison until December 1979, awaiting prosecution for "instigating" the deliberate burning of the factory and "arson, sabotage, homicide and disrespect for authority".
The prisoners claimed, as did other sources, that the fire may have been deliberately set by the factory managers, who were about to replace obsolete machinery that was heavily insured, and who allegedly ordered the removal of fire-fighting equipment from the factory shortly before the police assault. Local trade union representatives claimed it was unlikely that trade unionists would act to destroy their own livelihood by burning the factory. The use of tear gas by the police, which can be highly flammable in enclosed areas, could provide a third explanation of the fire.
The last of the prisoners to be released were Cordova Turcios, lawyer and university professor, and Nativi Galvez. Both were held in poor conditions in the crumbling Central Penitentiary in the capital city Tegucigalpa. Some 250 men were being housed in each of the large cells, where beds were stacked four high and sanitary facilities were inadequate. Cordova Turcios and Nativi Galvez declared a hunger-strike on 10 December 1979 in protest at prison conditions and to demand their release. On 19 December Amnesty Intemational groups appealed on behalf of the two men; it was later learned that both had been released on 24 December. Although charges have not formally been dropped, informed sources report that the case will
150
probably not be reopened.
Appeals were made also on behalf of three leaders of the Unión Nacional de Campesinos (UNC), the National Union of Peasant Farmers: Ricardo Sauceda, Rolando Turcios and Gustavo Reyes, arrested on 14 June 1979 in Olancho Department by agents of the Departamento de Investigación Nacional (DIN), the National Department of Investigation. Amnesty International subsequently learned that all had been released within four days of arrest. (At Olancho seven leaders of the UNC and two Roman Catholic priests had been murdered in July 1975.) In February 1978 two army officers were convicted of those murders.
On 20 April 1980 the first elections for a constituent assembly since the military coup of 1972 took place. The assembly is to rewrite the constitution, appoint an interim President of the Republic and arrange for presidential elections. Only the two traditional parties, the Liberals and the Conservatives, and the tiny conservative grouping Partido Innovación y Unidad (PINU), the Party for Innovation and Unity, were permitted to take part in the election, as registration was denied the centre and left parties, including the relatively large Christian Democratic Party. The Liberal party won the election, despite allegations of official military support for the Conservative party.
There are no prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International in Honduras.
