Sri Lanl<a
Amnesty International has been concerned about the suspension of legal safeguards under special and emergency legislation introduced in 1978 and 1979 providing for wide powers of arrest and detention. It was concerned about torture allegations and of deaths in police custody particularly during the period after the Emergency was declared in July 1979.
Continuing demands for the establishment of a separate state Tamil Eelam, for the Tamil minority, in the northern region were accompanied by several violent incidents, including the killing of 12 policemen in the period after the United National Party (UNP) government assumed office. Onll July 1979 President Jayewardene's government declared a state of emergency for the Jaffna district, where most of the Tamils live, and the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1979 came into force, providing for wide powers to arrest and detain suspects in police custody for 15 days. The government could order prolonged detention of people without trial. A week later the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Bill No. 48 of 1979 was put before Parliament and, after brief debate, became law the next day, 20 July 1979. The Prevention of Terrorism Act is valid for three years; Sections 6 and 7 allow detention in police custody for up to 72 hours. The provisions of both the Emergency Regulations and the Prevention of Terrorism Act do not allow for any form of judicial or other independent control. People arrested need not be produced before a magistrate within 24 hours of arrest, as is the normal rule in Sri Lanka, nor need they be allowed access to a lawyer and to their families during the period of police custody. Under Section 9 the Ministry of Defence can order detention without trial for a period not exceeding 18 months, a provision similar to that already in force under Section 11 of the 1978 Proscribing of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and Other Similar Organizations Law.
Although the July 1979 Emergency Regulations were allowed to lapse in December 1979, the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Proscribing of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and Other Similar
232
Organizations Law continue in force. Nearly all the approximately one hundred people, mostly members of the Tamil minority, who were detained at some length during the Emergency under those special legal provisions have now been released Amnesty Intemational believes, however, that in the period immediately after the emergency declaration a pattern of arbitrary arrest and detention existed and that torture was used systematically. The allegations that six young men, reported arrested in the days after the Emergency declaration, died in the custody of the police after having been tortured and that the bodies of three of them have still not been found are the subject of an inquiry by a Parliamentary Select Committee.
On 19 July 1979 Amnesty International sent a cable to President Jayewardene expressing concem about the introduction of the Emergency Regulations and the provisions under these and the Prevention of Terrorism Bill for prolonged detention without trial and the denial of bail. It also mentioned its deep concem about reports that the mutilated bodies of two young Tamils, Visvajothiratnam alias Inpam and Selvaratnam, had been found under a bridge near Jaffna on 14 July 1979, the same morning as that of their reported arrest It asked that the government institute a formal inquiry into their deaths, and also investigate the whereabouts of S. Parameswaran, S. Rajeswaran, Rajakili and R Balendran, who were also believed to have been arrested on 14 July 1979, and reported missing.
Three of those named by Amnesty International, R. Balendran, S. Rajeswaran and S. Parameswaran "disappeared" after their reported arrest on 14 July 1979, and their bodies have not been found The govemment established a Parliamentary Select Committee to inquire into the six cases of deaths alleged to have occurred in police custody. At the time of writing, the findings of the Committee were not known. Another Tamil, lyathurai Indrarajah, also arrested on 14 July 1979, was admitted to Jaffna hospital the next day with many injuries. He died in hospital on 21 July 1979. Inquests were ordered into the circumstances of three of these deaths. On 8 January 1980 the* Jaffna magistrate returned a verdict of homicide in the inquest on lyathurai Indrarajah, stating: "There is evidence of assault by the police".
In view of the serious allegations of human rights violations it received in the period immediately after the Emergency proclamation. Amnesty Intemational commissioned Stephanie Grant Director of the national section office in Washington, its observer attending the Sixth Lawasia Conference in Colombo, in late August 1979, to discuss with the authorities those human rights developments that gave cause for concern. The Amnesty Intemational representative met the Minister of Trade, who is also the Chairman of the Pariiamentary Select Committee, the Deputy Minister of Foreign
233
Affairs and the Inspector General of Police. In Jaffna she met the Commander of the Security Forces in charge in the northern district and the Government Agent She also met former political prisoners and relatives of young Tamils who had "disappeared".
Amnesty International subsequently wrote to President Jayewardene on 12 October 1979 to inquire whether the government was taking steps to investigate allegations of torture, particularly those which Amnesty International had received from various sources about members of the Tamil Refugees Rehabilitation Organization, a body established to assist the victims of the 1977 communal disturbances. It also asked the President about reports it had received that relatives of wanted individuals were arrested if the wanted person could not be found. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in a letter of 7 January 1980, responded to inquiries made by Amnesty International regarding six people about whom it was concerned. The letter said that two of the people had been arrested for investigation "into their own complicity with terrorism" and that the other four "had been brought in mainly for questioning". But Amnesty International has not received information about any steps the government has taken to investigate the allegations of torture.
When the Emergency was declared, the President had instructed the Commander of the Security Forces in the Jaffna district to carry out his mandate before 31 December 1979 and on 27 December 1979 the state of Emergency was allowed to lapse. In a subsequent letter to President Jayewardene Amnesty International welcomed this and the fact that nearly all the approximately one hundred people, mostly members of the Tamil minority, detained after the Emergency declaration had been released. At the time of writing, six of these people were reported still to be in detentioa However, Amnesty International stressed its concern that fundamental legal safeguards remained suspended under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Proscription of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and Other Similar Organizations Law, and said it believed that the human rights violations reported to it in the period after the July 1979 Emergency declaration were directly related to the suspension of those legal safeguards. It said it had recendy received testimonies which indicated that serious violations of the right of freedom from torture and from arbitrary arrest detention and punishment — rights also guaranteed in Sections 11 and 13 of the Sri Lanka Constitution — had occurred in the months after the Emergency declaration. It expressed concern to the President that even after the lifting of the Emergency, legal and other conditions still existed under which serious human rights violations within the Amnesty Intemadonal mandate could easily occur and said that "a number of steps had yet to be taken if the
234
fundamental rights, guaranteed in Sri Lanka's Constitution, were to be effectively protected, and if further abuse of the wide powers of the army and police forces to arrest and detain suspects was to be prevented".
Together with its letter Amnesty International presented the text of a memorandum which contained a summary of its concerns. In the memorandum it was stated that people had been arrested by the police and the army who were often not in uniform; that the people arrested were not informed of the reason for their arrest, the law under which the arrest was made or the place where they were being taken; that detainees had been denied access to a lawyer for more than a week and in some cases were also not allowed visits by their relatives during the period they were kept in police custody and that they were not produced before a magistrate within 24 hours of arrest Prisoners were not able to instruct their lawyers freely because prison officials were present at all such meetings. Prisoners were also threatened that disclosure of any information about their treatment while in police custody would meet with serious consequences. The memorandum contained a list of various methods of torture stated by Amnesty International to have been used both by the police and the army in the period immediately after the Emergency declaration, including suspending people upside down by the toes while placing the head in a bag with suffocating fumes of burning chillis, prolonged and severe beatings, insertion of pins in the fingertips and the application of broken chillis and biting ants to sensitive parts of the body and threats of execution. After these and other methods of torture had been applied, statements were extracted and recorded. One victim reported " I was assaulted on the head with an object that looked like a baton as a result of which I became concussed and dizzy. I was then interrogated and whatever I said was recorded by means of a tape recorder".
Amnesty International urged the government to restore at once the legal safeguards which had been curtailed under the special and emergency legislation. It recommended that all prisoners should be informed at the time of arrest of the reasons and grounds for arrest that they and their relatives.should be informed of the place where they were being taken and that immediate access to lawyers and regular family visits should be guaranteed to all prisoners. It also expressed concern about changes in the normal rules of evidence made by Emergency Regulation No. 59 and Section 16 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act which allows statements and confessions made to the police, otherwise inadmissible in Sri Lanka law, to be used as evidence. The Amnesty International memorandum recommended that these special legal provisions should be abolished and
235
that the govemment should establish a structure for the independent investigation of complaints of police bmtality and torture. It also recommended that important international legal instruments, adopted by the United Nations and designed to protect people in custody, should be translated into Sinhalese and Tamil and that the govemment should consider ratifying, in line with the Resolution adopted by the Sixth Lawasia Conference, the Intemational Covenants on human rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
