Morocco and Western Sahara
The concerns of Amnesty Intemational included political imprisonment, detention without trial, inadequate trial procedures, ill-treatment of prisoners and poor prison conditions. There were many arrests and trials of trade unionists and other people working in health and education in the aftermath of the widespread strikes and industrial actions in the first part of 1979 and the similar protests which occurred throughout the year, particularly in November 1979, in January and February 1980 and again in April 1980 on the anniversary of the 1979 actions. In addition, the continuing war between Morocco and the Polisario Front, backed by Algeria and Libya, for control of the Western Sahara, had important effects on human rights.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of approximately 180 Moroccan prisoners. These included members of the Union nationale des forces populaires. National Union of Popular Forces, sentenced at trials in 1967, 1973 and 1976 and members of various Marxist-
348
Leninist movements sentenced at trials in Casablanca in 1973 and 1977 where sentences extending to life imprisonment were passed. A number of those who had received sentences of five years' imprisonment at the 1977 Casablanca trial (but whose imprisonment had begun several years earlier) and who were also serving additional two-year sentences for contempt of court, passed on all defendants in that trial, were released following a ruling which determined that the supplementary two-year sentences be considered to run concurrently with the longer sentence. Amnesty International investigated the cases of Malika Thethan and Abderrahmane Dbouh, two trade unionists arrested in April 1979 and sentenced to one and two years' imprisonment respectively.
Amnesty International viewed with concern arrests which followed upon several other incidents. More than 60 trade unionists were reportedly brought to trial as a result of their participation in the strikes of spring 1979. In most cases sentences ofseveral months were passed, and give cause for anxiety since the trade unionists do not appear to have been involved in violence but only to have been peacefully expressing their political views.
Amnesty International also received reports of widespread arrests in December 1979 of Moslem activists, said to be students, shopkeepers. civil servants and police. Unofficial estimates put the number of detentions at up to 4.000; most detainees were reported to have been released after a brief period.
Amnesty International was disturbed about the arrests, in late December 1979, of some 180 peasants from the region of Qasba Tadla near Beni Mellal, after a dispute over land. Many of them were reported to have been beaten at the time of their arrest and to have been held in custody in unhealthy conditions and in contravention of Moroccan law. Twenty-nine of those arrested were tried and 27 received sentences of up to three years' imprisonment
In January and February 1980 a number of arrests of students, trade unionists and members of the political opposition were made, after strikes and demonstrations to show solidarity with Moroccan political detainees called by the Union nationale des étudiants marocains (UNEM). National Union of Moroccan Students, for 24 January. Among those held in custody for several days following the strike was Loubna Chichaoui. a 15-year-old schoolgirl whose brother Jamal. currently serving a 10-year prison sentence in Kenitra, has been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Amnesty International members sent urgent appeals to the Moroccan authorities expressing fear that Loubna Chichaoui and four other secondary school students had been illegally arrested and were being ill-treated.
349
On 23 February 1980, 10 people involved in the January demonstrations were convicted in Rabat of disturbing public order and of belonging to an illegal Marxist-Leninist organization. They received sentences of up to six months' imprisonment. On 15 April they were provisionally released, pending appeal. On 18 February three students were convicted in Fez on similar charges and sentencèd to three months' imprisonment. Trials of six other students facing similar charges in Casablanca were scheduled to take place in March but have been postponed.
Amnesty International is concemed because some prisoners in Morocco have been detained for long periods without charge or trial, or remain in custody after their prison terms have expired.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of more than 30 people of Saharan origin believed to have been secretly detained without trial in Morocco since 1976. In addition to the apparently large numbers of Saharans believed to be detained in the Western Sahara by Moroccan forces, individuals not themselves active in the war have been detained in the Western Sahara by Polisario forces, according to reliable information received by Amnesty International.
More than 80 prisoners in Meknes Civil Prison began a hunger-strike in March 1980. protesting against their incarceration for lengthy periods, many since 1977. without being brought to trial. Some were thought to be detained because of their sympathies with the Polisario claim for independence for the Western Sahara and others for their left-wing political beliefs. The prisoners demanded that they be either released or brought to trial. Amnesty International received reports that many of these prisoners were seriously ill, some from ill-treatment and poor prison conditions. Amnesty International sent urgent appeals to the authorities expressing fears for the prisoners' health and advocating that they be either tried or released quickly. Shortly after the beginning of the hunger-strike, 47 of the more than 80 were provisionally released and others were transferred; 15 of the latter were brought to trial, sentenced to up to one years' imprisonment and reportedly released, their prison term already having been spent in detention.
Trials began in April of prisoners, describing themselves as Saharans. who had been held in Meknes Civil Prison. In Settat seven defendants each received maximum sentences of five years' imprisonment and in Marrakech five defendants were reported to have received similar sentences. In both trials there were reports of procedural irregularities. A number of other trials have been announced.
Amnesty International continued to receive disturbing reports about the health of a number of prisoners and the ill-treatment of
350
detainees. Urgent appeals were made on behalf of Abdellatif Laabi and Abraham Serfaty. both adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience, in which it expressed its serious concern at their deteriorating state of health. Abraham Serfaty appears to be suffering from cardiac and kidney disorders and advanced Raynaud's disease {a condition of the circulation, the effects of which are increased by cold and cardiac conditions); Abdellatif Laabi is believed to have a serious heart condition, severe rheumatism and an eye disorder.
Medical care available to political prisoners deteriorated after three prisoners receiving treatment attempted to escape in October 1979 from Avicennes Hospital in Rabat. The three were Sion Assidon and Rahal Jbiha, both adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience, and Najib Bribri, a detainee from Meknes Prison. Jbiha died from a fall while attempting to escape and the others were recaptured shortly afterwards. A number of arrests followed the escape attempt, including that of Sion Assidon's mother. The number of hospital beds available for the treatment of prisoners was reportedly reduced. On 17 October 1979 Amnesty Intemational cabled the Ministry ofJustice in Rabat, seeking clarification aboutthe arrests, the state of health of those arrested and the conditions of detention. Among the reports on prison conditions and ill-treatment reaching Amnesty International was the testimony of a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany arrested in Morocco for a drug offence, who alleged corruption among detaining officials and reported severe, overcrowded and unhygienic conditions in prisons in Tangiers and Asilah.
Amnesty International noted with interest the formation of a new organization devoted to human rights, L'Association marocaine des droits de l'homme (AMDH). Moroccan Association for Human Rights, bringing together lawyers and other professionals and in its constitution calling upon the govemment to respect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The AMDH is the second organization of this sort in Morocco; the other. La Ligue marocaine de la défense des droits de l'homme. Moroccan League for Defence of Human Rights, affiliated to the Istiqlal political party, was formed in 1972. Both organizations took part in April 1980 in committees of inquiry to examine the health and conditions of political prisoners in the prisons of Meknes and Kenitra. Their reports have so far not been made public.
In May 1979 Morocco ratified the International Covenant on Economic. Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
351
