Swaziland
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to work for the release of several long-term political detainees, most of whom are associated with the former main opposition Ngwane National Libe-ratory Congress (NNLC) party led by Dr Ambrose Zwane. Among the prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International was Musa Shongwe, a prominent and widely respected defence attorney. He was arrested in early August 1978 shortly after having represented three South African refugees, all members of the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), on trial in the High Court on charges of unlawful possession of arms and ammunition. During the course of the trial, Musa Shongwe caused some embarrassment by asking the judge to recuse himself on the grounds that as a white South African he might be prejudiced against the three accused. He also argued that the Government of Swaziland should have no objection to PAC members bearing arms because Swaziland, as a member of the Organization of African Unity, had endorsed the view that the armed struggle for majority rule in South Africa, in which the accused had attempted to engage, was legitimate.
Since his arrest in 1978, Musa Shongwe has been held under a succession of detention orders, each of 60 days' duration, the maximum permissible period of any detention order. Several of the NNLC supporters have been detained longer, most of them since early 1978. They remain in prison even though Dr Zwane, the NNLC leader, was permitted to return to Swaziland "without fear of persecution" under a special amnesty extended to him personally by King Sobhuza II in July 1979. At that time Dr Zwane was living in exile in Tanzania. He had left Swaziland in August 1978 when, owing to an administrative error, he was able to escape from detention at Malkems and cross the border into neighbouring Mozambique. After
82
this incident, three prison officials, who had been on duty at Dr Zwane's place of detention in Malkems, and a long-time NNLC supporter Longidi Gamedze, who lived near the point at which Zwane crossed the border, were held under 60-day detention orders. They were still being held at the end of April 1980.
Some prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were released during the year. Three of these were South African refugees who had been detained as prohibited immigrants since April 1978. They were freed only when arrangements had been completed for their resettlement in other countries. However, one other South African refugee who had been declared a prohibited immigrant and detained in April 1978, John Dube Manzi, was permitted to remain in Swaziland after his release in December. In early April 1980, the most prominent of the Swazi nationals in detention. Prince Clemens Dumisa Dlamini, a prominent trade unionist and close relative of the King, who had been detained continuously since July 1977 under a series of 60-day detention orders, was released.
After the death of Prime Minister Prince Maphevu Dlamini, Amnesty International appealed in late November to his successor. Prince Mabandla Fred Dlamini, urging him to inaugurate his premiership "in a humanitarian spirit" by ordering the immediate release of all political detainees. In December Amnesty International issued a major appeal for the release of Obert Mpangele Mabuza, a former leader of the small Swazi United Front party, who was detained without trial in October 1978. He and other long-term detainees have been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
