Mozambique
Amnesty International's main concerns were detention without trial, political imprisonment and the death penalty.
Large numbers of detainees were released in 1979 and 1980 as the government of President Samora Machel entered its fifth year in office. Those freed included more than 60 Portuguese nationals, groups of whom were periodically released in August, September and October. Most were repatriated to Portugal. In October, while on a tour of Niassa province. President Machel also announced the release of some 600 people who had reportedly been imprisoned for deserting the Frente de Libertaqao de Moqambique (FRELIMO), Front for the Liberation of Mozambique, during the pre-1975 struggle against Portugese colonial rule. On the same
64
occasion, tlie President announced the release of more than 500 inmates from Unango "re-education camp" in Niassa. Those released were told, however, to remain in the Unango area and assist in its development.
More than 60 people detained in connection with the Zimbabwe conflict were released also and repatriated after the Lancaster House agreement and the installation of a temporary British administration in Salisbury. At the end of January, after strong diplomatic pressure from that British administration, some 60 "dissidents" detained by the Mozambican authorities on behalf of Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) were freed and flown to Salisbury. Some had been held since January 1977; others had been arrested in early 1978. Amnesty International had appealed several times to Robert Mugabe, most recently in January 1980, for the release of these prisoners. Two white civilians taken from Rhodesia by ZANU guerrilla forces several months before also were released and allowed to return home.
Despite these releases, detainees are still being held in prisons and "re-education camps" throughout the country, many on criminal grounds but some for political reasons. They include more than 50 officials arrested in early 1980, when President Machel personally initiated a country-wide purge of alleged corruption, maladministration and negligence in state-run enterprises.
Some political prisoners are still serving sentences imposed by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal, a military court established in March 1979 to try people charged with treason or other security offences. In one major trial in December, the tribunal convicted 17 accused of offences ranging from high treason and espionage to membership of a clandestine, anti-government organization. Five of those convicted were sentenced to death and executed by firing squad; the others received prison sentences of from two to 30 years.
At least 11 other people were sentenced to death during the year after being convicted by the tribunal of treason, espionage and sabotage. In all cases, executions were reportedly carried out within a few days of sentence.
65
