.Colombia
The concerns of Amnesty International were: the lack of effective protection of human rights curtailed by emergency measures such as the prolonged state of siege and the Security Statute; the denial of the right of defence before military tribunals; arrest and detention procedures; human rights violations in peasant and Indian territories; the imprisonment of trade unionists and professional people; the widespread use of torture.
Throughout most of 1979 Amnesty Intemational received allegations of large-scale political arrests, the infliction of torture, inadequate
123
defence guarantees in trials of civilians before military tribunals and the use of emergency legislation that led to serious violations of the human rights of trade unionists, peasants, professional people and Indians.
An Amnesty International mission visited Colombia from 15 to 31 January 1980. It submitted recommendations to the government on 1 April 1980. The mission met President Julio César Turbay Ayala, Supreme Court magistrates, members of parliament, military authorities and members of professional associations, human rights groups, trade unions, peasant and indigenous organizations, and political parties and social movements. The mission, which also visited 11 prisons in seven cities and met more than 400 political prisoners, concluded that political prisoners were being systematically tortured in military installations in Colombia. The mission identified 33 centres where torture had been reported, including the Cuevas de Sacromonte, Caves of Sacromonte, and the Escuela de Caballería, the Cavalry School, in the Usaquén, Cundimarca area and La Remonta and the Batallón Pichincha in Cali, Valle del Cauca. Numerous methods of torture, ranging from the psychological to beatings, burning, the use of drugs and electric shock were reported to the mission.
The recommendations to the government, which were published in full in major Colombian newspapers, dealt with the main Amnesty International concerns.
The effective protection of human rights: The system of emergency measures including the prolonged state of siege which has been in force almost continuously since 9 November 1949, the Security Statute of 6 September 1978 and related decree laws and the use of Article 28 of the constitution which permits detention without charge for up to 10 days, had produced a quasi-permanent suspension of the human rights guarantees enshrined in the Colombian constitution and in international agreements to which the country is a signatory. Amnesty International urged the government to consider lifting the state of siege "since its virtually permanent imposition, the manner in which it has been employed, the ends to which it has been directed and the decree laws to which it has given rise have contributed to the present upsurge of human rights violations in Colombia". It also recommended the repeal of the Security Statute under which a wide range of actions and offences including the ill-defined charge of " disturbance of public order" are placed under military jurisdiction. It called for specific safeguards to protect people detained under Article 28 of the Colombian constitution.
The right to defence before military tribunals: It recommended that civilians no longer be tried by military courts, in which the
124
military constitute both judge and prosecutor, often in mass trials conducted as special Consejos verbales de guerra. Oral Courts Martial. Normal defence rights are denied and a number of defence lawyers have been imprisoned or threatened.
Arrest and detention procedures: The mission noted that arrest and detention procedures were indiscriminate and lacked effective guarantees against arbitrary detention. Prisoners have been held in military installations beyond ordinary judicial control. Amnesty Intemational called for a high-level review of these procedures by either the Council of State or the Supreme Court, with a view to establishing effective independent structures, capable of investigating the legality of every detention.
Torture: A series of recommendations intended to end widespread torture of prisoners was submitted. These included the creation of commissions, including independent doctors and lawyers, to investigate allegations of torture and to report publicly on their findings; new instructions on interrogation procedures to be issued to the military and police; allowing detainees to contact their lawyers and families within 24 hours of arrest and thereafter, regular medical examinations; indemnities to torture victims. It recommended also the rigorous application of the principle that statements or confessions obtained under torture should be inadmissible as evidence; strict adherence to the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; non-discrimination against political prisoners.
Imprisonment and killings, particularly in peasant areas occupied by the military and on Indian territories: The mission recommended that the govemment should strictly define, publicly and in writing, military and police powers in areas under military control and that it should take action against paramilitary groups operating in Indian areas that have carried out arbitrary arrests, ill-treatment and assassinations of peasants and rural Indians. Among the evidence collected by the mission was testimony concerning the murders of 48 members, mostly leaders, of the Regional Indian Council of the Cauca since 1973.
Imprisonment of Trade Unionists: Information received in the course of meetings with trade unionists throughout the country led the mission to conclude that they had been particularly affected by arrests and harassment while taking part in trade union activities such as conducting legal strikes, holding workers' meetings and circulating petitions for the enforcement of their rights. Such arrests and harassment have occurred when the authorities have attributed political motives to such activities. In addition, trade unionists testified to the mission that there is a clear tendency on the part of the authorities to equate the legitimate activities of the trade unions with
125
various forms of" subversion" or "disturbance of public order" and to presume hastily the existence of a link between such activities and those of armed revolutionary groups. The report called for the release of trade unionists arrested for the peaceful exercise of their rights and for speedy, impartial, public trials for those who face criminal charges.
Freedom of conscience, expression, political and professional rights: Doctors, lawyers, priests, teachers and journalists were among those arrested. Amnesty International received reports that in many cases they had been detained for giving professional attention to members of the political opposition or to alleged members of revolutionary movements. The mission urged that members of the professions should be protected from arrest or harassment because of adherence to professional ethics. While recognizing the existence of guerrilla movements and violejit opposition to the government in Colombia, Amnesty Intemational at the same time called on the authorities to establish clear and precise definitions of "subversion" and "disturbance of public order", so that political rights could be safeguarded.
Constitutional reform of 1979 and the new penal code of 1980: Amnesty Intemational called for a review of the Constitutional Reform of 1979, related to the administration of justice, as well as of the new penal code in view of the last-mentioned recommendation. It recommended that a special effort should be made to guarantee greater independence and impartiality to the judiciary and to ensure the effective protection of human rights in Colombia.
In a nationwide radio and television address. President Turbay rejected the findings and recommendations of the mission and charged Amnesty Intemational with infringing the national sovereignty of Colombia. Subsequently, a national political debate focusing on the hum^n rights issue in general and the recommendations of Amnesty International in particular, took place, with the participation of political parties, professional associations, human rights groups and the mass media.
In the second half of April the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States visited Colombia to study the climate of human rights there and to observe the trials of civilians before military tribunals. Before that visit Amnesty International had submitted its documentation on human rights violations to the lACHR.
126
