Chile
There was a marked deterioration in the human rights situation during the year. The major concerns of Amnesty International were political killings, political imprisonment and torture. There were many arbitrary detentions, allegations of torture and harassment of trade unionists, members of youth organizations, human rights activists, members of church organizations, poUtical opponents and the poor. Amnesty International issued numerous appeals concerning such cases, prepared and distributed information about its concerns in Chile and submitted information to appropriate inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations.
The government has stated several times that its new constitution, currently being drafted without participation of or consultation with independent lawyers, will have no place for political parties. A group of independent lawyers, known as the Group of 24, which prepared alternative texts for the constitution has been harassed and forbidden to hold public meetings. The new labour code has been enforced amid strong criticism from the few remaining independent trade union federations. Several trade union leaders have been arrested and charged with involying themselves in poHtics because they signed a petition concerning the "disappeared" prisoners whose bodies were found in Lonquen.
On 7 February 1980 the state of emergency was again renewed — this has taken place as a matter of routine every six months since 1973, when President Pinochet came to power as a result of a coup. All political parties remain banned and, according to Decree 3177 of 9 February 1980, all poHtical activity connected with the banned political parties is to be considered an offence under the jurisdiction of ordinary courts. Before this decree was promulgated, this type of offence was dealt with by the Court of Appeal. Independent lawyers consider ordinary courts to be even less independent from the executive than the Court of Appeal, and delays are longer.
During the year two other decree laws were promulgated which further restrict the right to defence and fair trial of political detainees. Decree Law 2621 of 28 April 1979, the so-called And-Terrorist Law, amends articles of the Law of Internal State Security, the Penal Code and the Code of Penal Procedure. The law has been widely
117
criticized by members of the legal profession on legal and political grounds because it assumes an organization is illegal if one or more of its members — even if they were not acting in their capacity as members of that organization — commits an offence under the law. The Minister of Justice stated that "organizations of all kinds will, therefore, have to take care not to admit to membership people performing such acts, since all their members will be brought to trial as constituting an illegal organization, an offence which exists by the mere fact of having formed such an organization, and will be required to prove whether or not they are innocent". This directly contravenes Article 11 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that a person shall be assumed innocent until proved guilty. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on Chile, in his report on the protection of human rights in Chile published on 21 November 1979, concluded his examination of the law as follows:
"Decree Law 2621, which was apparently promulgated in order to combat terrorism, contains elements which may transform it into an instrument for violating human rights. In particular, it affects the right of persons to be presumed innocent until they are proved guilty, the right of association, and the right of a person not to be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, or to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation. The possible social implications of this legislation for community « life in Chile are particularly serious in view of the intimidating nature of its provisions as they were explained to the population by the Minister of Justice."
On 6 February 1980 Decree Law 3168 was promulgated which gave the Minister of the Interior power to order the detention of people for up to five days and to assign them to residence in remote areas for disturbing public order or for attempting to disturb public order, without any rights to defence, trial or appeal. This decree gives the government powers under the present state of emergency that it formerly had only under the state of siege. To avoid the possibility that the Supreme Court might deem this decree law unconstitutional, the junta invoked legislative powers which it had assumed after the coup of 1973. Furthermore, arrests under Decree Law3168 are not under the control of the Contraloria General de la República, the public body that oversees state administrative procedures.
Decree Law 3168 was appUed to people who demonstrated peacefully on 8 March 1980, International Women's Day. Hundreds of demonstrators took to the streets for a rally organized by the women's section of the Coordinadora Nacional Sindical {CHS), the National Trade Union Coordinating Body. The CNS had requested
118
permission for the march from the government but had been refused because of the "políücal intention" of the rally. Peaceful demonstrations took place in Chile's main cities, Santiago, Concepción and Valparaiso. The police detained more than a hundred people in Santiago and 26 in Valparaiso. Detainees were reportedly subjected to interrogation by the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), the National Centre of Information, as the secret police are now called, and kept incommunicado for five days.
On 13 March the Minister of the Interior announced that 12 of the detainees were to be banished by order of President Pinochet, each for a period of three months, to remote villages in the far north or south of Chile. The other detainees were released "under observation". They, too, may be banished if they are detained again as a result of participating in any sort of protest; the people who were banished were referred to as "repeated offenders".
Towards the end of March 1980 the Minister of the Interior stated that a further five people who had been arrested on 8 March were to be banished. The five people concerned had been freed "under observation" but "new evidence" made it necessary to banish them.
Amnesty International believed that those restricted under Decree Law 3168 were prisoners of conscience and appealed to the government for their immediate and unconditional release.
In June 1979 the magazine Hoy was banned for two months after having published a statement made by the Special Investigating Judge appointed to look into the case of bodies found at Lonquén. The government stated that the reason for the banning was the planned publication-of interviews with exiled leaders of the Socialist Party. The measure was taken by the military commander of the Santiago area under the state of emergency.
During 1979 the Comité Pro Retomo was formed by relatives of those exiled with the purpose of campaigning for their return in accordance with various international agreements to which Chile is a signatory, for example, the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Individuals applying to return to Chile have been refused re-entry, often without any apparent motive, since many of them left voluntarily and were not involved in any political activity abroad.
Between 1,500 and 2,000 people were arrested for political reasons during 1979 and atthe beginning of 1980, mostly for participating in public and peaceful demonstrations, still systematically forbidden by the government Several hundreds were arrested in their homes, at their places of work or in public places by members of the security forces who commonly took them to secret detention centres where
119
they were interrogated and tortured or suffered other forms of ill-treatment, and then released a few days later.
An Amnesty International survey of some 1,500 detentions during 1979 reveals that most of those arrested by the CNI or by armed civilians (who probably belong to the CNI) were taken to secret places of detention and tortured by, among other methods, electric shock, suspension and severe beatings.
The government attempted to prevent a large turnout on Labour Day 1979, by means of short-term arrests in the preceding weeks and many arrests on the day. However, more than 10,000 people took to the streets. Many of those arrested were severely ill-treated and some tortured, by methods including electric shock. Most were released after a few days, although 57 were detained for several weeks. Twelve who had been arrested in or near the San Francisco church in Santiago were accused of agresión contra carabineros, aggression against police officers, and after torture and interrogation were sent to the Cárcel Pública, Public Prison. After internal and international pressure, including a hunger-strike by relatives in Santiago, they were released on bail and finally acquitted.
On 28 May 1979 José Nazario Reyes Valenzuela was arrested, put into the boot of a taxi and taken to a secret place where he was held in a windowless room only 1.6 metres square. There he was stripped, suspended and constantly given electric shocks. He was interrogated about his alleged connection with the Vicaria de la Solidaridad, a human rights organization of the Chilean Roman Catholic Church. He was released without charge on 4 June.
Another victim (whose name is withheld by Amnesty International) was arrested in April 1979. He testifies:
"During my interrogation they applied electricity to me through the parrilla, metal bed frame. They applied electricity to my tongue, ears, genitals, hands, head and feet... later... they took me to another room where once again they stripped me completely and sat me down in a chair the arms of which were made of metal. This time they applied electricity to my hands and pounded me on the face."
He stated that a doctor was present to observe his reactions and to assess his level of physical resistance.
Amnesty International has received dozens of detailed testimonies of torture during the past year. In January 1980 a submission was made on this subject to the Rapporteur on the state of human rights in Chile of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Despite the fact that many recursos de amparo, a procedure similar to habeas corpus, containing allegations of torture are filed with the Court of
120
Appeal in Santiago and other Chilean cities, no action has yet been taken by the government to remedy this serious violation of the right of Chilean people to be protected against cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment by law enforcment agencies.
This inaction on the part of the government and the courts resulted in the death of a teacher, Federico Alvarez Santibanez, who was detained and tortured by the CNI. Federico Alvarez died while the granting of a recurso de amparo was delayed in the courts. He was detained on 15 August 1979 by a police officer while distributing pamphlets. After being treated for lesions of a minor nature he was taken by members of the CNI to one of their units and held until 20 August. He was then placed at the disposition of the Primera Fiscalia Militar de Santiago, Santiago First Military Court After interrogation the court ordered him to be detained incommunicado in the Santiago Penitentiary's infirmary because of his condition. When that deteriorated, the duty doctor ordered him to be taken to the central emergency hospital, where he died at 6.50 am on 21 August The post-mortem examin^ion found the cause of death to be a complex fracture of the skull and that complications included aspiration of blood, final incipient bilateral bronchopneumonia and final aspiration of vomit The fracture of the skull was produced by a direct blow and there was no evidence of self-wounding. Ministro en Visita, Special Investigating Judge, Alberto Chaigneau, submitted a report which concluded that "at this stage of the process, it can be presumed that the investigated facts constitute a crime of homicide in which it is necessary to accuse as co-authors the functionary of the carabineros, uniformed police, who carried out the arrest and the functionaries of the CNI who submitted him to interrogations, and, as an accessory after the fact, the doctor who provided a certificate stating that Alvarez Santibafiez was in a good state of health when he left the said CNI institution".
Although it is not the policy of Amnesty International to request specific forms of punishment, it believes that individual responsibility for serious violations of human rights should be established under the law of the country. The medical groups of Amnesty International were also particularly concerned that a physician failed to follow the code of professional ethics in making a false statement on the health of Alvarez Santibaiiez and asked its medical groups to express their concern.
The unlawful activities of the CNI are also responsible for several unexplained deaths of political opponents of the government Police allege that Alberto Salazar Briceno and Iris Yolanda Vega were killed when a bomb they were carrying exploded accidentally. Reports suggest, however, that the couple had been arrested two days before
121
and were in police custody at the time they were killed.
Further confirmation of the methods used by the CNI to eliminate potential opponents was provided by the death of Daniel Acuña who, according to the police, committed suicide by exploding a bomb while they were attempting to arrest him. The official explanation of the death of this venerable socialist leader was sufficiently incredible, and the material evidence so overwhelmingly against it, that a Special Investigating Judge was appointed. Because there was the evidence of unlawful killing by the military the judge soon declared herself incompetent. A military judge is now dealing with the case.
Short-term detentions and harassment of political leaders and trade unionists were common during the year. At the end of November 1979, 46 members of the banned Christian Democrat Party were detained, a seminar on the rights of youth was forbidden and invited foreign delegates were expelled or prevented from entering the country. In November 1979 alone Amnesty International estimates that more than 600 people were detained, mostly from shanty towns in Santiago, while police were allegedly looking for members of the Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR), the Movement of the Revolutionary Left, banned since 1973.
In April 1980, 12 peasant leaders were detained on the grounds that they were planning agitation for 1 May. Juan Jara, the leader of the taxi-drivers' union, was also detained and held for several days for criticizing the government's economic policy.
On 16 April 1980 it was announced that the Supreme Court had upheld the acquittal of eight carabineros who murdered 14 peasants shortly after the 1973 coup — bodies had been discovered at the end of 1978 in a mine in Lonquén. The court ratified the ruUng of a military tribunal which in 1979 declared that the eight carabineros were protected by the Amnesty Law of April 1978 — alaw benefiting those who committed crimes between September 1973 and March 1978.
Since 1973 the government has disregarded the interests and feelings of the relatives of disappeared prisoners. In September 1979 the Military Court announced that the bodies found in Lonquén would be returned to their families. The relatives then received the news that their dead had been buried secretly. The Cardinal of Santiago immediately issued a condemnation stating "human dignity has been violated in the most extreme manner".
In October 1979, 18 bodies were found in a secret grave in the cemetery at Yumbel near Concepción. It has now been established that they were workers from a paper factory, teachers and railway workers from Laja and San Rosendo, who had been detained by the police in September 1973 or had gone voluntarily to the police station
122
accompanied by priests. The explanation of the government that "disappearances" were the result of civil war was again offered, but all the evidence shows that the victims were "unarmed, handcuffed and adequately guarded". They were taken from the police station to be transferred, it was stated, to the Los Angeles Regiment's political prisoners' camp. They never arrived there, but were killed and secretly buried, remaining "disappeared" until the discovery and identification of their bodies at the end of 1979.
Other secret graves have been discovered in Mulchén in the Eighth Region of Chile and other places; unmarked graves in site 29 of Santiago Cemetery are believed to contain more than 300 bodies, many of which may be those of "disappeared" prisoners.
During the year threats were made on several occasions against members of the Agrupación de Familiares de Presos Desaparecidos, Association of Relatives of Disappeared Prisoners, by a group calling itself the Comando Carevic, named after a police officer who died while allegedly dismantling a bomb left in Santiago by "terrorists". This appears to be a right-wing group, and has so far done no more than make threats. Other reports of harassment of relatives of "disappeared" prisoners are common. In August 1979 Amnesty International appealed for the protection of the safety of the wife of a "disappeared" prisoner, Pedro Silva Bustos, after she had received a death threat signed by Comando Carevic. Amnesty International requested the Chilean Government to take steps to end the illegal activities of the Comando Carevic.
