Egypt
The concerns of Amnesty Intemational included the holding of political prisoners, the legislation under which they are charged and tried, allegations of ill-treatment and the death penalty, although it has been applied less frequently than in previous years.
There are repeated arrests mainly of left-wing opponents of government policies, who are held under security legislation for several weeks or months before being provisionally released. In some instances no charges are brought against them and they do not face trial. Nevertheless, those granted provisional release, in addition to being subject to rearrest at any time, have, on occasion, been denied the right to travel outside Egypt and may also be subjected to restrictions in their work.
In Egypt, the arrest and imprisonment of people whom Amnesty International regards as prisoners of conscience still takes place under legislation introduced during the state of emergency which has been in force for many years. It was justified by the authorities in the past on the grounds of the state of war with Israel, and it still applies, despite the "normalization" of relations between the two countries. Many of the arrests which took place during the past year preceded important political events, such as the opening of the Israeli Embassy in Cairo and the arrival of the former Shah of Iran.
Amnesty Intemational groups went on working on behalf of more than 100 adoptees. Some had been arrested in September 1977 and are currently serving sentences of up to five years' imprisonment on charges of membership of an illegal communist.organization. Others were arrested after the food riots of 18 and 19 January 1977 and were among 176 people accused of being members of either the Egyptian Workers' Communist Party or the Egyptian Communist Party, of instigating the riots and of disseminating leaflets or notices in universities, which had allegedly contributed to the atmosphere of revolt leading to the food riots.
In May 1979 Amnesty International expressed its concem at some of the proceedings in the trial of the 176 people. At first, very few copies of the case dossier existed and were available only to the defence lawyers and cost Egyptian £500. The price was later reduced and the dossiers were finally supplied to defence lawyers free of charge. In eariy 1979 lawyers protested to the bench that additions had been made to the prosecution dossier and that these were not
327
generally available to the defence. A fine of Egyptian £50 imposed by the tribunal on the defence lawyers and its call for their replacement in the case were subsequently withdrawn. Amnesty International observers attended part of the trial before the Supreme State Security Court in November 1979. On 19 April 1980 the tribunal announced the verdicts: 155 of the defendants were acquitted, 11 (four of them women) were given sentences of three years' imprisonment and a fine of Egyptian £100, and nine others received sentences of one years' imprisonment and a fine of Egyptian £50. However, one of the defendants died before the verdicts were announced The verdicts now await ratification by the President, who has the power to approve or to veto them; the defendants themselves have no right of appeal against verdicts passed by the State Security Court.
A number of those acquitted are among the 30 people to be tried on similar charges in a new case concerning an illegal political organization. This new case was announced on 16 April 1980 and concerns 30 defendants accused of membership of the Egyptian Communist Party. They include five lawyers, three journalists, four students, an engineer, a pharmacist and two peasants. The prosecution has reportedly demanded sentences of up to life imprisonment with hard labour for all 30 defendants, in accordance with Article 22 of Law No. 40 of 1977 concerning political parties. This law, promulgated after the food riots on 18 and 19 January 1977, not only provides for harsh punishment for those convicted of illegal political activities (the maximum punishment is life imprisonment with hard labour) but is also wider in its application than legislation previously applied in such cases. At the time of writing none of the defendants was believed to be in detention.
The 30 defendants are accused of participating in illegal communist activities from the end of 1977 to August 1979, when many of them were arrested. Amnesty International received a number of reports that arrest and detention procedures were not in accordance with the law. Many of those arrested had had their homes thoroughly searched and large quantities of belongings seized, including books which had been published in Egypt legally.
In November 1979 and January 1980 there were more arrests of people alleged to be members of the Egyptian Workers' Communist Party and of the Egyptian Communist Party (some of whom were members of the legal left-wing party, the National Progressive Unionist Party). At the time of the arrests, new detention procedures were reportedly put into effect, making it possible for the period of» detention before trial to be longer than it had previously been. During 1979 there were reports of hundreds of arrests of members of extreme religious groups, such as the so-called Takfir wa Higra group. El-
328
Jihad and ofthe Islamic Liberation Party. According to information held by Amnesty Intemational, they were accused of belonging to illegal political organizations and were said to be in possession of arms. Reports that a number of those arrested were beaten at the beginning of their detention have not been substantiated. It is believed that most of the people arrested are no longer in detention; there is no indication of when those who still are will be brought to trial.
At the end of April 1980 a new law, "the Law on the Protection of Values from Shameful Conduct", was approved by the People's Assembly. Many of its provisions are broad and'vague and appear to impose further restrictions on the rights to freedom of opinion and expression guaranteed by the constitution.
On 26 January 1980 the Executive Council of the Egyptian Bar Association issued a declaration calling for, among other things, the abolition of the post of Socialist Prosecutor General, the rejection of the then draft law and the abolition of the state of emergency.
There have been allegations that in Tora Prison disciplinary measures for common law prisoners include being strapped to a device called al-'Aroussa, the doll, a wooden cross-like pillory with a locking device to keep the head bent forward over the horizontal bar of the cross. In this position the prisoner is beaten on the back and" legs. The Prosecutor General, Salah al-Rashidi, who is responsible for prison administration, denied the existence of this form of punishment when questioned by Amnesty Intemational mission delegates in November 1979.
During the year Amnesty Intemational sent cables to President Sadat urging that death sentences passed on five people accused of murder be commuted on humanitarian grounds. In January 1980 it learned that two men found guilty of murder were hanged in the Isti 'naf Prison in Cairo.
On 5 October 1979 Amnesty International had written to President Sadat, enclosing a copy of its publication. The Death Penalty. On 17 December 1979 it received a letter from Hassan Ahmed Kamel. the President's Chef de Cabinet at the time, acknowledging receipt of the report. The letter stated: "Highly appreciating that positive step on the road to safeguarding man's natural right to live. His Excellency the President shares with you the firm belief that the death penalty is incompatible with the right to life and the prohibition of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment as guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In fact the abolition of capital punishment in all countries would greatly enhance respect for human life throughout the world."
329
