Laos
Amnesty International has described its concerns in detail in Political prisoners in the People's Democratic Republic of Laos, published on 15 April 1980. These concerns are the continuing detention without charge or trial since 1975 of thousands of former civil servants and professional people; continuing arrests on political grounds and lack of legal safeguards for those detained on such grounds; lack of proper medical
213
care for detainees who need specialized or continuous treatment; isolation of detainees from their families. Five years after the change of govemment which marked the end of the "neutralist" coalition in Laos, thousands of members of the former administration who were sent to "re-edcuation camps" in 1975 are still detained. This remains the major human rights issue.
The precise number of people held on political grounds without charge or trial is not known. Since 1975 estimates of the number of detainees in "re-education camps" have varied, but the lowest estimates have set the figure at some 10,000. As regards former party cadres believed to be detained, a senior Lao communist defector is reported to have stated in 1979: "Afterthe 1975 communist takeover, about 2,500 party cadres were purged for their and-Vietnamese views and sent for fe-education. Another 200, most of them soldiers, were jailed and at least 100 more were alleged to have been killed", {Far Eastern Economic Review, 24 August 1979). The place where this category of detainees is held is not known. As regards members of the previous administration, the former Prime Minister, Souvanna Phouma, who is now adviser to the present government, stated in March 1979 that 10,000 to 15,000 former civilian officials and military officers have been detained since 1975 {New York Times, 25 March 1979). A foreign journalist who visited Laos in mid-1979 wrote: "It is presumed that at least one third of the 10,000 or so inmates in the camps are trained professionals, working alongside top military and political figures of the old regime" (Washington Post, 7 May 1979).
A large number of political detainees are known to be held in the north and northeast, particularly in Phong Saly and Houa Phan( Sam Neua) provinces. Three camps are reported to exist at present in Houa Phan province, including Camp 06, which is about 110 kilometres from Muong Viengsay and 4 kilometres from Muong Het, very near the border with Vietnam, and Camp 05, set up in 1976, reportedly to hold the highest-ranking military and civilian personnel in the former administration. There are also camps in various other provinces, including Vientiane, Xieng Kouang and Savannaket.
In a letter to the Prime Minister, Kaysone Phomvihane, on 27 March 1980, Amnesty International appealed for the release of all those detained because of their beliefs, political activities or functions under the former govemment It also submitted a list of such detainees known to it and recalled a statement made on 10 May 1976 by Souvannalat Saignafong, a member of the Supreme People's Council, about detainees in camps. He had said in an interview with foreign journalists that "more and more people" who had been sent to "seminars" in the northeast would return to Vientiane in groups so that they would be able to take part in the reconstruction of the
214
country. Four years have now passed since that interview but very few have returned to Vientiane.
Amnesty International has continued to work on behalf of more than a hundred individuals. These cases include those of former civilian or military officials and professional people who have been held in camps without charge or trial or who have been reported "missing" since their assignment to a camp inl975. Those detained include Padab Pangdarind, a military doctor by profession, who has been held since October 1975 in a camp in northeast Laos and is now reported to be suffering from a serious articular ailment and other illnesses; Chansamone Voravong, the 49-year-old former Director of the National Geographical Institute of Laos, whose health is said to have deteriorated seriously after four and a half years in a camp; Soukpraseuth Sithimolada, a 47-year-old diplomat detained since July 1975; Tenh Teso, the former Director of the Royal Institute of Law and Administration; Khamouane Ratanavong, the former Secretary General of the National Bank of Laos, who is reported to have lost 20 kilograms and to suffer from gallstones.
Amnesty International has been concerned about the inadequacy of food and medical care in the camps, the effects of which are made more acute by the fact that detainees are usually required to undertake hard manual labour. Amnesty International is concerned also about the isolation to which the detainees are subjected. Many of the detainees known to Amnesty International have spent more ¿an four years in detention without being allowed visits from their relatives. The receipt of parcels and mail is restricted and irregular. Some detainees have been forbidden at times to send or receive mail. In some cases, there has been no communication between detainees and their families for several years and their whereabouts are unknown.
Amnesty International has also sent repeated appeals and inquiries to the Lao authorities about people who have been reported " missing" after their assignment to a camp or since their arrest It is particularly concerned about the case of seven medical students, all in their late twenties, who have "disappeared" since their arrest on 12 October 1976, when they were summoned to the Chinaimo military camp in Vientiane and taken away from the camp without being able to see their families. The latter were reportedly told by the authorities that the students were being taken to attend a "political seminar", and have received no news of them. The authorities have so far failed to give any information about these seven students.
Arrests of members of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) were reported during 1979 but the total is unknown. In June 1979 the Lao Minister of Post, Telegraph and Telecommunications, Khampheng Boupha, was reported to have been arrested and sent to a
215
camp in Houa Phan province for planning to flee the country. In August 1979, two important members of the LPRP were reported to have been sent for "re-education" to Vietnam because of their "anti-Vietnamese acts". One of them was Khamsouk Sayaseng, the Minister of Production and Agriculture. More arrests were reported in the autumn of 1979, including that of Khamphan Chantara, Director of Higher Education, and other members of the Education Ministry. They were alleged to have been taken to Samkhe prison near Vientiane. Several of those arrested in late 1979 are believed to have been released after a few weeks.
Very few trials have been reported since 1975. Several groups of people have been convicted either of murder or of "plotting to assassinate government officials" or of "carrying out sabotage activities". All the sentences which have been reported were passed by Vientiane People's Court. The Lao People's Democratic Republic has not yet promulgated any legislation and the country's constitution is still being drafted. However, in a report to the Supreme People's Council (SPC) on 26 December 1979, the Prime Minister, Kaysone Phomvihane, stressed the need to promulgate "laws on the people's fundamental rights, interests and responsibilities" and to-publicize them "extensively". He also stated:
"The Justice and Interior Ministries must take quick action in arresting and detaining private individuals. Those arrested with complete evidence should be brought to court for trial immediately. Those arrested without valid evidence must be free. The Justice and Interior Ministries must draft laws on arrest and detention, searching property and houses and confiscating property, for enactment and promulgation by the SPC. Any state employees found to be abusing their power by intimidating the people by illegally arresting and detaining them, searching or confiscating their property, must be strictly dealt with."
Amnesty Intemational learned of a few individual releases, including that of a Thai citizen Vanida Sungthommongkol, who was held for three years in prison without charge. There were also reports of releases from camps in the northern province of Phong Saly. According to a former prisoner, about 200 people — mainly intellectuals, doctors, teachers and civil servants — were released in 1979 from a camp in the province. He did not identify the camp saying only that it was in an isolated area, surrounded by mountains (Agence France Presse, Vientiane, 13 December 1979). Another former detainee, Somchine Phisayavong, said that nearly 500 political prisoners at the Boun Neua camp (Phong Saly province) were released in 1979 (L'Express, 23-29 February 1979).
216
On 30 April 1980 Amnesty International wrote to the government, inquiring about unconfirmed reports that "re-education camps" had been closed down throughout the country. It said it knew of individuals still detained in Camps 05 and 06 in Houa Phan province and had received no information confirming that extensive releases had taken place.
