ETHIOPIA
Hundreds of suspected government opponents continued to be detained, mostly without charge or trial, including some held since the late 1970s. They included prisoners of conscience. There were also new political arrests. In September some political prisoners in Eritrea were released. Twelve army generals arrested in 1989 for involvement in a coup attempt were executed and 23 army officers were sentenced to prison terms after trials which failed to satisfy international fair trial standards. Torture and ill-treatment
ETHIOPIA
of political prisoners continued and there were new reports of extrajudicial executions by government troops. At least 60 people were under sentence of death at the end of 1990.
There was renewed fighting between government and opposition forces, particularly in Eritrea and central Ethiopia. Preliminary peace talks broke down in early 1990. In the north, the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (eplf) captured the port of Massawa in February and controlled most of Eritrea, except for Asmara and the port of Assab. The Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (eprdf), headed by the Tigray People's Liberation Front (tplf), which had controlled Tigray since 1989, captured substantial territory in the central regions. The Oromo Liberation Front (olf) was active in Asosa district in western Ethiopia, Unarmed civilians were killed in bombings by the Ethiopian air force and by soldiers in the areas of conflict.
There were reports of human rights abuses by opposition groups, Opponents of the tplf leadership were said to be still detained by the tplf after several years and to be held in harsh conditions. There were reports of killings of government supporters by both the tplf and the olf - the latter denied killings reported in Asosa in February.
In March the central committee of the Workers' Party of Ethiopia (wpe), the only legal party, announced economic reforms. It also proposed to allow political opposition groups if they accepted the territorial unity of the country and the leadership of the wpe. However, no further announcement was made regarding the implementation of these proposals.
Details of political prisoners were, as in previous years, difficult to obtain. Hundreds of suspected political opponents, including prisoners of conscience, were held in secret and tortured by the security police. Most political prisoners were detained indefinitely without charge or trial, with no opportunity to challenge the legal basis or reasons for their detention, despite constitutional guarantees. Some allegedly "disappeared" after their arrest and may have been extrajudicially executed.
During 1990 there were reports of new political arrests, especially of people suspected of having links with opposition groups such as the eplf, tplf and olf. People from Tigray region were particularly targeted for arrest in early 1990, in reprisal for the tplf's advance south.
Three trade union leaders arrested in the capital, Addis Ababa, in January, apparently for political reasons, remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. They included Alemayehu Tadesse of the official All-Ethiopia Trades Union. In May about 300 university students in Addis Ababa were arrested and held for a few days when they demonstrated against the execution of 12 army generals and called on the government to resign. Some demonstrators were wounded when security police fired on them but reports of killings were unconfirmed.
Two foreign journalists and two Ethiopians whom they had interviewed were arrested in May because the interview contained criticisms of the government. The two foreigners were expelled but the two Ethiopians were reportedly tortured and were detained until September, when they were released uncharged.
Reports continued to be received of people being forcibly conscripted into the armed forces, including boys as young as 12 years old. Some were punished with detention or beatings for attempting to evade or escape military service.
Over 100 known long-term political detainees arrested in previous years were still held at the end of 1990. Among them were prisoners of conscience such as Are-gai Gebre-Igziabeher, a Tigrayan student held since 1978 for alleged links with the tplf, and Mulugetta Mosissa, an Oromo civil servant detained since 1980 for alleged olf links. Political prisoners still held included Tadelech Haile-Mikael, a
ETHIOPIA
journalist detained since 1979. Her husband, a leader of the opposition Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP), was killed in custody shortly after her arrest. Berhanu Mamo, mayor of Mekelle in Tigray region, also remained in detention. He was arrested in 1984 with numerous other Tigrayan officials, over 100 of whom were still held. They came under suspicion when detainees being tortured apparently claimed they were TPLF supporters. In addition, numerous Eritreans were in detention in Asmara and Addis Ababa on suspicion of involvement with the EPLF. Ajak Obuyi and 27 other farmers belonging to the Anuak ethnic group reportedly remained in detention in Metu prison in the southwest. Held since 1986, they were apparently suspected of belonging to an armed opposition group.
Some 130 military personnel arrested in connection with the coup attempt in May 1989 also remained in detention without charge. In addition, at least three civilians arrested after the coup attempt were still held without charge or trial. They included Genet Mebratu, a United Nations (un) World Health Organization official and widow of one of the coup leaders, and Teferra Wonde, a former deputy prime minister. There was still no information about the "disappearance" in custody in June 1989 of Fanta Belay, a former minister of industry and air force commander.
Some 270 eplf fighters captured in the late 1970s were still detained alongside political prisoners in Addis Ababa's Central Prison. In addition, 18 former members of a Somali armed opposition group opposed to the Somali government, the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (dfss), remained in detention. They had been held in Ethiopia without charge or trial since 1985 and 1986.
Marking the 16th anniversary of the revolution which overthrew the previous government, the government announced the release in September of 620 Eritrean prisoners held in Asmara who were serving prison sentences of up to 20 years. They were said to include political prisoners, but no details were published.
A total of 47 military officers arrested after the coup attempt in May 1989 were tried during 1990. In May, 12 generals were sentenced to death by the military division of the Supreme Court and were immediately executed. Their trial on charges of trea-
son and mutiny, which began in December 1989, was held mostly in camera, and the proceedings were kept secret. The presiding judge was reportedly removed shortly before the verdict was announced, allegedly because the government disagreed with his handling of the trial. The defendants had legal representation but were not allowed private access to their families and had no right of appeal. Some defendants reportedly told the court that they had been tortured. The death sentences and executions were announced together on 21 May but the executions probably took place at least two days earlier. Two other senior officers were sentenced to 10- and 15-year prison terms. A second secret trial of 21 middle-ranking officers began in January and ended in June. All were convicted and sentenced to between one and seven years' imprisonment. A third trial of higher-ranking officers started in January but appeared to have been adjourned indefinitely.
Torture of people arrested for political reasons continued to be reported. Those held by the security police were reportedly beaten on the soles of the feet, hung by the wrists or ankles, subjected to electric shocks, plunged into cold water or scalded with hot oil, or suffered injuries to their bones, hearing or eyesight from beatings.
Several long-term detainees were reportedly ill as a result of torture or denial of medical treatment. Among them were Abdulkadir Hassan Mohamed, known as "Isbarije", a 62-year-old former dfss finance secretary who was suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis, and Nigist Ghiorghis, a woman arrested in 1978 as an alleged eplf member, who had an untreated heart complaint.
Once again there were reports of extrajudicial executions by government soldiers, although confirmed details were difficult to obtain. A judge and seven other Tigrayans were reportedly extrajudicially executed in Arba Minch in southern Ethiopia in January, in reprisal for tplf military successes in central Ethiopia. Thirty people were reported to have been rounded up in Asmara on 9 June, allegedly for breaking the curfew, and to have been extrajudicially executed.
At least 60 people were reported to be under sentence of death for criminal offences in Addis Ababa's Central Prison at the end of 1990. However, no details
ETHIOPIA/FIJI
were available on court-imposed death sentences or executions during the year, apart from the executions of the 12 army generals in May.
Amnesty International continued to appeal to President Mengistu Haile-Mariam for the release of prisoners of conscience and for other political detainees to be brought to trial fairly and promptly, or released. The organization urged a full review of all cases of untried political detainees and appealed for those in poor health to be given proper medical treatment. The organization also sought information about the trials of those arrested after the May 1989 coup attempt, and asked to send an observer to assess the fairness of the trials, but no reply was received. Amnesty International also received no reply when it again urged the authorities to receive an Amnesty International delegation to discuss human rights in Ethiopia.
In an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International expressed concern about administrative detentions in Ethiopia.
