KOREA
(DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
Two Japanese nationals who may have been prisoners of conscience were released after seven years in detention. It was impossible to confirm reports that there were thousands of political prisoners owing to the difficulty of obtaining information about human rights. AH news media were controlled by the state and those available to foreigners did not report any political arrests, trials or executions.
Two Japanese seafarers, Beniko Isamu and Kuriura Yoshio, were released in October as a result of an agreement between the Korean Workers' Party and Japan's Liberal Democratic Party and the Japan Socialist Party. Both men had been held since 1983, accused of spying and helping a North Korean soldier defect to Japan aboard their ship. Both denied the accusations. On their return to Japan, Beniko Isamu told reporters that they had neither been formally charged nor tried, although the authorities had previously announced that they had been tried and sentenced to 15 years of "reformation through labour" in December 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
The situation of others reportedly detained in previous years, including about 40 university staff and students said to
have been arrested in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989], remained unclear. Likewise, it was not possible to confirm other reports that tens of thousands of people might be held for political reasons at corrective camps throughout the country (see Amnesty International Report 1990].
There was concern that a number of students who were recalled from their studies in Eastern Europe at the end of 1989 might have been detained on suspicion of criticizing their government while abroad, but this could not be confirmed. On several occasions, however, the ruling Korean Workers' Party called on its members to intensify ideological indoctrination in the advantages of socialism over capitalism, apparently as a reaction to political changes in Eastern Europe, and some sources suggested that returning students were made to attend ideological "reeducation" sessions.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of Isamu Beniko and Kuriura Yoshio and sought information from the government about others reportedly detained, but without response. Amnesty International also wrote to the government about its wish to visit the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to discuss human rights with government officials but received no reply.
