CHINA
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout 1990, including many detained without charge or trial. There were many new arrests of political and religious activists, advocates of Tibetan independence and others. Some government opponents were sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials. Torture of detainees by police and harsh conditions of detention continued to be reported. A dramatic increase in the number of death sentences and executions was recorded, particularly after the launch in May of a new campaign against crime. Amnesty International recorded over 960 death sentences, including 750 which were carried out, but believed the true number was far higher.
Martial law, in force for over six months, was lifted in Beijing on 11
January. In Lhasa, capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region (tar), where it had been in force for 14 months, it was lifted on 1 May. However, the police and security forces retained extensive powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial under regulations in force throughout the country. Public meetings and demonstrations remained severely restricted under legislation which came into force after the June 1989 crackdown on the pro-democracy movement. No public inquiries were known to have been carried out into the killings of unarmed civilians by government forces in Beijing and Lhasa in
1989.
According to the government, 881 untried political detainees arrested since June 1989 were released in the first half of
1990.	They were freed in three groups, but the identities of only 11 were officially disclosed. Prisoners of conscience were among those released.
Hundreds of people arrested in connection with the 1989 protests remained in prison throughout 1990, but the fate of thousands of others remained unknown. The authorities stated that 881 people had been released and 355 were still in pre-trial detention in Beijing in mid-1990. However, they did not disclose how many had been detained in Beijing or nationwide, nor how many had been tried or assigned to labour camps without trial. Released detainees confirmed that thousands had been arrested in Beijing alone.
Students, workers and others who had not played a major role in the protests were reportedly sent to labour camps under a law on "re-education through labour" which permits detention without charge or trial for up to four years. An official at the Tuanhe "labour-re-education" camp, in Beijing's suburbs, tuld foreign journalists in May that 300 "counter-revolutionaries" had been sent to the camp after the June 1989 crackdown. According to unofficial sources, other groups were sent to labour camps further away from Beijing.
Hundreds of political detainees were also held without charge or trial in prisons and detention centres throughout the country. Officials stated in June that 355 people detained since June 1989 were still held "for investigation" in Beijing. Student leaders and intellectuals who had played a major role in the protests were held at Qincheng, a maximum security prison for
CHINA
prominent political prisoners several miles north of Beijing. Over 100 of them were still held there without charge in May, according to a released detainee.
Prolonged detention without charge or trial was facilitated by illegal practices which had become the norm, and by regulations which permit administrative detention without judicial approval or review, contrary to provisions in the Constitution and Chinese law. Regulations on "shelter and investigation" - which give police the authority to detain suspects without charge for renewable periods of three months -were used frequently to detain people suspected of involvement in the protests.
In November several dozen leaders of the 1989 protests were charged with "counter-revolutionary" offences after being held for over one year without charge. They included student leader Wang Dan, who was charged with "counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitation". Two intellectuals, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, faced trial on the same charge as well as that of "conspiring to overthrow the government", which carries penalties from 10 years' imprisonment to death. The trials had not taken place by the end of 1990.
In Tibet, the lifting of martial law in Lhasa in May was followed by a decree requiring prior police permission for any public assembly. New regulations prohibited the use of "religion or other activities" in "demonstrations or parades [which] ... endanger national unity or social stability". Buddhist monks and nuns were expelled from monasteries and convents near Lhasa, particularly from April to July. Some were reportedly restricted to their village of origin.
Tibetans suspected of opposition to the government continued to be arrested. Agyal Tsering, a monk, was reportedly held incommunicado for several weeks following his arrest in February in Qinghai province. He was later sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for allegedly printing and distributing a leaflet advocating Tibetan independence. At least nine nuns and a monk arrested in Lhasa in August, apparently for chanting pro-independence slogans, were still held at the end of 1990.
Political and religious activists were also arrested elsewhere. Among those held were 11 poets who were arrested in March in Sichuan province and accused of belonging to an underground poets' society
and of publishing "subversive poetry". They were reportedly planning to publish a collection of poems commemorating those killed in Beijing in June 1989. They were still detained at the end of 1990.
Other arrests were unconnected with the 1989 protests. Some reflected a tightening of the official policy on religion and a continuing crackdown on independent church groups.
In north China, over 30 Roman Catholic priests, bishops and church members were arrested in late 1989 and early 1990, They belonged to the "underground" church, which remains loyal to the Vatican and refuses to join the official church. Most had participated in the formation of a Chinese Bishops' Conference, which declared its allegiance to the Pope, and they were still held without charge at the end of 1990. Liu Guangdong, the 71-year-old bishop of Yixian in Hebei province and Chairman of the Conference, and Su Zhemin, a priest, were accused of taking part in "illegal activities". They were administratively "sentenced" in May to three years' "reeducation through labour". Further arrests of dissident Catholics took place in several provinces during the year.
Members of independent Protestant groups were also detained and harassed by police. Some were released after short periods, but others were still held at the end of 1990. Those still held included Xu Guox-ing, a preacher arrested in November 1989 in Shanghai who was sent to a labour camp without trial for three years' "re-education through labour". He was accused of having founded an independent "house-church" without official approval. He was considered a prisoner of conscience.
Other prisoners of conscience held throughout 1990 included people serving long prison sentences for their involvement in the democracy movement of the late 1970s, Tibetan advocates of independence and people arrested for their religious activities.
In Xinjiang, over 6,000 people were reportedly arrested and accused of "fomenting rebellion" after unrest in Baren Township. Although few details were available, at least 50 civilians were apparently killed by security forces in clashes when several hundred Muslim Kirghiz on a pilgrimage were barred access to a mosque by police. Official reports described the clashes as a "counter-revolutionary riot"
CHINA
engineered by Muslim "separatists" and said that only 16 civilians and six police officers had been killed. However, local television reportedly said that 50 civilians and eight police officers had died. In September the authorities in Xinjiang announced regulations severely restricting religious activities.
Some prisoners of conscience were convicted on "counter-revolutionary" charges and sentenced to prison terms. Chen Zhixiang, a Guangzhou teacher, received a 10-year sentence in January for allegedly displaying a slogan criticizing government leaders shortly after the 4 June 1989 massacre. Li Haitao, cin academic held since June 1989, received a four-year sentence in August for "counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitation" and "disrupting traffic": he had circulated information about the 4 June massacre and organized public protests in Wuhan, Hubei Province. Tashi Tsering, from Shigatse, southern Tibet, was reportedly sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for having written "slogans and leaflets" in support of Tibetan independence. He had been arrested in November 1989.
Few such trials were publicly reported. Most trials publicized by the authorities were of people accused of committing ordinary criminal offences during the 1989 protests. However, hundreds of secret trials related to the protests reportedly took place. A report by the Washington Post in January that 800 people were sentenced in such trials was denied by the official New China News Agency. In February, however, the official Beijing Daily said that "more than 200 cases" stemming from the "counter-revolutionary rebellion" had been tried by the Beijing municipal courts in 1989, without specifying how many defendants were involved in each case. It added that Beijing courts had also handled 3,459 cases involving "crimes of seriously disrupting social order" - some of which may have been related to the 1989 protests.
New reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners emerged. Released detainees said that beatings and other abuses, as well as harsh conditions of detention, were commonplace in Beijing after the June 1989 crackdown. Cases of torture were also reported in other areas, particularly Tibet. Topgyal, a tailor arrested in April for possessing a video-cassette of the Dalai Lama,
was reportedly severely beaten while held incommunicado in police custody in Lhasa. Lhakpa Tsering, a student arrested in late 1989 and accused of belonging to a "counter-revolutionary" organization, was allegedly beaten to death in December in Drapchi prison, Lhasa. A doctor and judicial officials reportedly examined his body at the request of his family, but no formal inquest was reported by the end of 1990.
In a report presented to the United Nations (un) Committee Against Torture in April, the authorities acknowledged that torture still existed in China but gave no details of the procedures followed to investigate individual cases. According to official sources, more than 4,700 cases of "infringement of citizens' rights" were investigated and dealt with in 1988, and 2,900 cases of "perverting justice for bribes, extorting confessions by torture, illegal detention and neglect of duty" were investigated from January to March 1990. Of these, more than 490 "major" cases involved "deaths and injuries as well as serious economic losses".
There was a dramatic increase in the use of the death penalty. The authorities do not publish statistics on the death penalty, but it appeared that several thousand people may have been sentenced to death in 1990. Amnesty International recorded over 960 death sentences, including some with a two-year stay of execution. At least 750 executions were known to have been carried out. There were 270 in June and July alone, following the launch in May of a new campaign "to sternly crack down on crime". Courts were ordered to impose "severe and swift" sentences, using 1983 legislation which provides for summary procedures. The widespread practice of deciding sentences before trial added to the summary nature of the proceedings. Some death sentences were officially described as a means of ensuring "social order" and "stability" before the Asian Games held in Beijing in September. Some prisoners sentenced to death were reportedly paraded in public before execution, a practice which in Amnesty International's view constitutes degrading treatment and is prohibited under Chinese regulations,
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to press for the release of prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners, and
CHIIWC0L0M8IA
for commutation of all death sentences. However, despite numerous appeals and inquiries to the government, there was no direct reply.
In May Amnesty International sent the government a list of 700 detainees believed held since June 1989, and requested information about them and others being held. In September it sent the government a detailed account of its concerns relating to the death penalty and called for an immediate halt to executions and the introduction of fair trial safeguards. In November it called on the authorities to disclose what had happened to hundreds of political detainees who had vanished since their arrest the previous year. Following reports that leaders of the 1989 protests might soon face secret trials, the organization called on the government to ensure that the trials were conducted in accordance with international standards, and to allow international observers.
In January Amnesty International submitted to the un Secretary-General a document describing its concern at the killings of unarmed civilians in Beijing in June 1989, the large-scale arbitrary arrests carried out subsequently and persistent reports of torture and ill-treatment. This document was included in a report debated in March by the un Commission on Human Rights. In an oral statement to the Commission in March, Amnesty International reiterated its concern about extrajudicial executions carried out in June 1989.
Amnesty International again expressed its concerns in China in an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August.
The organization also published several reports and documents about human rights violations in China. They included in March, Tibet Autonomous Region; One Year Under Martial Law: An Update on the Human Rights Situation, and in April, China: The Massacre of June 1989 and its Aftermath, as well as Catholics Imprisoned in China: Recent Arrests and Long-fern? Prisoners and People's Republic of China: Torture and Ill-treatment. In May it published List of People Detained for Activities Related to the 1989 Pro-Democracy Movement, and in September three documents entitled The Continuing Repression, including one on the death penalty and anti-crime campaigns.
