NORWAY
One prisoner of conscience, a conscientious objector to military service, served a three-month prison sentence. Two people were convicted of making false statements against the police, related to their allegations of ill-treatment.
On 13 February the government signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty; it had not yet been ratified by the end of the year.
Tore Guneriussen was imprisoned in February for 90 days because of his refusal, based on his political beliefs, to perform military service. Norwegian legislation at the time only accepted absolute pacifist convictions as acceptable grounds for exemption from military service. In June parliament adopted a new law, to come into effect in January 1991, extending the right of conscientious objection to those refusing to perform military service on the grounds of their opposition to nuclear weapons.
Two people, who had alleged that they were ill-treated by police officers in Bergen in previous years, were convicted of making false statements and given suspended sentences. Some 140 people had reportedly made allegations of police misconduct to a police inquiry in Bergen in 1987. In one case the inquiry proposed that a police officer be fined. The other cases were dismissed for various reasons. The Bergen
NORWAY/PAKISTAN
District Attorney subsequently initiated investigations into 50 of the 140 people who had made allegations to the inquiry. Fifteen of them, including the two convicted in 1990, were charged with making false statements against the police. One died before the court hearing took place and two cases were dropped by the prosecution. Nine people were convicted in 1989; eight of them were imprisoned for between two and seven months, and one was fined. One person was acquitted.
In 1989 and 1990 an Amnesty International delegate observed the trials of two people charged with making false statements. In December Amnesty International wrote to the government expressing concern that the criminal investigation and prosecution of people who made complaints about ill-treatment could act as a deterrent to others with similar complaints. The organization recognized that some complaints might be exaggerated or untrue and that police officers were entitled to protection of their reputations. However, it urged the government to take any necessary steps to ensure that those with genuine complaints about police ill-treatment should not be deterred fi:om making them.
Amnesty International also called for the release of imprisoned conscientious objector Tore Guneriussen.
