AFGHANISTAN
Hundreds of government opponents were believed to be imprisoned, including pris-oners of conscience, and dozens of people were said to have been extrajudicially executed following an attempted coup. New information was received about the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in previous years. At least five people were sentenced to death and six people executed. Armed opposition groups also held many hundreds of prisoners and were responsible for torture and killings.
President Najibullah's government retained control of the capital, Kabul, and other main cities but continued to face armed opposition from a variety of groups - the Mujahideen - which effectively controlled one provincial capital and many rural areas. The continuing conflict made it difficult to obtain accurate and objective information about human rights.
In March the government of President Najibullah survived an attempted coup led by the then Defence Minister, Shahnawaz Tanai, who subsequently fled to Pakistan and formed an alliance with the Hezb-e Islami Mujahideen group led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. Dozens of people were said to have been extrajudicially executed following the coup attempt, and hundreds arrested. In April Kabul Radio said 623 people had been held, but it was not known how many had been brought to trial by the end of the year. The government, in response to an intervention by Amnesty International, said that their cases would be "examined in strict compliance with both national legislation and intemational instruments".
At least four but possibly many more
alleged members of the National Unity Party (nup), which had sponsored the establishment of democracy in Afghanistan through peaceful means, were released in the first half of 1990. They had been brought to trial before the Special Court of National Security in 1989. The nature of the charges was not made public, but at least two of those.who were released had been convicted: Mohammad Mohsen Formoly, a university professor, received a six-year sentence and Dr Abdul Jalil was sentenced to two years' imprisonment. Those tried had been among dozens of nup supporters arrested in June 1989, the rest of whom were believed to have been released earlier.
No new information was received about Amin Yusufzai, a possible prisoner of conscience reportedly arrested in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The government did, however, confirm the continuing imprisonment of two media workers, Seyed Abdul Samad and Mohammad Nazar. It said they had been sentenced for "the crime of participation and cooperation in [the] espionage activities of Alain Guillo", a French journalist (see Amnesty Intemational Reports 1989 and 1990) and evasion of military service. Both appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
The government also responded in June to inquiries about Dr Mohammad Younis Akbari, a nuclear physicist sentenced to death in 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985), stating that he had been executed. The date of execution was not given. No new information was forthcoming about prisoners who reportedly "disappeared" in previous years.
New information about torture was received from former prisoners. One, who was reportedly arrested and tried in 1983, alleged that he had been tortured with electric shocks, beaten and had his teeth broken, and had been forced to sign a statement saying that he had spied for the Mujahideen while visiting Pakistan.
At least five people were sentenced to death in January, including two reportedly aged under 18. In October President Najibullah was reported to have commuted 58 death sentences. However, in the same month Kabul Radio announced that six people had been executed after they had been sentenced to death by a special court of national security on charges of murder, robbery and disruption of public order.
AFGHANISTAN/ALBANIA
In November the government told Amnesty International that Seyed Hamza, an alleged member of famiat-e-Is!ami Mujahideen group, had been sentenced to death in 1988 for violent political offences. It added that the sentence had been referred to President Najibullah for approval but that no decision on the case had yet been announced.
Mujahideen forces reportedly detained, ill-treated and killed people in areas they effectively controlled if they suspected them of links with the government or rival Mujahideen groups. One case reported in 1990 was that of Haji Anaat Khan, a supporter of the former king, Zahir Shah, who was detained together with his assistant in November 1989 while travelling through territory controlled by the Hezb-e-Islami (Hekmatyar) Mujahideen group. They were forcibly taken over the border to Pakistan and the assistant was reportedly tortured before both were released after eight days. At least 1,500 prisoners were believed to be held by the various Mujahideen groups inside Afghanistan with others said to be held in Pakistan. Several abductions from Pakistan were also attributed by some sources to the Mujahideen. The fate of two people who were abducted in 1989 remained unclear at the end of 1990. Abdul Fatah Wadoud, an Afghan working for the World Food Programme in Peshawar, was reportedly abducted by Hezb-e-Is!ami [Hekmatyar)-. and John Tarzwell, a Canadian relief worker, was abducted by an unidentified Mujahideen group.
The Mujahideen also carried out executions. Four Hezb-e-Islami [Hekmatyar] supporters were reportedly hanged in public at Taloqan in January by members of the Jamiat-e-Islami group under Ahmad Shah Masood's command. They were apparently tried and sentenced under Islamic law in connection with killings in 1989. Two other hangings by Mujahideen forces were reported at Spinboldak in October.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the continued imprisonment of nup members and, in response, was informed in May that three of those arrested had been released by February under a decree issued by President Najibullah. The authorities did not, however, clariiy how many nup supporters were being held. Amnesty International
also inquired about people arrested following the March coup attempt, urging full respect for their human rights, and about prisoners reportedly arrested in previous years. The authorities responded on several cases. Amnesty International also called for the commutation of all death sentences.
