GRENADA
The appeal hearings ended in the cases of 14 former members of the People's Revolutionary Government (prg^ sentenced to death for murder and of three others convicted of manslaughter for the 1983 killings of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and others. The appeal court's decision was pending at the end of the year. No executions had been carried out since 1978, although 21 prisoners were under sentence of death for murder. There were complaints about the prison conditions of one of the prg prisoners sentenced to death.
The hearings before the Grenada Court of Appeal in the Maurice Bishop murder case concluded in September. They had started in May 1988. The 17 appellants had been convicted in December 1986 of the killings of prg Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and 10 other people at the People's Revolutionary Army (pra) headquarters at Fort Rupert on 19 October 1983. Fourteen of the defendants were sentenced to death for murder and three were convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to long prison terms.
The killings at Fort Rupert had taken place following a power-sharing dispute within the Central Committee of the prg, during which Maurice Bishop was placed
under house arrest. On 19 October he was freed from house arrest by several thousand supporters and taken to Fort Rupert. He and others were reportedly shot by a firing squad after the pra regained control of Fort Rupert.
These events were followed by the invasion of Grenada by the United States of America and troops from six Caribbean states on 25 October 1983. Most of the defendants in the case had initially been detained by the occupying forces in late October or early November 1983 and were later transferred into Grenadian custody before being charged,
Ten of the 14 people sentenced to death were members of the prg Central Committee who had not been present when the killings took place but were found guilty of ordering or instigating them. They included the deputy leader of the prg, Bernard Coard; his wife, Phyllis Coard; and the Commander-in-Chief of the pra, General Hudson Austin. The three defendants convicted of manslaughter were pra soldiers found guilty of having carried out the killings under orders.
More than 30 grounds of appeal were presented. These challenged, among other things, the selection and impartiality of the trial jury; the admissibility of statements made by several of the accused, who alleged that they had been extracted as a result of ill-treatment; and the trial judge's directions on the reliability of witness testimony. A key prosecution witness was Fabian Gabriel, who had originally been charged with murder but was granted a conditional pardon in return for testifying for the state.
Constitutional motions raised in earlier proceedings also formed part of the appeal. These included a motion that unfavourable pre-trial publicity had deprived the defendants of a fair trial. Another motion challenged the legitimacy of the Grenada Supreme Court: on this basis the defendants had refused to recognize the jurisdiction of the trial court and had dismissed their defence counsel when the trial began in April 1986. They had also refused to participate in the trial proceedings except to make unsworn statements to the court (see Amnesty International Report 1987]. The appeal court had not yet ruled on the case by the end of the year.
In July Phyllis Coard reportedly started a hunger-strike in protest against her
GRENADA/GUATEMALA
conditions of confinement at Richmond Hill Prison. Unlike other prisoners condemned to death, Phyllis Coard had been held mainly in solitary confinement since 1983 and had been periodically denied visits fi°om relatives. She was also reportedly denied occupational facilities available to other women inmates. Phyllis Coard also complained that in 1990 the Prison Commissioner had frequently entered her cell area unaccompanied by women staff, which was contrary to prison regulations, and had looked into her cell even when advised that she was using her slop pail.
An Amnesty hitemational observer attended the final summations in the Maurice Bishop murder appeal in September. Amnesty International had previously raised concerns about aspects of the proceedings, including questions about the impartiality of the jury and allegations that some of the accused had been ill-treated during police interrogation. Amnesty International continued to assess the proceedings.
In September Amnesty International wrote to the recently appointed official Prison Visiting Committee about the prison conditions of Phyllis Coard. The organization said it was concerned that her long-term solitary confinement could damage her physical and mental health and that her conditions of detention had apparently remained unchanged, or had worsened, despite reports about her deteriorating health. Amnesty International asked the Committee to investigate the allegations about the unaccompanied visits of the commissioner to Phyllis Coard's cell area, stating that this appeared to be contrary to the United Nations Standards Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. The organization also expressed concern about reports that Phyllis Coard had been placed on seven-day restricted diets (usually bread and water) five times in a four-month period for protesting about her treatment. Amnesty International said it was disturbed by the reasons for this punishment and by the frequency with which it had been imposed. The organization asked the Committee to review this practice.
The Committee replied in October, stating that it had visited the prison to ensure there was no breach of regulations. The Committee's letter made no reference to the specific concerns raised by Amnesty International.
