CYPRUS
Some 30 prisoners of conscience were held, all of them Jehovah's Witnesses who had refused on conscientious grounds to perform military service or reservist exercises.
Draft legislation announced in 1988, which would recognize for the first time the right to conscientious objection, had not been debated in parliament by the end of the year. The draft legislation proposes three years' unarmed military service or four years in the Civil Defence Force or a social service as alternatives to ordinary military service of 26 months. The draft legislation provides for conscientious objection only on religious grounds. It was not clear how conscientious objectors to reservist exercises would be treated or whether the social service would be of a purely civilian character. It was also unclear whether a conscientious objector would have the right to choose between the alternatives. Conscientious objectors to military service in 1990 were given prison sentences of up to six months; those refusing to perform reservist exercises were given sentences of up to four months' imprisonment. Conscientious objectors who continued to refuse either military service or reservist exercises following their release faced further prosecution and imprisonment.
A number of conscientious objectors imprisoned during the year had already served sentences of up to 12 months prior to September 1985, when all imprisoned conscientious objectors were released following a decision by the Supreme Court (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Georgios Anastasi Petrou, who had served a 12-month prison sentence between 1984 and 1985 for refusing to perform military service, was sentenced to two months' imprisonment in January and a further three months' imprisonment in September for refusing to participate in reservist exercises.
On 1 October, Independence Day, President George Vassiliou granted an amnesty to five imprisoned conscientious objectors. In December one other conscientious objector was granted early release.
Amnesty Intemational appealed repeatedly for the release of all imprisoned conscientious objectors. It urged the government to introduce alternative civilian service of non-punitive length; to widen the grounds for objection in the draft legislation; and to provide for objection which develops after conscription into the armed forces. In July President Vassiliou informed Amnesty International that it was likely that the draft legislation would be enacted before the end of the year.
