CHAD
More than 300 political prisoners were extrajudicially executed shortly before the government of President Hissein Habré was overthrown on 1 December. Hundreds of others, including prisoners of conscience, survived and were released. They had all been held without charge or trial in secret detention centres where conditions were harsh and torture was frequent.
CHAD
Many had effectively "disappeared". Released prisoners said that hundreds had died in prison, with several deaths from starvation occurring each day. Dozens of other extrajudicial executions by President Habré's troops were reported before the change of government.
Armed clashes in eastern Chad continued until the end of November between government troops and insurgents belonging to the Mouvement patriotique du salut (mps), the Patriotic Front for Salvation, a coalition of armed opposition groups led by Idriss Deby, a former army commander. President Habré and other senior government officials fled Chad on 1 December after military victories by the mps. Idriss Deby appointed himself President of Chad and installed a new government. However, the situation remained uncertain. There were attempts on the lives of two new government ministers, and one army officer, Gabaroum Demtita, was reportedly arrested and killed by members of the security service in late December.
Before the mps take-over, President Habré's government continued to be responsible for gross human rights violations including arbitrary arrests, secret detention, torture and extrajudicial executions, As one of their last acts before President Habré fled the country, members of his Presidential Guard extrajudicially executed more than 300 political prisoners in the capital, N'djamena. The victims had been secretly detained at the President's headquarters. Some of their bodies were apparently thrown into the Chari river, but many others were found in the headquarters.
Gross and persistent abuses of human rights had taken place under President Habré's rule despite the adoption by referendum in December 1989 of a new constitution containing strong human rights guarantees. Released prisoners alleged that the former president had been directly involved in the day-to-day workings of the Direction de la documentation et de la sécurité, the Directorate of Documentation and Security, the security service which was responsible for holding political prisoners and had a record of severe human rights violations. No political detainees had been charged or brought to trial, or even allowed to challenge their detention in the courts or elsewhere since President Habré came to power in 1982.
Several hundred political prisoners were released on 1 December following the mps take-over. They had been detained at various secret detention centres in N'Djamena. Many had been held at a converted swimming pool, where torture was frequently used. Other prisoners were found alive at a house used by the former interior minister and at other secret detention centres.
Fewer than 20 of the more than 200 people known to have been arrested in 1989 were among those released (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The others, who were members of the Zaghawa community, as well as several hundred members of the Hadjerai" community arrested in 1987, had apparently died or been killed in detention. Released prisoners said that hundreds of people had been secretly executed in 1987 and 1989, in many cases at President Habre's headquarters. The victims included 11 brothers of Hassan Fadoul, a senior mps official who became Minister of Planning and Cooperation in the new government in December, and Ahmed Dadji, the director of a state company. Others were said to have died as a result of torture, malnutrition or illness, in the absence of medical care. Released prisoners said that there were usually several prisoners' deaths each day due to starvation.
Before losing power, President Habre's government had refused to account for those arrested or to disclose any information about them.
People arrested in 1990 before the mps take-over were subjected to torture and to brutal beatings and whippings during interrogation. Some were tortured with electric shocks to sensitive parts of the body. Others had two sticks tied together with cords along the sides of their heads; the cords would then be twisted, causing severe pain and bleeding from the nose.
President Habre's forces were responsible for dozens of extrajudicial executions in March after recapturing the eastern towns of Bahai and Tine, after they had been briefly occupied by the mps. Dozens of government soldiers who had been held prisoner during the mps occupation were reportedly executed extrajudicially by Chadian army officers, apparently because their failure to hold the towns against the mps was attributed by the government to a lack of will to fight. The victims were said
CHAD/CHILE
to be mostly southerners from the Mayo Kebi prefecture.
Government soldiers reportedly crossed the border in March and took seven wounded insurgents from their hospital beds in Kutum, Western Sudan, and summarily executed them. In April, 24 civilians were reportedly arrested, tortured and extrajudicially executed by government forces who recaptured the town of Iriba after it had been occupied by the mps. Those killed included Take Hissein and Noura Markou, two sisters-in-law of Idriss Deby.
At least nine people were arrested in August, after leaflets criticizing the government and calling for democracy in Chad were circulated in N'Djamena. They included Gatta Gali Ngothe, a lecturer and former adviser to President Habré, Joseph Madjimbang, a former ambassador, and Laoukein Bardé, an army officer. They were all held incommunicado and without charge or trial at secret detention centres until they were freed in December following the change of government.
Dozens of refugees who had voluntarily returned to Chad, some with the assistance of the United Nations (un) High Commissioner for Refugees, were arrested shortly after their return and either secretly detained without charge or trial, or killed by government forces. They included Dai'enhl Gabriel, a trader, Anhoul Jean, a former local government official, and Metel Ernest, a priest, all of whom were reportedly arrested and extrajudicially executed by government soldiers only a month after they returned in July after living for several years at a refugee camp in northern Cameroon.
Amnesty International repeatedly urged President Habré's government to release prisoners of conscience and called for urgent official clarification of the fate and whereabouts of people who had "disappeared" or were believed to be secretly detained. Amnesty International also pressed the government to stop torture and extrajudicial killings, and introduce full safeguards to prevent such abuses.
In February Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Chad for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
In March Amnesty International published a detailed account of its concerns, Chad: Political Prisoners Held in Secret -Calling the Government to Account.
Following the change of government in December, Amnesty International welcomed the release of political prisoners and urged the new authorities both to establish an inquiry into the cases of "disappeared" prisoners .and to introduce strong safeguards for the future protection of human rights. In response, the new government said it had dissolved the political police and released all political prisoners, and that no one would be detained in the future because of their opinions.
