SWAZILAND
Eleven suspected government opponents were prisoners of conscience, of whom five were still held at the end of the year. All five were held without charge or trial after being acquitted of treason. A member of the royal family was rearrested and detained without charge or trial after being acquitted of treason. One detainee alleged ill-treatment in police custody and at least 80 students were injured, in three cases reportedly fatally, as a result of police beatings. Three people were sentenced to death and one person under sentence of death was reprieved. There were no executions.
Several dozen students, trade unionists and others were arrested in May and June as suspected supporters of the People's United Democratic Movement (pudemoJ, an illegal opposition party under a 1973 royal decree banning all political parties. Most were released within a few days, but 11 were charged with treason, sedition and other offences. They included Mpandlana Shongwe, President of the Swaziland National Union of Students, and Sábelo Dlamini, a law student who alleged that he was assaulted by the police after arrest.
Charges against one of the 11, Boy Magagula, were withdrawn in September. However, when he refused to testify for the prosecution, he was rearrested and charged again. He was released on bail and had not been tried by the end of the year. The 10 others stood trial in the High Court in October. They were accused of forming pudemo with the intention of forcibly overthrowing the government. Four were acquitted of all charges. The other six were
SWAZILAND/SWEDEN
acquitted of treason and sedition but convicted of contravening the 1973 decree by attending poHtical meetings: four received six-month prison terms but were released in view of the time they had already been held; and two, Dominic Mngomezulu and Ray Russon, were each sentenced to serve one year in prison but were released on bail after lodging an appeal. During the trial, which was attended by an Amnesty International observer, the main prosecution witness and seven others said they had been threatened with prolonged detention to make them testify.
Five of the defendants, including Mpandlana Shongwe, were rearrested in November and held without charge or trial under renewable 60-day detention orders signed by Prime Minister Obed Dlamini. After three of them had been rearrested, Sábelo Dlamini and Ray Russon sought refuge in the American Embassy and then escaped to South Africa, only to be forcibly repatriated. No new charges were brought against the five, all of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience.
A member of the royal family was also detained under a 60-day order after being acquitted of treason. Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini was due to be released in July after serving a prison sentence for defeating the ends of justice (see Amnesty International Report 1987), but was charged with planning to overthrow the government of King Mswati III. He was acquitted of this charge in August but immediately rearrested and was held under successive 60-day detention orders.
At least 80 students required hospital treatment in November as a result of beatings by police and soldiers inflicted when the authorities forcibly closed the university. Students had boycotted classes to protest against Sábelo Dlamini's expulsion from the university. Three students were reported to have died as a result of the beatings they received.
A prisoner sentenced to death in July 1987 for murder, whose case was the subject of Amnesty International appeals during 1989, had his sentence commuted in July. Three people were sentenced to death but there were no executions.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and called for an independent inquiry into the beatings of students by police and soldiers in November, but received no response.
