SPAIN
Six conscripts were imprisoned as deserters after declaring their conscientious objection to further military service. There were allegations that prison officers and members of the security forces had ill-treated detainees and prisoners. After long delays, significant verdicts were reached in trials of police and Civil Guard officers accused of ill-treatment. Inquiries were opened into disputed killings of members of an armed Basque group by security forces.
It was estimated that 32 people, includ-^ ing members of the security forces and
civilians, were killed during the year in attacks by armed groups such as Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (eta), Basque Homeland and Liberty, and Grupos de Resistencia Antifascista Primero de Octubre ((;rapo), First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Groups. The special legal procedures applicable to detainees suspected of belonging to armed groups remained in force. Under these, extended incommunicado detention of up to five days may be imposed by judicial order and the detainee's lawyer may be appointed by the court.
In April the Ombudsman, in a statement to parliament, expressed concem about the persistence of cases of alleged ill-treatment of detainees by members of the security forces. His report emphasized the deliberate obstacles to investigation created by officers accused of ill-treatment and the failure of the responsible authorities to clarify the facts.
In November parliament voted to ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty. A reservation was entered retaining the death penalty under the Military Penal Code.
Six conscripts were imprisoned after they left their barracks and declared their conscientious objection to further military service. Under the law, the right to conscientious objection and alternative civilian service may only be exercised "until the moment of incorporation into the armed forces". Carmelo Sanz Ramiro, a baker who had completed several months' military service when he left his barracks, said he felt that continuing his service would be incompatible with his pacifist beliefs. He was arrested and imprisoned for desertion
SPAIN
in February after he presented himself voluntarily to military authorities. He had applied for recognition as a conscientious objector about one week earlier. In March he was placed in isolation for several weeks for refusing to wear a military prison uniform. It was alleged that his civilian clothing was removed, leaving him in his underwear, and that his correspondence and reading material were withheld. His lawyer and girlfriend were denied visits. He was released in May but ordered to report back to barracks to continue his military service. According to news reports he was rearrested in October for refusing to comply with this order but released and exempted from all further military service for medical reasons.
In lanuary the National Police stopped lose Antonio Montoya and a friend in a car in Valencia and ordered them to get out and produce their papers. Reportedly, when they went to fetch them, the police assaulted them. José Antonio Montoya alleged that he was beaten on his head, neck and arm with truncheons before being handcuffed and taken to hospital for treatment. Medical evidence, including photographs, showed stitches to his head and severe contusions on his arm and back. José Antonio Montoya made an official complaint but the police failed to attend preliminary investigations in May and July. There was no further news regarding the progress of the investigation by the end of the year.
In May a judicial investigation was opened into allegations that 17 men had been beaten earlier that month by guards during a transfer of prisoners after a disturbance in the Modelo prison in Barcelona. A lawyer who interviewed the prisoners stated that some of them were badly bruised. The administrator and the deputy director of the prison were reportedly suspended following the incidents.
In November a court in Bilbao condemned nine Civil Guard officers to sentences including imprisonment, fines and disqualification from duty on charges relating to the torture of Tomas Linaza in 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Two officers were found guilty of torture and the other seven were found guilty of deliberately failing to perform their duty to prevent torture. In addition, the most senior officer was found guilty of refusing to cooperate with the law and tampering
with evidence. Three other officers were acquitted. The judgment severely criticized the obstructive behaviour of the defendants and made specific reference to the "innumerable difficulties" the coiul had faced in obtaining basic information. The defence and prosecution entered appeals.
In June an exchange of gunfire occurred in the Foz de Lumbier in Navarre between members of an armed etta group and the security forces. One Civil Guard sergeant was killed and another wounded. Two members of the eta group were later found dead and a third was seriously wounded. The Minister of the Interior stated the next day that the eta members had apparently committed suicide to avoid being taken alive and that the third member of the group had tried to kill himself, but failed. Doubt was thrown on this explanation by reports that one of the dead had been shot twice in the side of her head and the other had substantial quantities of water in his body. Judicial inquiries were opened into the circumstances of the deaths. In July there were reports that the Civil Guards had attempted to impede these inquiries, which had not been concluded by the end of the year.
On 18 September an eta member, Mikel Castill6, was shot and killed in Pamplona while attempting to escape from a police officer. He was reportedly unarmed and his family brought a private petition alleging homicide. His companion, Bautista Baran-dalla, was arrested and alleged that he had been beaten and nearly asphyxiated while in custody. A third man escaped. Judicial inquiries into the allegations were opened but had not been completed by the end of the year,
Amnesty International considered that individuals should be able to claim conscientious objector status at any time and appealed for the release of conscientious objectors it considered to be prisoners of conscience, including Carmelo Sanz Ramiro.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about allegations of ill-treatment. In luly it wrote to the Minister of lustice urging the fullest possible judicial investigation of the shootings in the Foz de Lumbier and subsequently expressed concern about the reported abuse of the judicial process by Civil Guard officers. No reply had been received by the end of the year. In October Amnesty
SPAIN/SRI LANKA
International wrote to the Attorney General expressing concern about the shooting of Mikel Castillo while reportedly unarmed and the allegations of ill-treatment made by Bautista Barandalla. The Attorney General replied in November with information about the two judicial inquiries then in progress.
