ECUADOR
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the pohce and security forces continued to be reported. One person was reportedly killed and several injured as a result of army and police operations to disperse members of indigenous communities involved in land disputes. The Supreme Court declared it outside its jurisdiction to initiate proceedings against security forces personnel allegedly responsible for an extrajudicial execution in 1985.
Against a background of heightened political tensions between Indian communities and the security forces over territorial rights, the government of President Borja Cevallos issued an official communiqué in August claiming that the Confederación de Nacionalidades Indígenas del Ecuador (conaie), the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador, was seeking to set up "a state within a state". In September talks were held between indigenous leaders, human rights defenders, church
leaders and government representatives in an attempt to resolve the demands of the Indian organizations.
In August a faction of the armed opposition group Alfaro Vive, Carajo, Alfaro Lives, Dammit, suspended negotiations with the government about reintegrating its members into civilian life and handing over weapons to the authorities.
In August Ecuador signed the Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights to Abolish the Death Penalty; it had not ratified this treaty by the end of the year.
Members of the police forces reportedly continued to ill-treat and torture detainees suspected of committing common crimes. In January two prison directors responsible for holding untried criminal suspects transferred fi'om police custody resigned and publicly denounced the torture and ill-treatment some detainees had allegedly suffered during police interrogation.
René Sangolqui was detained in May on suspicion of having committed a double murder. He was taken to the headquarters of the Servicio de Investigaciones Criminales (sic), the Criminal Investigation Service, in the town of Loja. He later claimed that during his interrogation he was beaten, hung by his thumbs, and had a bag placed over his head into which gas was fed, causing him near-asphyxiation. The government stated in June that it had ordered an investigation into the allegations, but its findings had not been published by the end of the year.
Marco Antonio Espin, a soldier, stated that he had been held for over three weeks in February and March at the headquarters of the Batallón de Transmisiones de Rumiñahui, the Rumiñahui Communications Battalion, in Quito, the capital. He was accused of using illicit drugs. He reported that members of the army threw water over him and a fellow soldier, and applied electricity to their necks, backs and genitals. Marco Antonio Espin testified that he had been denied access to a doctor during his detention and warned not to inform human rights organizations about his torture. No investigations into his case were known to have been initiated by the end of the year.
In June Indian communities in the sierra region organized a series of protests over territorial rights. They took over highways and occupied the church of Santo
ECUADOR/EGYPT
Domingo in Quito. In June Oswaldo Cuvi, an Ecuarunari Indian community activist, was reportedly shot and killed by the army during attempts to disperse protesters peacefully blocking the highway in Gatazo Grande, Chimborazo province. Several other Ecuarunari Indians were reportedly injured by army gunfire in the same incident. In early October César Morocho, an Ecuarunari Indian leader, failed to return home after leaving a meeting in Quito. He was not seen again. César Morocho had led a march denouncing the killing and injuring of Indians involved in the Gatazo Grande protest, and had reportedly received numerous telephone calls threatening him with death.
In separate operations between 9 and 13 November, large numbers of armed police entered three Indian communities in the provinces of Pichincha and Imbabura in the context of land disputes. Reports indicated that a number of unarmed community members protesting over land rights were severely beater by the police and injured by gunshot pellets, including Cayetana Farinango. She died on 14 November. No official investigations into these incidents were known to have opened by the end of the year.
The Supreme Court declared it was not within its competence to initiate judicial proceedings against navy and police officers named in 1989 by a multi-party congressional committee as responsible for the killing of Consuelo Benavides in 1985 (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 and 1990). The government also failed to clarify the fate of people who "disappeared" between 1984 and 1988.
In May Amnesty International published a report entitled Ecuador: Torture Continues. It described the common practice of torture and ill-treatment of suspected criminals by the police and documented 21 cases. The organization pressed for thorough investigations into the allegations. In August the government responded to allegations raised both in the report and in a November 1989 letter from Amnesty International (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The government reaffirmed its commitment to investigate fully all the cases and to comply with its human rights obligations. It provided information on 26 cases of reported tortiue, including those of Héctor Vinicio Arteaga Carpió, Gonzalo Quintero Mina, Sélñdo Uves Camacho, and
of Héctor Mejía and five colleagues (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The government denied that Héctor Vinicio Arteaga had ever been detained by the sic in Azuay. It stated that the Attorney General's department had established the causes of Gonzalo Quintero's death and had submitted its report to the competent authorities. The government reported that judicial proceedings had been initiated against the alleged torturers of Sélfido lives, and that an investigation into the reported torture of Héctor Mejía and his fellow workers had also been initiated.
In September Amnesty International representatives held talks in Ecuador with government officials about alleged torture and ill-treatment by members of the police. The officials said the government was taking initiatives to implement a program of reforms and training, including human rights education, for its police forces.
Amnesty International wrote to the authorities calling for allegations of torture by the police to be investigated fully and the findings published. It also called for thorough investigations of the violent incidents during police operations directed against members of indigenous communities, and for an investigation into the fate of César Morocho. In December the organization urged the authorities to investigate fully cases of reported torture within the armed forces.
