PANAMA
Several thousand prisoners detained by United States (us) troops after the us mih-tary invaded Panama in December 1989 were in custody at the beginning of 1990. They were reportedly held without legal counsel or access to families in conditions which many described as severely overcrowded and lacking sufficient food and medical care. Many were released within weeks or months. However, some were transferred to Panamanian prisons on criminal charges, including corruption, money-laundering and drug-trafficking. Prison facilities, particularly medical care, were reportedly insufficient and there were complaints of delays in legal proceedings and inadequate access to legal counsel.
In November Panama signed the protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights to abolish the death penalty.
Many of those in detention at the beginning of the year were members of the Panamanian Defence Forces (pdf) , loyal to former de facto ruler Defence Forces' Chief Brigadier General Manuel Noriega. Other detainees were members of the civilian adjuncts to the pdf organized by General Noriega, known as the Dignity Battalions, some of which had offered armed resistance to the US invasion, us troops also detained residents of poor neighbourhoods where support for the Dignity Battalions was believed to be strong.
After initially seeking asylum in the Papal Nunciature, General Noriega was taken into custody by us troops in January 1990; he and several associates were detained in the United Stales of America on criminal charges related to drug-trafficking and money-laundering.
In the months following the invasion, further large-scale, frequently short-term.
arrests were reportedly carried out by us troops and the restructured Panamanian security forces. Those arrested included leaders of political parties and trade unions which had supported General Noriega, those believed to have been Dignity Battalion activists and journalists allegedly arrested solely for having written articles critical of us policy in Panama or the administration of President Guillermo Endara Galimany. President Endara had been inaugurated during the invasion on the grounds that he had been the front-runner in the May 1989 elections before General Noriega declared them invalid.
Reports were also received that us troops may have used excessive force cind not taken adequate care to avoid injuring civilians during military operations, leading to unwarranted deaths of non-combatant civilians, particularly in neighbourhoods believed to be Dignity Battalion strongholds. Allegedly, many victims were buried in mass unmarked graves in order to conceal the number of civilian casualties; some of the victims may have been extrajudicially executed.
Prisoners transferred to the custody of the Panamanian authorities during 1990 included journalist Escolástico Calvo, who managed the government-controlled media under General Noriega. His detention at a us military base in December 1989 was initially denied, but his family eventually visited him there. He complained of solitary confinement, not receiving medicines for diabetes, and being kicked by his guards. In February he was transferred to a Panamanian prison on what the authorities said were criminal charges, and in March to hospital for an operation. He was taken from hospital shortly afterwards by police officers, but following international protest he was returned for further care. His family repeatedly complained about his medical care; the government insisted it was adequate. In November he was released without explanation.
In April Panama's National Assembly voted to appoint a special prosecutor to probe the 1985 murder of Dr Hugo Spadafora, a former vice-minister of health whose decapitated body was found in 1987 just over the border with Costa Rica. High-level Panamanian officials had repeatedly charged that General Noriega ordered the pdf to kill Dr Spadafora (see Amnesty International Reports 1985. 1988 and 2990).
PANAMA/PAPUA NEW GUINEA
In December the Panamanian authorities announced charges against General Noriega and 11 other people, including senior military officials of his administration, for Dr Spadafora's murder.
In June a us soldier was convicted of murdering a Panamanian woman during the invasion and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment by a us military court. Along with two other soldiers, he had been accused of staging an exchange of fire for purely personal reasons, in which the woman was killed. The soldiers had apparently intended to use the staged fight as an explanation for the loss of a pistol.
In October Panamanian newspapers announced the arrest of a former pdf member, the 10th person to be detained in connection with the murders of a us citizen and a Panamanian. The victims had been seized and extrajudicially executed in the course of the invasion, reportedly in a combined pdf-Dignity Battalion operation.
Amnesty International wrote to Panamanian authorities including President Endara, with copies to us officials, urging the new government to investigate human rights violations reported under the previous administration and subsequently. Amnesty International asked how many prisoners remained in detention in the aftermath of the invasion, the specific legal basis for their detention and the procedures implemented to ensure that all of them were treated in conformity with international standards, particularly regarding protection from physical or mental ill-treatment. The organization urged that care should be taken to ensure that criminal charges were not being used to mask political persecution of General Noriega's supporters. In that context, any penalties imposed should be appropriate to the alleged offences, otherwise the punishments could be seen to be politically motivated. The organization also requested details of any investigations initiated into "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions reported under the previous administration, and regarding those held prior to General Noriega's overthrow.
In April President Endara responded to a number of the issues raised by Amnesty International, stating his administration's commitment to human rights. The President outlined judicial proceedings initiated with respect to certain cases reported prior to the invasion, including the extrajudicial
executions of Father Nicolas Van Kleef during the 1989 elections, and of pdf members after a coup attempt in October 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). In July the government expressed its willingness to discuss Amnesty International's concerns regarding conditions in Panamanian prisons; other officials maintained that the new government was doing its best to improve "inherited" facilities.
