PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Dozens of people suspected of supporting an armed opposition group on the island of Bougainville in North Solomons Province and several criminal suspects in other parts of the country were tortured or ill-treated by government security forces. At least nine people were killed in apparent extrajudicial executions on Bougainville, some after torture or ill-treatment by government forces. The government announced plans to draft legislation to restore the death penalty for wilful murder.
Armed conflict between government forces and the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (bra), which began in 1989, continued until mid-March when all government troops were withdrawn from Bougainville and the state of emergency there was ended. This followed the signing of a cease-fire agreement on 2 March. The bra sought Bougainville's independence and financial compensation for land occupied by a copper mining company and for resulting environmental damage.
There were widespread reports that bra forces committed acts of violence, including the torture and killing of civilians, both before and after the withdrawal of govern-fnent troops, bra forces were said to be
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
responsible for a raid on the Kuveria jail complex in January which left four prison officers and two civilians dead. On 17 May an interim government formed on Bougainville with bra backing unilaterally declared the island's independence. Following talks with representatives of this government in early August, the national government agreed to restore essential services to Bougainville as soon as possible and without resort to force. However, there were renewed clashes between bra and government forces beginning in September and both the resumption of services and negotiations over Bougainville's political status were postponed.
Reported human rights violations by members of the security forces on Bougainville were not systematically investigated. The Supreme Court initiated procedures to streamline the hearing of human rights cases before the courts but by the end of the year no cases from Bougainville had been heard.
Papua New Guinea Defence Force (pngdf) soldiers and members of police riot squads ill-treated or tortured dozens of Bougainvilleans and reportedly threatened some with death. Most of the victims were suspected members or sympathizers of the bra and included journalists, medical professionals, government workers and local villagers.
In February four pngdf soldiers beat and stabbed Wilfred Seamus, a Bougainvillean, after abducting him and taking him to an army barracks in Port Moresby. The soldiers reportedly tied his hands, blindfolded him and told him to sit on the ground. They kicked him repeatedly in the head and joints and stabbed him in the arms until an off-duty soldier intervened. Government authorities confirmed that the beating had taken place and said that a full investigation would be set up. To Amnesty International's knowledge, however, those responsible had not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
Some criminal suspects were also reportedly ill-treated in police custody. In one case, three young men detained in connection with a series of robberies in February were said to have been paraded around town on a truck with slogans such as "Pigs for Sale", "Dogs" and "Criminals" hung from their bodies. Witnesses said that the detainees, whose hands were tied, were hit over the head with gun butts by police
officers before a crowd of onlookers. No disciplinary action or prosecutions were known to have been initiated against the police officers allegedly responsible.
At least nine people were killed in apparent extrajudicial executions on Bougainville, some of them after torture or ill-treatment. pngdf soldiers reportedly beat and then shot dead Kevin Kokiai Lalai in custody on 25 January. The military authorities said that he had been shot while trying to escape but a post-mortem report found multiple bullet wounds and evidence that he had been shot from the front, not while running away. It was reported that Kevin Kokiai Lalai had previously been ill-treated in December 1989 by police and soldiers, and again on 17 January, when soldiers and prison warders assaulted several people whom they suspected of involvement in the attack on Kuveria jail.
The government announced plans in June to draft legislation to restore the death penalty for wilful murder but the proposed legislation had not been introduced by the end of the year.
Amnesty International several times expressed concern to the government about reported human rights violations on Bougainville and continued previous efforts to engage the government in constructive dialogue about the protection and promotion of human rights. In April an Amnesty International delegation visited the country for 10 days. Despite repeated efforts both before and during the visit the delegation was unable to meet any government ministers or military authorities. The organization expressed concern about the government's plan to draft legislation restoring the death penalty. The government acknowledged some of Amnesty International's communications but provided no substantive response to the concerns raised.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about torture in police and military custody in Papua New Guinea. In November Amnesty International published a report, Papua New Guinea: Human Rights Violations on BougainviHe, 1989-1990. It documented 19 apparent extrajudicial executions and dozens of cases of torture and ill-treatment by government forces; it also examined the
PAPUA NEW GUINEA/PARAGUAY
evidence of abuses by opposition forces. The organization pressed for thorough investigations into the reported abuses. A draft version of the report was sent to the government in September.
