SAUDI ARABIA
More than 80 critics and opponents of the government were arrested and held as prisoners of conscience, 23 of whom remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. Two possible prisoners of conscience arrested in 1990 were also still held. Five other prisoners of conscience arrested in 1989 and 12 political prisoners arrested in 1988 were detained apparently without charge or trial throughout 1990. At least 95 political detainees, including 26 prisoners of conscience, were freed under a royal pardon in April. Other prisoners of conscience
SAUDI ARABIA
may have been among thousands of Yemeni nationals arrested between August and November. Four people were sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment. including of detained Yemeni nationals, and judicial amputations and floggings continued to be carried out. At least 13 people were executed.
Following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on 2 August, military forces of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and eight other countries were stationed in the country. The Saudi authorities regarded Yemen as an unfriendly country and in September the hundreds of thousands of Yemeni migrant workers in the country were made subject to new visa and work permit requirements and in many cases were deported.
In November a consultative system of government was proposed when King Fahd bin 'Abdul-'Aziz announced that a Central Consultative Council, as well as Provincial Consultative Councils, would be set up as soon as the necessary legislation governing their functioning had been decreed. In the same month the Ministry of the Interior issued a decree introducing a legal ban on female drivers; this ban had previously existed in practice but not in law.
In April 7,681 detainees and sentenced prisoners were released following a royal pardon. Most were common law prisoners; however, 95 were suspected political opponents, most of whom had been detained without charge or trial. They included 26 prisoners of conscience suspected of being members of Munadhamat al-Thawra a!-Islamiyya fil Jazira al-'Arabiyya, the Organization of Islamic Revolution in the Arabian Peninsula (oirap). Also among the
95 were nine possible prisoners of conscience, including five suspected supporters of Hizbul 'Amal al-Isbtiraki a!-'Arabi -al-fazira al-Arabiyya, the Arab Socialist Action Party - the Arabian Peninsula, and four alleged supporters of HizbuUah fil Hijaz, the Party of God in Hijaz (see Amnesty International Report 1990].
At least 83 non-violent critics or opponents of the government were arrested between February and November. Of these, 23 were still held as prisoners of conscience at the end of the year. Six suspected supporters of oirap were arrested in February and April and held by al-Mabahith al-'Amma, General Intelligence, in al-Dammam. Among them was 'Abdullah Jabir Shahin from Safwa who was arrested in Kuwait in the last week of January and handed over to the Saudi authorities on 4 February. Four of the six were released in April under the royal pardon; the other two were released in lune. Between August and October, 27 other suspected oirap supporters were arrested, 12 of them at Riyadh airport or other places when returning from abroad. Of these, 22 remained in detention apparently without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Another prisoner of conscience who remained in detention at the end of the year was Salih al- 'Azzaz, a well-known writer and journalist. He was arrested in Riyadh on 6 November on suspicion of helping to organize a protest that day by women against a ban on female drivers. During the protest, 49 women were arrested and held in custody for several hours. They were released only after their male relatives signed an undertaking that the women would not violate the ban. They included Fawzia al-Bakr, a professor at the University of Riyadh. She had previously been detained for several months in 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1983].
Five students at King Saud University in Riyadh, arrested in July 1989, remained in detention without trial (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Thousands of Yemeni nationals were arrested following the introduction of new visa and work permit requirements on 19 September. Among them were possible prisoners of conscience, apparently arrested for no reason other than their nationality or non-violent political views. Many were held for short periods in makeshift detention centres pending their
SAUDI ARABIA
deportation, while thousands of others were reportedly still held at the end of the year. It was not known whether any had been charged with a recognizably criminal offence.
Others arrested during the year included at least four possible prisoners of conscience, two of whom were still in detention apparently without charge or trial at the end of 1990.
Twelve alleged Hizbullah fil Hijaz supporters arrested in 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990) remained in detention, but it was not known whether they had been tried.
Four other Hizbullah fil Hijaz supporters were sentenced to between seven and 15 years' imprisonment in late 1989 or early 1990 after unfair trials. Their trials lasted only a few minutes and were held in camera. The defendants were denied lawyers, were not informed of the charges against them, and received no notice that they were to be tried until they were brought, in the early hours of the morning, before the Higher Shari'a Court in al-Dammam. In court they were asked to certify confessions extracted from them during interrogation. They had no right of appeal. Four Kuwaiti nationals sentenced in 1989 to between 15 and 20 years' imprisonment following similar procedures continued to be held (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and Yemeni nationals were reportedly widespread. Hundreds of Yemeni nationals were said to have been ill-treated or tortured in detention pending their deportation. For example, Amin Ahmad al-Shawafi, a mechanic from Ibb, who spent 16 days in Jeddah Central Prison before his deportation on 25 September, said he was questioned about his political views and continuously beaten over the head and body with a "sharp instrument".
Sayyid Tahir al-Shimimy, a, religious scholar and alleged oirap supporter who was released in April, said he had been repeatedly tortured following his arrest in June 1989. He said he had been beaten, deprived of sleep and had his face pushed down a lavatory. He spent 130 days in solitary confinement in al-Mabahith al-'Amma prison in al-Dammam and required hospital treatment for spinal injuries following his release.
New information was received about the torture and ill-treatment in detention of 29 Kuwaiti nationals arrested in July 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990], 16 of whom were executed in 1989 and four of whom were still held at the end of 1990. Others who were released alleged that all the detainees were beaten with canes and whips, deprived of sleep and injected with unknown substances which induced a trance-like state. 'Adnan 'Abdul-Samad, a former member of parliament, was reportedly deprived of sleep for several days, beaten all over his body with an 'iqal (a thick rope forming part of traditional Arab headwear) and had the 'iqal tightened around his neck to the point of near-asphyxiation. He was later released uncharged.
At least five people, four Filipinos and one Egyptian convicted of repeated theft, had their right hands amputated in February or March. The imposition of the judicial punishment of flogging remained widespread, although the number of sentences carried out was not known. One victim, Jack Huissen, an American teacher, was reportedly sentenced in June to receive 160 lashes - 70 for alcohol consumption, and 90 for reasons not disclosed to him. Prior to his release and deportation on 15 August, he received 90 lashes. Four Kuwaiti nationals sentenced in September 1989 to floggings of between 1,000 and 1,500 lashes, continued to receive their punishments during the year (see Amnesty International Report 1990],
Between January and July, at least 13 Saudi and foreign nationals were publicly executed after being convicted of criminal offences including murder, drug-trafficking and rape. Among those executed was Rashash Sa'id Mubarak al-'Utaibi, who was beheaded in June following his conviction for murder and highway robbery. His decapitated body was crucified and displayed in Riyadh.
In January Amnesty International published a report, Saudi Arabia: Detention Without Trial of Suspected Political Opponents, which expressed concern about the continuing pattern of detention without trial of suspected political opponents and torture and ill-treatment of detainees. It urged the government to review current detention cases and to release all those detained on account of their non-violent political opinions or activities. The
SAUDI ARABIA/SENEGAL
government denied it was holding pohtical prisoners or that torture was used to extract confessions. However, it expressed willingness to discuss matters of concern to Amnesty International, and accepted in principle that Amnesty International should visit Saudi Arabia for this purpose.
While welcoming the releases of prisoners of conscience and others. Amnesty International continued to press for the release of other non-violent government opponents and to express concern about the detention of other political detainees without trial or after unfair trials. The organization also expressed concern about the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, and about the use of the death penalty.
Following reports of torture and ill-treatment of detained Yemeni nationals. Amnesty International urged King Fahd to set up an immediate public inquiry and called for the release of anyone detained solely on account of their nationality. The government denied widespread torture or ill-treatment but undertook to examine information submitted by Amnesty International. The names and other details of over 400 Yemeni deportees, including victims of alleged ill-treatment, were then submitted to the government but no inquiry was known to have been established by the end of the year.
