GUINEA-BISSAU
Twenty-two political prisoners sentenced after an unfair trial in 1986 were released from prison in an amnesty, but six of them were restricted. The whereabouts of others remained unclear. A senior government official was arrested for apparently political reasons.
At a congress in December the ruling party. Partido Africano de Independencia da Guiñé e Cabo Verde (paigc), African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, agreed on a program of constitutional and legal changes to introduce a multi-party political system in 1991. President Joao Bernardo Vieira had earlier announced that anyone was iree to form a political party, but there were no legal guarantees to protect fi'eedom of association or information.
In January the government announced an amnesty for all prisoners still serving
sentences imposed in July 1986. They had been convicted, after an unfair trial, of plotting to overthrow the government. According to oflicial sources, 16 prisoners were released and six others, whose death sentences had previously been commuted to 15-year prison terms, were ordered to remain on the islands where they had been held on prison farms. Although official reports indicated that all those serving sentences imposed in July 1986 had been released in 1990 or in previous years, it appeared that at least two were still held and that some of those reportedly freed in previous years remained restricted.
According to Amnesty International's understanding, 24 of those convicted in July 1986 were still in prison at the beginning of the year, including 18 who had been sentenced to prison terms of between 13 and 15 years and the six who were originally sentenced to death. As the names of the prisoners released in January were not reported it was impossible to say which two had apparently not been released. However, one of them may have been Buota Nam Batcha, a former National Assembly deputy, who was said to have died in custody after the trial. The government did not clarify this, nor did it respond to reports that another prisoner, Nfono Tchuda Nalagna, had died in custody in 1987 (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1989). Once again there were claims that some of those convicted at the 1986 trial and who were officially reported to have been released in previous years were restricted to remote villages.
Guinea-Bissau's Vice-President and head of the armed forces, lafai Camara, was reportedly placed under house arrest in November. He was said by official sources to have helped supply arms to separatist rebels in the Casamance area of neighbouring Senegal in breach of a bilateral agreement. lafai Camara had not been charged or brought to trial by the end of the year and was apparently subsequently released.
Several other people were allegedly arrested or had restrictions placed on their movements for political reasons. Two men were reportedly detained, one for some days and the other for a few hours, after they returned firom abroad: they were questioned about their suspected contacts with government opponents in exile. Former political prisoners who had been arrested
GUINEA-BISSAU/GUYANA
in 1980 after a successful coup and released a few years later were also reportedly harassed by security police or instructed not to leave their home areas.
Amnesty International welcomed the January releases. It sought information from the government about the two prisoners who had apparently not been released and those who were reported to have died in custody. It also requested information from the government in response to reports that political prisoners released in previous years remained under restrictions. There was no reply.
