ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
Some 25,000 Palestinians, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested in connection with the intifada (uprising) in the Occupied Territories. Over 4,000 were administratively detained without charge or trial, and thousands of others were tried by military courts. By the end of the year about 13,000 were still detained or imprisoned. Dozens of Israelis, including Druze and Jewish objectors to military service, were imprisoned as prisoners of conscience. Thousands of Palestinians were punitively beaten or otherwise tortured or ill-treated. About 120 Palestinians, including children, were shot dead by Israeli
forces, often in circumstances suggesting unjustifiable killings. Israeli soldiers misused tear-gas, endangering lives. Investigations into abuses and related prosecutions appeared to be inadequate. One person remained under sentence of death.
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip continued to protest at the Israeli occupation. They organized regular strikes and demonstrations. Young people, often masked, frequently attacked Israeli soldiers and sometimes Israeli civilians, mainly with stones or petrol bombs. Some Israelis were stabbed to death. A dozen Israeli civilians and members of the security forces were killed in such attacks, Some 150 Palestinians were killed apparently by other Palestinians, the vast majority on suspicion of collaborating with the Israeli authorities.
The Israeli authorities responded to disturbances with widespread arrests and restrictions of movement. They also used excessive or indiscriminate force. They closed educational institutions, imposed prolonged curfews and closed off areas to outside observers as military zones. They also demolished or sealed houses as a form of punishment.
Over 4.000 Palestinians were held in administrative detention for renewable periods of up to one year. A two-step process of judicial review of detention orders was available, but appeals by detainees took place weeks, sometimes months, after arrest. In almost every case, detainees and their lawyers were not provided with crucial information about the reasons for their detention. With few exceptions, appeals resulted in confirmation of the original detention order or slight reductions in detention periods. Almost all administrative detainees were held in the Ketziot detention camp in the Negev desert in Israel. Despite improvements in accommodation facilities, conditions in the camp remained harsh, particularly as detainees did not receive visits from relatives.
Among the administrative detainees were prisoners of conscience. They included three human rights fieldworkers: Sha'wan Jabarin and lyad Haddad were released in September and December after 11 months and two and a half months in detention respectively; Wafiq Abu Siddu was served with a six-month detention order in November, reduced on appeal to four and a half months. Other political
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRiTORIES/ïTALY
detainees included Radwan Abu 'Ayyash and Ziad Abu Zayyad, two journalists served with six-month orders in November, and Dr Ahmad al-Yazji, a surgeon served with a one-year order in November.
Israeli prisoners of conscience included Michel Warschawsky, head of the Alternative Information Centre, who was imprisoned between July and November for agreeing to typeset a booklet without adequately checking its legality according to Israeli law. The booklet was issued by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and advised on how to withstand interrogation.
Two Israeli prisoners of conscience imprisoned in 1989 were released when their sentences expired. Abie Nathan, an Israeli peace campaigner, was released in February but was charged again for having met officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo) during the year. Yacov Ben Efrat, a political activist, was released in October (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Trial proceedings initiated in previous years against 12 Israelis accused of unauthorized contacts with the plo continued, but had not been completed by the end of the year.
Other prisoners of conscience released during the year included Hamzi Smeidi, a Palestinian journalist sentenced in January to 15 months of actual imprisonment. He was found guilty of drafting non-violent parts of a leaflet issued by the clandestine Unified National Leadership of the intifada. He was released in June.
Dozens of Israeli Dnize were imprisoned for several months for refusing to perform military service on grounds of conscience. 'Urwa Salim served a total of over nine months in prison between 1988 and 1990. Fu'ad Humayd was imprisoned for 45 days in May and June for refusing to do reserve duty in a prison containing Palestinian political prisoners. Some 46 Israeli Jews served periods of imprisonment of up to 35 days for refusing to perform certain types of military service, such as duties in the Occupied Territories. Nir Keinan, a career officer, was imprisoned for 35 days after refusing to serve in the Gaza Strip. He was released in November and was dismissed from the army. Amnesty International considers such objectors to be prisoners of conscience.
Thousands of Palestinians faced trial by military courts, most charged with violent
offences such as throwing stones or petrol bombs. After being arrested, they could be held for 18 days before being presented to a judge. Many were denied access to lawyers and family for much longer periods. Confessions allegedly extracted during incommunicado detention were often the primary evidence against them. Those contesting charges faced delays which could postpone trials for months and sometimes years. Bail was rarely granted and many pleaded guilty in order to avoid periods of pre-trial detention which would exceed likely sentences. The much heavier sentences imposed on those convicted after trial also reportedly deterred many from contesting charges.
The systematic use of ill-treatment during interrogation was widespread and there were reports of punitive beatings immediately after arrest and of torture. Methods included beatings with truncheons and rifle butts; hooding with dirty sacks; sleep deprivation by prolonged shackling in contorted positions; confinement in small, darkened cells often referred to as "closets"; and squeezing of testicles. Riad She-habi, a shop-owner in Jerusalem arrested on suspicion of throwing stones, was severely beaten in July while in police custody. 'Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin, a journalist, was held incommunicado for over three weeks in September. During this time he was allegedly deprived of sleep and beaten on his head, genitals and other parts of his body. In May Ghaleb Zallum died apparently as a result of beatings by soldiers after he refused to clear a road of stones in Hebron (al-KhaUl).
Mordechai Vanunu, an Israeli former nuclear technician, continued to serve his 18-year prison sentence in solitary confinement with severely restricted access to visitors (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1990).
About 120 Palestinians, including children and young people, were shot dead by Israeli forces using live ammunition and special types of plastic and other bullets. Firearms continued to be used as a common means of riot control under official guidelines which appeared inconsistent with the internationally recognized principles of necessity and proportionality in the use of force. Many resulting killings seemed unjustifiable. In October at least 17 Palestinians were shot dead by police at the Haram al-Sharif (Temple Mount) in
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRiTORIES/ïTALY
Jerusalem during a riot. An official commission of investigation found that the shootings were justified by a life-threatening situation, although it also established that at some point firing was indiscriminate and that two nurses were injured when an ambulance attending the woimd-ed was shot at. Reports from local human rights groups and other sources suggested that many of the victims died as a result of the indiscriminate and unjustifiable use of firearms. A judicial inquest into these killings was also initiated and was continuing at the end of the year.
There were reports of Israeli soldiers possibly deliberately misusing tear-gas, which can be lethal in confined spaces. Scores of babies needed urgent treatment after tear-gas canisters were thrown into a Gaza maternity clinic in June and into the infant ward of Makassed Hospital in October. A soldier received a 10-day prison sentence in connection with the incident in Gaza. A few elderly or very young Palestinians reportedly died after exposure to tear-gas in confined spaces.
Several soldiers and police officers were convicted or disciplined for offences related to the intifada during the year. Investigations were mostly conducted internally by the police or armed forces and took a long time to conclude. In October one soldier was sentenced to two months of actual imprisonment and three received suspended sentences of up to five months for having beaten two Palestinians in their custody in February 1988. One of the victims, lyad 'Aql, died after the assault. One soldier was reportedly sentenced to three months of actual imprisonment and two others to prison sentences of 14 and 28 days in connection with the torture of Sha'wan Jabarin (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). In June a soldier was sentenced to four months of "unpleasant" work at a military base for having shot dead in June 1988 'Abd al-Ra'uf Hamed, who was apparently fleeing arrest. Another soldier was reportedly sentenced to one month's imprisonment for the killing in August 1989 of Yaser Abu Ghawsh (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). The official investigation established that the treatment of the victim after he had been shot, when a doctor was reportedly prevented from giving aid, was "inappropriate under the circiunstances".
John Demjanjuk, convicted in 1988 of
offences including crimes against humanity, remained under sentence of death. His appeal proceedings before the Supreme Court began in May and continued during the year.
Amnesty International called for the release of prisoners of conscience and for administrative detainees to be released unless they were given an adequate opportunity to challenge their detention. It also appealed on behalf of victims of torture or ill-treatment. In January Amnesty International published a report, Israel and the Occupied Territories: Killings by Israeli Forces. The report said that existing guidelines for the use of firearms, as well as the pattern of killings and subsequent investigations, suggested that the Israeli authorities were effectively condoning if not encouraging extrajudicial executions as a means of controlling unrest. After the killings in Jerusalem in October, it called for an independent judicial inquiry to investigate the incident and to review official guidelines on opening fire and methods of riot control.
In January Amnesty International submitted a written statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights about human rights violations in the Occupied Territories. In August it drew attention to its concerns about administrative detention to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
Amnesty International delegates visited the country in July and October. They met several civilian and military officials and observed administrative detention hearings and military court trials.
The Israeli authorities told Amnesty International that every administrative detention order was based on reliable information, although reasons of security precluded disclosure of sources. They stressed violent aspects of the intifada, arguing that Israel's response had been proportionate in that context. They said that some soldiers had understood orders issued in early 1988 on the use of nightsticks as authorizing "excessive force, including the use of force as a punitive or deterrent measure", but that this had been redressed and offenders punished. The authorities also said that the decision to impose solitary confinement on Mordechai Vanunu was found to be reasonable by the Israeli judiciary.
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRiTORIES/ïTALY
Amnesty International received replies on six cases of fatal shootings by Israeli forces which were among those submitted to the authorities in 1989. The official version of events was sometimes inconsistent with the allegations which Amnesty International had received. Nevertheless, in five of the six cases official investigations had established that the guidelines for opening fire had been violated. In one case a soldier was charged with causing death by negligence; in two cases soldiers were charged with illegal use of arms; and in two others soldiers were reprimanded or censured.
