TANZANIA
More than 120 government opponents were arrested in Zanzibar. At least 40 were prisoners of conscience, of whom three were believed to be still in prison at the end of the year. Fifteen of those arrested were detained without charge or trial. The others were charged and released on bail after short periods in custody, with some still awaiting trial at the end of the year. On the mainland a government opponent was detained without charge or trial following his return from exile. A
Burundi national arrested for political reasons in 1989 died in prison; 14 others arrested vrith him remained in custody throughout the year. There were reports of executions and 12 people were sentenced to death.
Opposition in Zanzibar and Pemba to continued union with mainland Tanzania increased in the run up to nationwide elections in October. Advocates of secession in the two islands called for a boycott of the electoral roll registration process. Hundreds who supported the call were dismissed or suspended from state employment and leaders of the campaign were detained. In all, more than 120 people were arrested in Zanzibar and Pemba, including former Zanzibar Government ministers. At least 40 were prisoners of conscience, although most were held only briefly. Shabaan Mloo, a former senior official of the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (ccm), Party of the Revolution, the only legal political party, was arrested in June with five other leading advocates of secession. They included the former Zanzibar chief justice, Ali Haji Pandu, and Mkubwa Makame. The latter was held for five days, apparently unlawfully, on successive 24-hour detention orders without being brought before a magistrate, and then released. The five others were held until December. They were detained under the 1964 Zanzibar Preventive Detention Decree, which permits indefinite detention without charge or trial, rather than the more recent 1985 Preventive Detention Act, which permits the legality of detention orders to be challenged in court. Shabaan Mloo had previously been detained for several days in January with 11 others.
Mkubwa Makame was rearrested in
TANZANIA/THAILAND
August with two others, the day after they had met Amnesty kitemational representatives visiting Zanzibar. At the same time, Juma Ngwaii, a former government official, and two others were arrested on Pemba. All six were detained under the 1964 decree and held incommunicado until they were released in December. Two of the Pemba detainees were reported to have been denied appropriate medical care after becoming ill in detention. All those held under the 1964 decree were prisoners of conscience.
Three government critics sentenced to prison terms on Zanzibar in July were also prisoners of conscience. Rashid Ali Dadi received a one-year sentence and Omar Salum Hamad and Kombo Hassan Bakar were each jailed for six months after being convicted of holding an illegal meeting in 1989. They were convicted despite the prosecution's failure to prove that there was any unlawful purpose to the meeting.
Other government critics were also charged with holding illegal meetings or breaches of the peace. They were generally released for lack of evidence when their cases came to court, often after they had been held in custody and denied bail for up to two weeks. At least 50 government opponents were still facing such charges at the end of the year.
In April, 15 prisoners serving sentences imposed in 1989 for participating in an illegal demonstration and destroying property were pardoned and released. However, Seif Shariff Hamad, a former chief minister of Zanzibar and a leading advocate of secession, remained in custody throughout 1990 awaiting trial on charges of illegal possession of documents (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
At least one government opponent was detained in mainland Tanzania. Musa Membar, leader of the opposition Tanzania Youth Democratic Movement, was arrested in September when he entered Tanzania from Kenya, apparently to participate in the elections. He was detained without charge or trial under the 1985 Preventive Detention Act and was still held at the end of 1990. He was previously imprisoned in the United Kingdom for hijacking an aircraft flying from Tanzania to London in 1982.
On the mainland 15 possible prisoners of conscience from a Burundi opposition movement, the Parti pour !a liberation du
peuple Hutu (paupehutu), Hutu People's Liberation Party, remained in detention pending deportation. They had been arrested in 1989 and accused of political activity detrimental to Tanzania's relations with Burundi (see Amnesty International Report 1990). In August their leader, Remi Gahutu, died as a result of illness possibly exacerbated by harsh prison conditions and poor medical facilities.
In January the authorities announced that since 1985 the Court of Appeal had dismissed 188 prisoners' appeals against the death sentence and that 25 executions had taken place. Fiulher executions were believed to have been carried out in 1990. At least 12 people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of other political prisoners. In August Amnesty International representatives visited Zanzibar and met Attorney General Idi Pandu Hassan. He said that Shabaan Mloo and others detained without charge or trial under the 1964 decree were being held to prevent them from "disrupting" the October elections. In September Amnesty International published a report, Tanzania: The Harassment of Government Opponents in Zanzibar, which detailed recent arrests and reiterated the organization's call for the release of prisoners of conscience.
