YEMEN
In May the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (pdry) and the Yemen Arab Republic (yar) united to form a single state - the Republic of Yemen. All known political detainees and prisoners arrested in 1990 and in previous years in the pdry were released prior to unification. In the yar, one prisoner of conscience was released in January; it was not possible to confirm the release or continued detention of one other prisoner of conscience and 25
suspected political opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience. Released detainees alleged torture and ill-treatment in both the former pdry and yar. The cases of 50 people who "disappeared" in the pdry and yar in previous years remained unresolved. Unconfirmed reports were received of three extrajudicial executions in the yar. At least two death sentences were carried out in the yar. Since unification no death sentences were known to have been ratified by the Presidential Council, which commuted eight death sentences in November.
Following unification, a Presidential Council was set up to oversee the executive functions of the state during a 30-month transitional period, leading up to general elections. General 'Ali 'Abdullah Saleh, previously President of the yar, became its Chairman, and 'Ali Salim al-Bidh, previously General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Yemeni Socialist Party of the pdry, became its Vice-Chairman. The parliaments of the former pdry and yar merged and approved a new constitution.
Yemen's new constitution guarantees civil and political rights, and prohibits the use of "inhuman methods" of punishment and the promulgation of laws allowing such practices. In accordance with the Unity Agreement, the Republic of Yemen became a State Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In December the Presidential Council approved the government's decision to accede to the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and confirmed the decision taken in January by the Joint Council of Ministers to abolish the use of shackles in prisons.
YEMEN
Starting in May, the Parliament debated draft laws concerning freedom of the press and the judicial system. The Press Law was passed in December.
Between January and May, the authorities in the pdry released 20 possible prisoners of conscience who had been held without trial. They included 11 suspected members of the previously banned al-Ikhwan al-MusUmun, Muslim Brothers, arrested in February 1988; seven suspected supporters of former president 'Ali Nasser Muhammad, who were arrested in March 1989; and Sa'id Aghbari and Muhammad Saleh al-Hammati, suspected government opponents arrested in 1987 and 1986 respectively (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990).
In January the government of the then pdry released 33 other political prisoners in an amnesty. They had been convicted in connection with events in 1986 and 1989 of supporting former president 'Ali Nasser Muhammad who had been ousted in 1986 (see Amnesty International Reports 1967 to 1990).
In March between 100 and 150 people were arrested following demonstrations reportedly organized by Islamic groups in Aden and al-Mukalla in the then pdry. The demonstrators, who included male and female students, reportedly called for the segregation of the sexes and the compulsory wearing of the hijab (veil) in schools. The majority of arrests took place in Aden on 20 March. Most of those detained were released the same day; five were released uncharged 10 days later. In al-Mukalla, 13 people were arrested on 24 March after a similar demonstration. Nine of them were released uncharged several days later. The four others were initially held at the State Security Detention Centre in al-Mukalla and later at the Central Prison of the Gov-emorate of Hadhramawt. One of the detainees, Muhsin 'Ali Ba Surra, an agricultural engineer, was arrested by State Security officials while making inquiries about his brother who had been detained earlier in connection with the al-Mukalla demonstration. By the end of April all of them had been released.
In the then yar, 'Abdo Pari' al-'Ubad, a prisoner of conscience who was only 16 years old when he was arrested in October 1989, was released uncharged in January. He had been detained because of his father's political activities. The situation
of another prisoner of conscience, 'Ayesh 'Ali 'Ubad, who was only 12 years old when he was arrested in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1990), and of 25 other detainees, was unclear at the end of 1990. The 25, who included possible prisoners of conscience, were all suspected supporters of the prohibited National Democratic Front (ndf) who had been arrested between 1984 and 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
New allegations of torture and ill-treat-ment of prisoners in previous years in both former Yemeni states were received in 1990, Ahmad Nasser al-Fadhli, a Yemeni Socialist Party official who had been held in solitary confinement at al-Fateh detention centre in Aden for over six months following his arrest in January 1988, was reportedly beaten all over his body, deprived of sleep for three days and forced to stand for 48 hours. 'Ali Muhammad Nu'man, a trade unionist who had been held incommunicado and in solitary confinement in the yar for six years up to 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990), said he had been tortured throughout his detention. He was held at al-Amn al-Watani (National Security) detention centres in Ta'iz and al-Hadda, where he was reportedly beaten all over his body with metal cables, confined for one year in a small cell, and kept permanently shackled.
In January the Joint Council of Ministers abolished the use of shackles in the yar. This ruling was confirmed by the government of the Republic of Yemen in November. However, shackles were said to be still in use, including in prisons in Ta'iz and Sana'a, at the end of 1990.
The cases of 50 political detainees who "disappeared" after arrest between 1967 and 1986 in the pdry and yar remained unresolved. Among them were magistrates, engineers, army officers and senior state officials (see Amnesty International Reports 1981, 1982, 1983, 1987, 1989 and 1990). In some cases, the relatives of such detainees had themselves been arrested and had "disappeared" after making inquiries about the fate of their family members.
Three people were reportedly extrajudicially executed in the yar in March because they were suspected of causing an explosion at the Grand Mosque in Sana'a,
At least two people convicted of murder in the yar and whose sentences were ratified before unification, were executed
YEMEri/YUGOSLAVlA
during the year. At least 14 other death sentences were pending ratification by the Presidential Council at the end of 1990. In November eight members of the former ndf who had been sentenced to death by the yar authorities in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1990] were given clemency.
The scheduled execution of Hassan Yussif al-Bishri. a former soldier in the yar army who had been sentenced to death for murder in 1986, was postponed in November. His trial was allegedly marked by procedural irregularities, including the refusal of the court to allow at least one prosecution witness to retract the statements he had made against the defendant.
An Amnesty International delegation visited the Republic of Yemen in November at the invitation of the government, and met the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Presidential Council and other ministers and officials. The organization welcomed the releases of political prisoners in the former pdry and submitted a memorandum to the unity government summarizing Amnesty International's outstanding concerns in Yemen. It sought clarification of the cases of 25 members of the former ndf arrested between 1984 and 1988, and of the fate of 50 suspected political opponents who "disappeared" in detention between 1967 and 1986. The organization requested details of the trial proceedings in the cases of seven people arrested in 1987 on charges of sabotage (see Amnesty International Report 1990]. Amnesty International reiterated its request for an investigation into the deaths in custody in the past two years of seven political detainees. It called for the establishment of a judicial review into the legal-proceedings in the cases of Hassan al-Bishri and eight members of the former ndf who had been under sentence of death, urged that no further death sentences be ratified and appealed for the commutation of all current death sentences. The organization also sought confirmation of the reported extrajudicial execution in March of three people in Sana'a. Amnesty International urged the government to accede to the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
In its response in December, the government denied holding any political prisoners. It stated that it had no information on 'Ayesh 'Ali 'Ubad, a prisoner of con-
science. Of the 25 suspected ndf members whose cases were raised in Amnesty International's memorandum, the government said that six had been released, three were to be released by the end of the year, six had been tried and sentenced for criminal offences, and that it had no information on the remaining 10. The government asserted that allegations of torture were inaccurate, and that the deaths in custody referred to by Amnesty International had resulted from natural causes. Regarding "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, the government attributed such violations in the former pdry to "the regrettable events of January 1986". Of the 17 "disappearance" cases in the former yar, the government said four had been released, one had died in custody of natural causes and that it had no information on the 12 other cases, including that of the former minister Colonel Sultan Amin al-Qirshi. The government also said that killings of suspected political opponents in the former yar had resulted from acts of vengeance by individual citizens. It denied the extrajudicial execution of three people in March.
At the end of the year. Amnesty International was seeking further clarification on all of these concerns.
