DJIBOUTI
Scores of suspected government opponents were arrested but most were released after a few days or weeks. Some were alleged to have been tortured or ill-treated.
There were bomb attacks in June and September, the second of which killed a child and injured 17 people and was attributed to a little-known opposition group, the Mouvement de la jeunesse dji-boutienne. Djibouti Youth Movement.
Dozens of people belonging to the Afar ethnic group were arrested after the June bomb attack, in many cases apparently because of their suspected opposition to the government rather than because of any evidence of their involvement in such violence. All were released within a few days, except for one man, Omar Daoud Banoita, who was reportedly accused of responsibility for the bombing. He had not been tried by the end of the year.
In August four Afars were arrested in the capital. Djibouti, in connection with a leaflet which criticized the government and called for a multi-party system. They included Kassim Ahmed Dini, son of a former prime minister; Mohamed Dileyta, a
journalist; and Adam Mohamed Dileyta, a United Nations employee. All four were released uncharged after a few days. They were alleged to have been tortured or ill-treated. Another government critic arrested in August, Aka Der, was detained for two months and then released without being charged.
Scores of people, mainly from the Somali ethnic group's Gadabursi clan, were arrested following the September bomb attack and detained for several days. There appeared to be no evidence that they had been involved in causing the explosion and some of them were allegedly tortured.
In October four men accused of carrying out the September bomb attack were referred to the procuracy for a formal judicial investigation and were remanded in custody. A fifth, a taxi-driver, was reportedly kept in incommunicado detention without being brought before a magistrate, and there was concern for his safety. All five were still held at the end of the year.
Amnesty International sought information from the authorities about the arrests of suspected government opponents after the September bombing and expressed concern that some appeared to have been detained without being brought before a judge. It asked for details of the legal proceedings against the four people charged in connection with the September attack and inquired about the taxi-driver who was said not to have been seen since his arrest.
The Minister of the Interior confirmed that a number of people had been referred to the procuracy for judicial investigation in connection with the September bombing. In November he said that nine people were still held, but that they had regular access to their families, lawyers and doctors of their choice.
