JORDAN
Dozens of real or suspected opponents of the govemment, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held in administrative detention without charge, trial or judicial review. At least 26 were sentenced to prison terms by the Martial Law Court, whose procedures did not satisfy international standards of fair trial. Thirty-six political prisoners sentenced by this court in previous years were released, but some 30 others remained in prison. There were reports of torture or ill-treatment of detainees. At least four people were executed.
The government undertook a major review of existing state of emergency and other legislation relevant to human rights. A new draft Defence Law which, if adopted, would replace the 1935 Defence Law, was presented to Parliament in June. The draft proposed that administrative detention orders be reviewable every 30 days by the High Court of Justice but retained provisions for the indefinite administrative detention of security suspects and lacked other legal safeguards. The draft was still under discussion at the end of the year.
In January and July new Martial Law Directives greatly reduced the jurisdiction of the Martial Law Court with a view to its abolition. However, the court continued to have jurisdiction over offences relating to membership of illegal associations, for which almost all political prisoners have been charged and sentenced. Martial law, declared in 1967 and officially "frozen" since December 1989, was still in force at the end of 1990.
In January the govemment also proposed the repeal of the 1953 Law of Resistance to Communism, which has been used to imprison prisoners of conscience. The proposal was still being discussed by Parliament at the end of 1990.
Dozens of real or suspected opponents of the government were arrested during the year and detained incommunicado under state of emergency legislation by the General Intelligence Department (gid) and other security agencies. Many were released within a short time of their arrest and included possible prisoners of conscience. Among them were known or suspected members of the Islamic Hizb al-Tahrirfi al-Urdun, Liberation Party in Jordan (lpj), such as Sheikh Taher 'Abd al-Hamid al-Taher, a religious leader aged over 70. He was held incommunicado by the gid for almost three weeks in November apparently after he had spoken against the political system during a Friday sermon. Also detained was 'Abd al-Hamid al-Khalayfah, who was arrested in June apparently after he had publicly criticized the security forces' handling of riots in May. The riots were in protest at killings of Palestinians in the Israeli Occupied Territories. In August Samir Abu Hilalah was detained for six days by the Preventive Security, a wing of the security forces, apparently for his peaceful political activities; he had organized a debate on political issues in Ma'an.
At least 26 people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were sentenced to prison terms by the Martial Law Court. Bakr 'Abd al-Latif al-Khatib, who was arrested in March 1988, was sentenced early in 1990 to four years' imprisonment on charges of membership of an illegal association, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (pflp), but he was pardoned and released in June. Twenty-five others were reportedly sentenced to six-month prison terms after being tried by the Martial Law Court in connection with the May
JORDAN
riots. As in previous years, the Martial Law Court was not bound by the normal rules of judicial procedure and defendants were denied any right of appeal to a higher tribunal, contrary to international fair trial standards.
Thirty-six alleged members of illegal organizations who had been sentenced to prison terms by the Martial Law Court in previous years were released, 27 of them after an amnesty was declared in February. They included Kamal Khalil and Hasan Shahin. both alleged members of the pflp arrested in 1988, and fom alleged members of the lp], including Muhammad Khattab, who had been arrested in 1989. They were serving sentences of up to four years' imprisonment and may have been prisoners of conscience. Seven other prisoners serving sentences of up to life imprisonment for violent political offences were pardoned and released in November. Also freed were Munir Akrush, who was released in January shortly after starting a four-year sentence imposed under the Law of Resistance to Communism, and Brik al-Hadid, who was ft"eed in September under a royal pardon. He had been arrested in 1978 and sentenced to death for his alleged involvement in a plot to assassinate King Hussein bin Talal.
Some 30 people sentenced after unfair trials by the Martial Law Court in previous years were still in prison at the end of the year. Most were serving life sentences imposed for violent political offences.
There were new reports of torture or ill-treatment of detainees. The alleged victims included people arrested during the May riots, including 10 Palestinians who were said to have been beaten while in police custody and at Qafqafa Prison. In another case, lihad Abu Falah was allegedly subjected to fahqa (beatings on the soles of the feet) and cigarette bums while in police custody between May and June. Four men arrested apparently after a personal con-ft'ontation with security officers were allegedly burned with cigarettes and beaten in May while held for a few days by the Military Intelligence Department. In most cases torture is said to have occurred while detainees were held incommunicado and after lawyers' requests for visits had been refused.
There were concerns that two prisoners who died in custody might have been subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treat-
ment. Mu'taz Hamdan, who was serving a life sentence imposed by the Martial Law Court, was reported to have been shackled by his hands and feet to a hospital bed while terminally ill with leukaemia. He died in May. Suiyan al-Shamasnah was also reported to have been shackled to his hospital bed while critically ill prior to his death in August. He reportedly did not receive prompt medical attention after suffering a burst appendix while in police custody. Those detaining him apparently thought he was faking an illness.
At least four people were executed after being convicted of murder. Two others were also convicted of murder and sentenced to death, but they were not known to have been executed by the end of the year. Those under sentence of death included two prisoners convicted by the Martial Law Court for a bomb attack in 1982.
Amnesty International welcomed the human rights initiatives taken by the lordanian Government during the year, specifically the review of emergency legislation and the releases of prisoners, and urged that further initiatives be taken. It called for a full judicial review of the cases of political prisoners convicted by the Martial Law Court and for the adoption of internationally recognized safeguards relating to administrative detention, fair trial and torture and ill-treatment. It also urged the ratification of international human rights standards and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
In March an Amnesty International delegation discussed extensively the organization's concerns and the Jordanian Government's proposals for reform with Prime Minister Mudar Badran and other cabinet and government officials in Amman. The delegation also met members of parliament and local professional associations, and visited the gid interrogation centre and the Swaqa Rehabilitation Centre, Jordan's largest prison, gid and prison officials denied that torture had taken place in the cases raised by Amnesty International. lordanian authorities also stated that they would not detain political activists, even if they were members of illegal organizations, unless they had been involved in violence or constituted "a clear danger to the security of the citizens and the state".
In June Amnesty International published a report, Jordan: Human Rights
X)RDAN/KENYA
Protection After the State of Emergency. This detailed the organization's outstanding concerns, the outcome of its discussions with the government in Amman, and recommendations for further safeguards to protect human rights.
