PAKISTAN
Scores of people arrested for non-violent political or religious activities were prisoners of conscience. Most were released after short periods. Torture was widespread, and reportedly caused the deaths of at least 24 prisoners. The President
promulgated ordinances affecting the application of the death penalty and extending its scope. No executions were reported.
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan dismissed the government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto in August and dissolved the national and provincial assemblies. A state of emergency was declared but no emergency legislation was promulgated. An interim government was appointed until elections in October, which were won by the Islami Jamhoori Ittehad (i;i). Islamic Democratic Alliance. Mian Nawaz Sharif became Prime Minister in November and the state of emergency was then lifted.
Criminal and ethnic violence continued in Sind province, where hundreds of people were killed. In February rivalry between the ruling Pakistan People's Party (pppj and the opposition Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (mqm), Mohajir National Movement, led to conflict in Karachi in which supporters of each group kidnapped, imprisoned, tortured or killed members of the other. An exchange of prisoners was negotiated by the army. The alliance between the two parties had ended in November 1989.
Shortly after the dismissal of the ppp government in August investigations led to charges of corruption against former prime minister Benazir Bhutto and several of her former ministers, Their trials - which took place before a court which was empowered to disqualify them from public office but not to imprison them - were not completed by the end of the year. Benazir Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari. was arrested in October and charged with several offences, including involvement in a kidnapping case.
Several aides and associates of former prime minister Benazir Bhutto and her husband were detained without charge or trial in Karachi under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (mpo), apparently in connection with the investigations into corruption. They included Ahmed Fahim Moghul, a former private secretary to Benazir Bhutto, who was released after spending over 40 days in custody.
The Sind High Court ruled that some of these detentions were unlawful: criminal charges were then brought against those held, who remained in custody until granted bail. Other ppp members were detained under the in the interior of Sind during the pre-election period. Most were
PAKISTAN
released within a few weeks, either unconditionally or on bail after criminal charges were brought against them.
Both under the ppp government in June and under the iji government in December, the Sind provincial authorities allegedly arrested hundreds of political opponents during a campaign against crime. In some cases, members of the ppp arrested after the change of government were repeatedly charged with offences which could not be substantiated, and then placed under 30-day detention orders under the mpo. For example, a former member of the National Assembly, Afaq Shahid, was arrested in November and charged with three criminal offences in turn; each new case was brought against him after he had been cleared of the last, with the effect that he remained in police custody continuously and was still held at the end of the year. A ppp member of the Sind provincial assembly, Manzoor Hussain Wasan, was held in unacknowledged detention for over one week in December. During this period the Chief Minister of Sind denied his arrest. After his detention was challenged in the Sind High Court, criminal charges were brought against him.
The mpo empowers the authorities to detain prisoners without trial for up to three months if they are considered to be "acting in any manner prejudicial to public safety or the maintenance of public order", Under Article 10 of the Constitution, a review board can extend such detentions up to a limit of eight or 12 months, depending on the grounds for detention.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community continued to be arrested for the peaceful expression of their faith, and at least 13 were sentenced to terms of imprisonment. In Abbotabad, North West Frontier Province, a group of 12 Ahmadis, five of whom were arrested, faced criminal charges and a possible prison sentence for holding a prayer meeting in a private house in January. They were released on bail in late April. Their trial had not started by the end of the year. In Multan, Punjab province, two Ahmadi brothers, Muhammad Hanif and Muhammad Ahsan, were each sentenced to six years' imprisonment and a fine for offences connected with preaching their faith.
G.M. Syed, the 87-year-old leader of the Sind National Alliance, was released by the interim government in September
when charges against him of sedition and desecrating the national flag were withdrawn. He had been held since October 1989 (see Amnesty International Report ยง 1990]. Others facing charges in the same cases were released on bail, some before and others after the change of government.
Information was received in 1990 of the release from Karachi Central Jail in July 1989 of a political prisoner who had been held in unacknowledged detention without charge or trial for over four years. Rahmat-ullah had been arrested by police and army personnel in December 1984, and was released following the filing of a constitutional petition on his behalf in the Sind High Court.
The torture of criminal and political suspects continued to be reported throughout the year. In over two dozen reported cases, torture allegedly caused the death of the prisoner. The true number of deaths in custody resulting from torture was believed to be higher. In December five people were reported to have died in the custody of the Criminal Investigation Agency in Karachi in the previous few weeks, allegedly as a result of torture. Most reports concerned torture in police custody, including the rape of women prisoners, but there were also allegations of torture by the paramilitary Rangers in Karachi and by prison staff in both Punjab and Sind provinces. In Karachi, Sind province, Abdul Rehman Thebo, a student of engineering accused of illegal possession of arms, required hospital treatment after he was reportedly tortured by Rangers in January. His injuries, including multiple bruises and abrasions, substantiated his allegation that he had been stripped, lashed and beaten on the soles of his feet and elsewhere, and had received electric shocks to his genitals. Two women, one of whom was deaf and dumb, were reportedly raped in August by prison officers at Sheikhupura District Jail, Punjab province. After a local human rights organization filed a writ petition, the prison officers were charged and transferred from Sheikhupura District Jail.
Inquiries into several cases of alleged torture were announced. Some police officers were apparently charged in connection with the torture of prisoners, but none was known to have been brought to trial.
Sentences of lashing continued to be imposed for crimes including rape and the
PAKISTAN
possession of illegal drugs. In July police in Lahore, Punjab province, reportedly took 18 men to a mosque and lashed them publicly, without sentence having been passed by any court. The 18 had been arrested for watching pornographic films. They were moved to jail the following day.
Dozens of men, women and children were reportedly extrajudicially executed in May at Pucca Qila in Hyderabad, Sind province, when police opened fire on a procession of apparently unarmed protesters who were defying curfew regulations. The demonstrators were demanding the withdrawal of police from the area, which is inhabited by ethnic Mohajirs, and were protesting that they had been deprived of water for over 28 hours. The government announced in May that a judicial inquiry would be held into the recent violence in Sind province, which would include investigation of the Hyderabad killings. However, its work was reportedly hampered by lack of cooperation from the parties involved, It recommenced in November after the change of government, and was not completed by the end of the year.
The President promulgated three ordinances which affected the application of the death penalty, and a fourth which reintroduced Special Courts for Speedy Trials with the power to sentence convicted prisoners to death. Ordinances promulgated in August and September removed the powers of the President and provincial governors under the Pakistan Penal Code to commute death sentences for murder without the consent of the victim's heirs. They also enabled relatives of the victim to accept compensation from the murderer. The third ordinance, issued in December, made kidnapping for ransom an offence punishable by death.
Special Courts for Speedy Trials, which can condemn prisoners to death after trials lasting only a few days, were reintroduced through an ordinance promulgated in August. These courts, formerly in operation from 1987 to 1989, have jurisdiction over crimes which provincial governments deem "gruesome, brutal and sensational... or shocking to public morality", or which had "led to public outrage". Their procedures do not wholly conform to international fair trial standards. Prisoners convicted and sentenced by these courts retain the right of appeal.
Ordinances remain in force for 120
days; they must then be approved by the National Assembly or promulgated again.
At least 52 people were sentenced to death for murder. At least nine death sentences were passed by Special Courts for the Suppression of Terrorist Activities, the procedures of which do not wholly conform to international fair trial standards. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International pressed for the release of prisoners of conscience, including Ahmadis charged in connection with the practice of their faith, and sought information about government opponents detained without trial, both before and after the change of government. It called for the abolition of whipping and, following the reported extrajudicial executions in Hyderabad in May, asked for details of the composition and terms of reference of the inquiry announced by the government. It also urged the authorities to ensure that police were instructed to observe international standards relating to the use of lethal force as a means of preventing possible extrajudicial executions. No replies were received to specific requests for information.
Following the change of government. Amnesty International expressed concern that members of the outgoing administration might be tried and imprisoned for political reasons under the Holders of Representative Offices (Punishment for Misconduct) Order of 1977, noting that it lays down procedures which fall short of international fair trial standards. In the event, this legislation was not used in the corruption cases against former ministers.
Amnesty International submitted a memorandum on its concerns to the federal and provincial governments in April, and published the memorandum in May, Among its recommendations to the government the organization urged the review and limitation of powers for administrative detention and the implementation of effective safeguards against torture. It again submitted its concerns and recommendations for improved human rights protection following the formation of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif s government.
