LAOS
Three people arrested in October and later charged with treason appeared to be prisoners of conscience. At least 33 other suspected opponents of the government held since 1973, including five prisoners of conscience, remained under restriction without charge or trial. No information became available on the fate of over 200 people detained since 1975. The official media indicated that judgments in political
trials held in Savannakhet province were based on "guidance" fi:om non-judicial authorities.
The ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party (lprp) reiterated its opposition to a multi-party system in Laos amid signs that some officials and intellectuals were critical of its policies. In April the lprp Political Bureau approved a draft constitution describing Laos as "a popular democratic state under the leadership of the lprp". The draft, published in June, failed to incorporate specific guarantees relating to freedom of conscience and expression, and against torture. It also failed to safeguard the right to life. The new constitution was scheduled to be adopted by the legislative Supreme People's Assembly during 1991.
On 8 October the authorities detained at least three people suspected of involvement in an unofiicial "Social Democrat Club". They were Thongsouk Saisangkhi, who reportedly called for "a multi-party system" when he resigned as Deputy Minister of Science and Technology on 26 August; Latsami Khamphoui, another former deputy minister who had reportedly circulated letters criticizing government policy; and Feng Sakchittaphong, a former senior official in the Ministry of Justice. In early November the authorities announced that the three detainees would be charged with treason under Article 51 of the Criminal Law, which carries a possible death penalty, but they were not known to have been brought to trial by the end of the year. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience detained solely for their nonviolent advocacy of multi-party democracy.
At least 33 people held without charge or trial since 1975, including five prisoners of conscience, remained under restriction in a camp near the village of Sop Pan in the northeastern province of Houa Phanh (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1990).
Poor housing conditions in Sop Pan deteriorated in March after a rainstorm destroyed some of the camp's dwellings. The inmates, mostly elderly men, had Httle access to medicine and medical treatment. Sop Pan's chief medical officer, Tiao Sisoumang Sisaleumsak, himself a 72-year-old prisoner of conscience, resigned his post in luly owing to poor health. A member of parliament and minister in the pre-1975 government, he had been held without charge or trial since November 1975.
There was no further information on the
LAOSAEBANON
fate of the 12 Lao whose arrests on political grounds were officially reported in 1989, or about 185 people previously reported to be held in Attapeu province for "reeducation".
In lune the president of the Savan-nakhet provincial People's Court told the official newspaper Pasason that of 446 cases tried by the court in 1989, "79 were political". He added that the court had jurisdiction over all cases except "difficult or political cases" which were referred for "guidance" to the Party Committee and the local government. No other reports relating to political trials were received.
The Criminal Law adopted in November 1989 was implemented. It maintained the death penalty for a wide range of criminal and political offences. No death sentences were reported during the year.
In October Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihan and to members of the Constitution Drafting Committee to urge that the draft constitution be amended to include comprehensive safeguards for human rights in line with international standards. Amnesty International recommended that the right to life should be recognized and the death penalty abolished, that torture should be specifically prohibited, and that the freedoms of thought and association should be fully protected. Amnesty International also repeated its request to visit Laos to discuss its concerns there.
In November the organization expressed concern about the arrest of Thongsouk Saisangkhi, Latsami Khamphoui and Feng Sakchittaphong. and urged that they be immediately and unconditionally released if detained for their non-violent political activities and beliefs.
