GAMBIA
Ten Senegalese nationals who sought asylum in the Gambia were forcibly repatriated: one was subsequently reported to have died as a result of torture in police custody in Senegal. The 10 Senegalese, including Ibou Camara, a former political prisoner, fled to Gambia in June and July from Senegal's Casamance region following clashes there between Senegalese security forces and armed insurgents (see Senegal). Casamance villagers suspected of supporting the insurgents were reportedly tortured and extrajudicially executed by Senegalese soldiers. Many villagers fled to neighbouring Gambia to seek asylum.
The 10 men were arrested on 26 September in several villages by the Gambian security forces. They appeared in court in Kanifing on 8 October charged with entering the country without a residence permit and were remanded in Banjul's Mile 2
prison to face trial. On 12 October, before being brought to trial, they were handed over to immigration officers at Jiboro village by Gambian gendarmes. They were then taken to the border and forcibly returned to Senegal. At least one of them, Sekou Mary, known as Agnocoune, avoided arrest and returned to the Gambia where he was arrested on 23 October by police officers at Brikama. He was handed over directly to the Senegalese security forces without any court proceedings. He died in Diouloulou police station soon after, apparently as a result of beatings.
Amnesty International appealed to the Gambian Government to respect its international obligations by ensuring that asylum-seekers were not involuntarily returned to countries where they would be at risk of torture, imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, or execution. It also urged the authorities not to imprison asylum-seekers or refugees from Casamance for entering the country "illegally" or for having no residence rights in the Gambia. The government acknowleged that nine Senegalese had been forcibly returned to Senegal, saying that there was no reason to believe that any harm would come to them. It did not comment on the death in police custody of S6kou Mary.
