CHILE
Shortly after the civilian government of President Patricio Aylwin took office in March, a commission was set up to investigate human rights violations committed during more than 16 years of military rule. On the basis of an amnesty law passed in 1978, the Supreme Court ruled in August that cases of human rights violations committed before 1978 could be closed before they had been properly investigated. Military courts used the amnesty law to close investigations even as further evidence of the involvement of members of the army and security forces came to light. Most cases not covered by the amnesty law remained unresolved, although limited progress was reported in some investigations. At least three journalists were briefly detained on the orders of the military courts for writing articles discussing the role of the armed forces in past human
CHILE
rights violations. Forty-nine prisoners convicted of politically motivated offences received a presidential pardon but around 230 political prisoners whose trials were marked by serious irregularities remained in prison at the end of the year. Allegations of torture and ill-treatment were reported, although significantly fewer than in previous years. Nine political prisoners remained under recommended death sentences.
One of the most important human rights initiatives taken by President Aylwin was the creation in April of the Comisión Nacional de Verdad y Reconciliación, National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation. The Commission was charged with gathering information to establish the truth behind cases of "disappearance", illegal execution and death resulting from torture carried out by agents of the state, as well as death resulting from politically motivated acts of violence by private individuals, between September 1973 and March 1990. The Commission was also mandated to recommend measures aimed at preventing the recurrence of human rights violations and to advise on reparations to victims. The scope of its responsibilities did not include investigating hundreds of complaints of torture presented to the courts in past years. The Commission had no formal legal powers but transmitted information on cases within its mandate to the courts for judicial investigation. The Commission's report was expected to be presented to President Aylwin in early 1991.
The govemment took other measures to address the legacy of past human rights violations. For example, it proposed reforms which aimed to guarantee the right to a fair trial and eliminate the death penalty.
The scope of the government's human rights initiatives was limited by factors inherited from the previous govemment. The 1980 Constitution, for example, ensured the continuing presence of the former president. General Augusto Pinochet, as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and enabled the Pinochet administration to appoint nine senators to the Congress, reopened in March for the first time since the 1973 military coup. This prevented the elected civilian government from achieving a Senate majority. The Supreme Court, composed of judges appointed during the military govemment, continued to ciurb
investigations into past human rights violations.
A dissident faction of the extreme left-wing group, the Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez (fpmr), Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front, remained active. It claimed responsibility for the attempted assassination in March of General Gustavo Leigh, a former commander of the air force, and for the death in May of a former member of the seciuity forces. The Movimiento Juvenil Lautaro, Lautaro Youth Movement, an armed group with unclear origins, claimed responsibility for numerous bombings and the deaths of several carabineros (uniformed police officers).
In August Chile ratified the American Convention on Human Rights. The govemment also withdrew all but one of the important reservations of the former administration to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. It withdrew reservations to the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture and recognized the competence of the Hiunan Rights Conunittee to examine inter-state complaints under Article 41 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In August the Supreme Court upheld the decision by lower tribunals to use the 1978 Amnesty Law to close a case that originated in 1978 with a criminal complaint against senior members of the Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional (dina). Directorate of National Intelligence, con-ceming their responsibility for the "disappearance" of 70 people between 1974 and 1976 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The intelligence agency, formally disbanded in 1978, was implicated in a significant number of "disappearances" in the 1970s. The court's mling established a legal precedent which undermined hopes that the fate of the victims would be clarified and that those responsible for human rights violations before 1978 would be brought to justice.
Other cases were closed by the military courts on the basis of the 1978 Amnesty Law. They included that of Dr Claudia Tognola Ríos, who "disappeared" following his detention by a military patrol in 1973. His remains, discovered with those of other victims in a disused mine in Tocopilla, northern Chile, were positively identified in November. The remains of
CHILE
other "disappeared" prisoners were identified after being discovered iii secret graves. The victims included Vicente Aten-cio Cortés, a former member of the House of Deputies, and Eduardo Canteros Prado, who both "disappeared" following their arrest by the dina in 1976.
The military courts successfully contested the competence of a civilian court to conduct investigations arising from the discovery of a clandestine grave in Pisagua, northern Chile, leaving little prospect that investigations would continue. Political prisoners were held by the army at a camp set up in Pisagua after the 1973 military coup and some illegal executions were carried out there. At least 18 of the bodies were identified.
Most cases of human rights violations not covered by the 1978 Amnesty Law remained unresolved. However, some progress was reported in a few investigations by civilian court judges, such as an investigation reopened in July into the 1982 murder of trade union leader Tucapel Jiménez. He was killed in circumstances that suggested the involvement of members of the Central Nacional de Informaciones (cNi), the state security police. The cni, which was disbanded in February, had been accused of participating in serious human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions and torture.
In September three journalists were arrested on the orders of military coiu*ts on charges of "offending the armed forces" because they had written articles discussing the role of the armed forces in past human rights abuses. luan Pablo Cárdenas was released unconditionally in October when the Military Court of Appeal revoked the charges against him. The other two, Juan Andrés Lagos and Alfonso Stephens, were released on bail. About 30 journalists continued to face legal proceedings in the military courts at the end of the year, most of them on charges of "offending the armed forces" or "offending the carabineros".
Charges pending since 1986 against Dr Ramiro Olivares and Gustavo Villalobos of the Vicaría de la Solidaridad, Vicariate of Solidarity, a chinch human rights organization, were dropped by the Supreme Court in June (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990).
Forty-seven convicted political prisoners were granted a presidential pardon in March and two others were pardoned later
in the year. The government announced proposals to modify legislation that had seriously undermined the right to a fair trial of prisoners charged with politically motivated offences. The majority faced legal proceedings in military courts on charges of membership of armed opposition groups or of armed offences. The proposed reforms included provisions to prevent statements extracted under torture from being used as evidence, to reduce penalties for politically motivated offences, to transfer cases to civilian courts, and to restrict the jurisdiction of military courts to military offences. Some of the proposals were blocked in the Senate, although provisions were eventually approved to allow President Aylwin to pardon a number of political prisoners still detained. At the end of 1990 the reforms were still under discussion and the situation of about 230 political prisoners, many still awaiting judgment after long delays in their trials, remained unresolved.
At least 17 people, some of them charged with politically motivated offences, alleged that they were tortured or ill-treated while in police custody. Eight or more of these cases reportedly occurred in the Third Police Station of the carabineros in the capital. Santiago. Alvaro Rodríguez Escobar, for example, was arrested in August and held for seven days before his transfer to prison. He was reportedly subjected to electric shocks and other methods of torture.
In lanuary the Military Court of Appeal commuted the death sentences of Juan Diaz Olea and Cristián Vargas Barahona to life imprisonment. They had been sentenced to death by a military judge in 1989 following a trial marked by serious judicial irregularities (see Amnesty International Report 1990). A government bill calling for elimination of the death penalty was rejected by the Senate in December. Death sentences recommended by the prosecution in 1989 continued to stand against nine political prisoners.
In meetings with President Aylwin and senior government officials in October, Amnesty International welcomed the measures adopted by the administration but urged that every effort be made to thoroughly investigate past human rights violations and to bring those responsible to justice. Amnesty International also called for the release of the detained journalists
CHILEyCHlNA
and for a thorough review by civilian courts of the proceedings against remaining political prisoners under conditions that guaranteed a prompt, full and impartial hearing. In addition. Amnesty International expressed concern at the cases of torture reported during the year; the government informed the organization that investigations would be opened into any case brought to its attention. Amnesty International called for the abolition of the death penalty. In December, at the invitation of the National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation, Amnesty International submitted a series of recommendations for preventing the recurrence of human rights violations in Chile.
