MAURITANIA
Thousands of people, all of them black Mauritanians, were detained and held without charge or trial for up to several months. Others, including some who had been arrested in 1989, were still held without charge or trial at the end of 1990. Some of those held were prisoners of con» science and many were reportedly tor-tiu^d. At least 15 black Mauritanians died as a result of torture. Dozens of others "disappeared" following arrest. At least 100 people were extrajudicially executed by government forces and pro»govemment militia.
Expulsions of black Mauritanians from the country continued throughout the year. Over 50,000 Mauritanians had been expelled in mid-1989, following intercom-
munal violence between Mauritanians and Senegalese (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Several thousand people were expelled to Senegal and Mali during 1990 and thousands of others fled the country to escape persecution. Following the 1989 expulsions, the government settled Haratines (descendants of black slaves of the Moors) on land in the south belonging to those who had been expelled, and reportedly armed them. Mauritanians expelled to Senegal and Mali carried out armed raids across the border to recover property and cattle confiscated at the time of their expulsion, and attacked government forces and people who had been settled on their land. Acts of violence against government targets, such as military posts, were also committed by armed opposition groups.
Large-scale human rights violations continued, targeted mainly at black Mauritanians of the Halpulaar ethnic group (known as Fulanis) in the south of the country, along the Senegal river valley. While conducting searches and enforcing curfews, the National Guard and Haratine militia supporting them arrested, tortured and killed Halpulaar villagers apparently with impunity. However, information was difficult to obtain and relatively few incidents could be documented in detail.
In November and December some 3,000 or more black Mauritanians were arrested in the capital, Nouakchott, and in Nouad-hibou. The authorities later alleged that there had been a conspiracy to overthrow the government. Most of those arrested were members of the armed forces and civil servants. They included Abdoulaye Malikel Sy and Ly Moussa, two former prisoners of conscience. At the end of 1990
MAURITANIA
the majority were held without charge or trial in various military barracks.
Arrests occurred throughout the year in the south. At least 350 villagers were said to be held in a military barracks at Azlat in Aleg region in mid-1990. Although a number were released in July, it was unclear what had happened to others. No legal procedures were observed in such cases, and those detained were held incommunicado without any information being revealed about them. Some relatives who made inquiries about detainees were themselves arrested. The secrecy surrounding detentions meant that many people who were openly arrested were subsequently classified as "disappeared" when no news could be obtained about them.
Some of those arrested in mid-1989 were still held without charge or trial at the end of 1990. Most were detained simply because of their race or ethnic origin. Those held included alleged government opponents, all of them black, who were arrested in Nouakchott and elsewhere. Among those released was Ladji Traore, a former prisoner of conscience from the Sonink^ ethnic group, who was detained unlawfully from October 1989 to October 1990. The authorities gave no reasons for his detention, but it was believed to be connected to his opposition to the expulsions of black Mauritanians from the country.
Dozens of people, foreigners as well as black Mauritanians, were arrested and held without charge for several weeks before being expelled firom the country. In one case, a Mauritanian woman was held in Nouakchott's Central Police Station from March until May, and then summarily expelled to Senegal with 50 other people.
Some villagers were detained on suspicion of harbouring returned refugees, after people who had sought refuge in Senegal or Mali came back over the border to recover confiscated property or cattle. Others were held because they opposed the expulsions or protested against the confiscation of their goods. Yoro Lam, a herdsman from Zereyga near Foum Gleita, in M'Bout area, was held in Nouakchott prison fi'om June 1989 to September 1990 because he and his brother had resisted the expropriation of their cattle by police (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Many detainees were reportedly tortured by security forces. Following the
November arrests as many as 15 prisoners were said to have died after torture including Ly Moussa, a former prisoner of conscience. Methods of torture used included burning with hot irons and cigarettes, and the "Jaguar", during which the victim is suspended upside-down from a bar and beaten on the soles of the feet. Gorel Ba, a farmer from Gourel-Mamoudou village, was among about 10 people arrested in April in M'Bom6 who were chained up, beaten and subjected to the "Jaguar" by soldiers. Many Halpulaar women were also reportedly raped while held by the security forces. One woman was said to have been repeatedly raped in February by soldiers at the military post of the Ould Mogheina area, near Rosso, before being thrown into the Senegal river.
Dozens of villagers reportedly "disappeared" following arrest by government forces: many of them were believed to have been extrajudicially executed. Most were detained in the Aleg or Selibaby regions. Sixteen people, including Kanni Sail and 15-year-old Oumar Thiam, were arrested in March at Dioud6-Di6ry near Bogh6, Aleg region, by the National Guard. They were taken to an unknown destination and their fate was unknown at the end of 1990. In the S61ibaby region, whole families "disappeared". Adama N'Diaye, his wife and nine children were arrested in February) at Gourel-Amadou Mamadou, near Ould Yenge, and taken into the bush. They were not seen again.
Reports of extrajudicial executions by the army, the National Guard and Haratine militia rose dramatically in the first half of the year. There were killings reported in most towns and villages along the Mauritanian bank of the Senegal river. Virtually all the victims appeared to be unarmed Halpulaar villagers. The killings had begun in May 1989 with the operation to expel black Mauritanians (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The victims were often singled out following routine patrols of villages. On 10 April, for example, a patrol of soldiers and armed Haratines entered Moudji village near S61ibaby. After searching houses, they arrested seven men including Silly Youme Ba and Mamadou Demba Sail. The seven were taken a few kilometres out of the village and extrajudicially executed: three were shot and four had their heads crushed with stones. All were found with their hands tied behind
MAURITANIA/MAURITIUS
their backs, indicating that they were being held as prisoners when they were killed.
Several people were also killed when members of the National Guard reportedly fired at villagers deliberately and for no apparent reason. For example, Thierno Saibatou Bâ, a religious leader, was killed on 12 April in Ngoral-Guidal near Boghé. Eye-witnesses said that soldiers shot him just after he had finished bathing in the river in preparation for afternoon prayers. In another case, at least four people suspected of returning illicitly to Mauritania after being expelled were said to have been beheaded by members of the National Guard in July and August in the Maghama area.
Fourteen political prisoners were released in September, their sentences having been reduced by one year as a result of a measure ordered by President Maaouya ould Sid'Ahmed Taya in December 1989 which affected all sentenced prisoners. Thirteen of the 14 were serving five-year prison terms imposed after unfair trials in 1986 and 1987. They had been convicted in connection with the distribution of an opposition group manifesto, the Manifeste du négro-mauritanien opprimé, Oppressed Black Mauritanian's Manifesto. The 14th had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment in September 1988 when eight members of the pro-Iraqi Ba'th Socialist Party were convicted of state security offences. However, at the end of 1990, 32 members of the armed forces and one civilian remained in prison in Aïoun El Atrouss. They had been convicted in October 1987 of plotting to overthrow the government, after trials which failed to satisfy international fair trial standards.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed concern to the Mauritanian Government about persistent reports of grave human rights violations. In a statement to Amnesty International in June, the Minister of Justice intimated that the security forces' actions constituted a legitimate response to the acts of violence committed by armed opposition groups.
In October Amnesty International published Mauritania: Human Rights Violations in the Senegal River Valley. The report expressed concern that the rule of law had been virtually abandoned in the river valley area and called on the authorities both to disarm the irregular Haratine militia and to instruct members of the
security forces and militia to respect human rights. The government did not respond to these appeals. However, it dismissed the organization's concerns and accused Amnesty International of favouring Senegal in the conflict between the two countries and of ignoring the persecution of Mauritanians in Senegal. After the November arrests Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to end the use of torture and to release those held solely because of their ethnic origin. The government acknowledged that numerous arrests had occurred but denied that anyone had been tortured. In an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Mauritania.
