NEPAL
Thousands of government opponents were detained during the first part of the year. Most were prisoners of conscience held without trial in harsh conditions. Torture and ill'treatment were widespread until mid'April. Scores of people, killed when security forces opened fire on unarmed demonstrators, may have been extrajudicially executed. The death penalty was abolished for ordinary offences.
In February the centrist Nepali Congress party and the communist United Left Front launched a largely peaceful campaign for multi-party democracy, in defiance of a 30-year ban on political party activity under the country's non-party panchayat (assembly) system. The campaign of strikes and demonstrations rapidly gained nationwide support. The authorities attempted unsuccessfully to suppress the protests by force:
NEPAL
there were thousands of arrests and numerous reports of torture and police attacks on demonstrators. In mid-April, after scores of unarmed demonstrators were shot dead by police in the capital, Kathmandu, King Birendra dismissed the government, lifted the ban on political parties and announced the release of political detainees. A multiparty interim government was then appointed to oversee constitutional reform and preparations for multi-party elections.
Most pohtical detainees, including some who had been imprisoned for several years, were released by the end of April and all charges against them were dropped.
A new constitution was introduced in November, which provides increased human rights protection. It prohibits torture, which was not previously a specific offence, and forbids provision for the death penalty under future legislation. The application of the death penalty under existing legislation was restricted.
Over 8,000 democracy campaigners and sympathizers were arrested throughout Nepal between January and mid-April, including hundreds of students and agricultural workers, at least 50 lawyers, over 40 journalists, and several teachers, doctors, nurses and paramedics. Members of Amnesty International were among those held, as were leaders of banned political parties. Those detained were kept in police custody or jails for up to four months. Most were held under the Public Security Act which permits detention without charge or trial for up to 18 months, but others, including three members of the national panchayat, were charged under the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act for criticizing the non-party system, or were charged with criminal offences. The police
failed to keep records of all detainees, and ignored the legal requirements to bring detainees before a court within 24 hours of arrest. Scores of people were held incommunicado in unacknowledged detention for up to several weeks.
Most of those charged were released before being brought to trial, but some were given summary trials. In Hetauda, Man Nath Timilsina was brought to trial in early April after spending 44 days in police custody. during which he was allegedly tortured. He was unaware of the charges against him until he was met at the court by a state-appointed lawyer who reportedly told him that he was being charged under the State Offences Act and that any witnesses he named would be tortured. He was sentenced but then released in mid-April after the case was withdrawn,
Thirty Christians, arrested in previous years and sentenced to up to six years' imprisonment for religious conversion or proselytization - both of which remained illegal - were released in June, after King Birendra granted an amnesty to all such detainees.
Scores of detained pro-democracy activists were tortured during interrogation by police, in some cases apparently on the orders of senior police officers who personally threatened detainees and their relatives with death. Methods of torture reportedly included electric shocks, insertion of pins under the finger-nails, being made to stand in cesspits, sleep deprivation and, most commonly, severe beating with lathis (bamboo canes) - including on the soles of the feet - while bound and in some cases hung upside-down. Scores of people suffered broken bones as a result of such beatings. Torture victims included several Nepali Red Cross workers, who were detained after giving medical assistance to people injured when police fired on demonstrators, and several injured demonstrators arrested from their hospital beds.
Widespread torture and ill-treatment ceased after mid-April, but isolated reports of torture in police custody continued to be received throughout the year.
Conditions in police stations and jails were harsh. During the period of mass arrests, detainees were held in severely overcrowded conditions: hundreds were kept in ad hoc detention centres such as grain warehouses which were damp and
NEPAL/NICARAGUA
lacked sanitation. In February over 150 people arrested in Chitwan were held by police for 48 hours without food or access to toilet facilities in a windowless, unventi-lated room measuring about 60 square metres. Many detainees, including torture victims, were denied proper medical treatment by police and needed hospital treatment after release.
Between 18 February and 9 April security forces fired on unarmed, largely peaceful demonstrators in several areas of Nepal, injuring scores and killing at least 50 people - some reports put the number of dead in the hundreds. Many victims suffered head and chest wounds, indicating that legal requirements to aim below the knee had not been met. Some of the dead may have been victims of extrajudicial executions.
In July the death penalty was abolished for murder and subversive activities. The reintroduction of the death penalty for these or any other offences was prohibited under the new constitution. Legislation providing the death penalty for espionage and for attacking the royal family was not repealed, but under the new constitution existing law must be reviewed within one year to ensure its compliance with constitutional provisions, including prohibition of the death penalty.
During the period of mass arrests, Amnesty International urged the panch-ayat government to release prisoners of conscience, charge or release other political detainees, and investigate allegations of torture and extrajudicial killings. The government replied that reports of arrests and deaths were exaggerated and denied that torture had occurred.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Nepal in April to investigate reports of mass arrests, torture and extrajudicial executions. It met members of the interim government, including several former political detainees, who stated their commitment to human rights protection. The interim government established investigations into the "loss of life" during the pro-democracy campaign, and into six "disappearances" which took place in the mid-1980s (see Amnesty International Report 1988). It also stated its intention to ratify international human rights treaties, although it had not done so by the end of the year.
Following the visit, Amnesty Interna-
tional submitted and published a memorandum to the government, containing recommendations for the prevention of further human rights violations in Nepal.
