VIET NAM
At least 60 known and possible prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout 1990 and at least nine others were arrested during the year. The government confirmed that 128 prisoners detained in earlier years were still being held at a "reeducation" camp. Six people were reportedly sentenced to death and there may also have been unreported death sentences. No executions were known to have been carried out.
The official policy of doi moi, "renovation", under which reforms to protect human rights and to allow political debate were carried out between 1986 and 1989, suffered setbacks in 1990. In April the government confirmed that it was suppressing dissent and warned that force would be used to quash any attempt "to destabilize the socialist system". In June the official Vietnamese media announced the arrest of "many people accused of violating national security". Among those detained were known and suspected critics of the government.
At least 60 people who continued to be imprisoned throughout 1990 were believed to be prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience. At least four other prisoners of conscience and five possible
prisoners of conscience were detained during the year, including two Roman Catholic priests, Chan Tin and Nguyen Ngoc Lan; Doan Than Liem, a lawyer; and Nguyen Dan Que, a doctor. The official Vietnamese media reported that the two priests had been arrested for offences including "carrying out activities aimed at opposing socialism". Chan Tin was also accused of giving anti-government sermons with the aim of "inciting Catholics to demand human and civil rights". Doan Than Liem was reportedly arrested on charges including involvement in the drafting of an unauthorized constitution. Dr Nguyen Dan Que, who had been imprisoned for political reasons from 1978 to 1988, was arrested in June after peacefully criticizing the government. In January he had become the first member of Amnesty International in Viet Nam. It remained unclear whether any of the nine detainees had been charged or tried.
Among the prisoners of conscience who continued to be held throughout the year were three Buddhist monks - Thich Tri Sieu, Thich Due Nhuan and Thich Tue Sy - and a writer, Doan Quoc Sy. Dominic Tran Dinh Thu, a Roman Catholic priest who had been tried and sentenced with other defendants in 1987, was offered his release in January on the condition that he returned to live with his family. He refiised, declaring that he would agree to be released only if his innocence was officially acknowledged, and on condition that he was allowed to return to his seminary and that all those tried with him were also released.
At least three prisoners of conscience were released. Ho Hieu Ha and Nguyen Huu Cong, two Protestant pastors convicted in 1987 of "preaching against the revolution", were freed in January (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 and 1990). Hoang Hai Thuy, a writer held since 1984, was released in February. Phan Van Lam Binh, a writer released from prison in 1989, reportedly continued to be subject to restrictions on his movement.
The government confirmed to Amnesty International in March that as of May 1989, 128 former soldiers and officials of the previous Republic of Viet Nam (rvn) government remained in a single "re-education" camp, referred to as k 1230d, at Ham Tan, Thuan Hai province. It provided no information to suggest that any of them had been fi?eed since May 1989. Those detained
VIET NAM
included Tran Ngoc Diem, a former lieutenant-colonel in the rvn army who had been chief of security in Gia Dinh province. However, the situation of some former rvn military officers and civil servants who had been held in camps remained unclear. Among them were Truong Kim Gang, Nguyen Van Hao, Tran Ban Loc and Nguyen Khac Nghi.
The situation of a number of other prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, who were reported to have been detained without trial in previous years, remained unknown. They included Buddhist, Protestant and Roman Catholic clergy, former members of parliament, lawyers, teachers and students arrested for their political or religious beliefs and activities. Some of them were arrested after the collapse of the rvn Government in 1975. Among them were Nguyen Khac Chinh, a lawyer, and Truong Tuy Ba, a 72-year-old businesswoman.
In September the government declared an amnesty for around 700 prisoners on the occasion of the country's National Day, but the names of the released prisoners were not made public and it was not clear whether they included political prisoners.
Attempting to leave the country without official permission remained a crime under Articles 85, 88 and 89 of the Criminal Code. Anyone arrested for attempted "illegal departure" may be detained without trial or charged under the Criminal Code. There was no information about arrests of people attempting to leave the country illegally during the year. In March the Vietnamese media reported on the trial of 20 people, including five police officers, accused of organizing the illegal departure of some 1,000 people on payment of gold between September 1984 and March 1989. On 11 March the Ben Tre Provincial People's Court sentenced Phan Van Thanh, the leader of the group, to 20 years' imprisonment and his accomplices to jail terms ranging from three to 18 years. Lam Thi Tuyet and her five children, who had been detained without trial since February 1989 for attempting to leave the country by boat, were reportedly released in April 1990,
Political trials apparently continued with restricted rights to defence, contrary to the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code introduced in 1989. Little information about such trials was available, although some details were received about a
trial on 15 and 16 August in Ho Chi Minh City in which a Roman Catholic priest, Nguyen Van De, and 10 other Catholic priests and lay persons were convicted of spreading "counter-revolutionary propaganda through religious activities". Nguyen Van De was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and the other defendants to jail terms ranging from three to eight years.
Owing to restrictive legislation on the media adopted in December 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990], press reports of torture and ill-treatment were apparently discontinued. However, there were no firm indications that torture and ill-treatment had ceased to be used by police officers or as a form of discipline in "re-education" camps (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Death sentences were rarely reported. In June the official army newspaper, Quan Doi Nhan Dan, reported that in the previous six months, during which an official crime suppression drive had been in progress, six people had been sentenced to death. No other details were published and there were no reports of executions.
In February Amnesty International published a report, Viet Nam: "Renovation" (doi moi), the Law and Human Rights in the 1980s, which was partly based on the visit in May 1989 of an Amnesty International delegation to Viet Nam. While welcoming official moves to protect human rights, the report provided details of the organization's concerns in Viet Nam, including the continued detention without charge or trial of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience; the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience on ill-defined charges of endangering national security; trials of political prisoners that fell far short of international standards; reports of torture and ill-treatment; and the use of the death penalty. The report was sent to the Vietnamese authorities with a request for their comments.
In March the Vietnamese Government replied that it had taken a series of measures "aimed at better guaranteeing the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms", and said that most of those sent for "re-education" had been released. The government also said that national security regulations did not hinder or restrict civil rights and that public trials and the right to legal defence were guaranteed by the Constitution and the Criminal
VIET NAM/YEMEN
Code. It denied that there were any prisoners of conscience in Viet Nam, saying that some intellectuals had been imprisoned for violating the Criminal Code but not for their ideology or beliefs. The authorities said that people responsible for torturing or ill-treating prisoners would be brought to trial and that the death penalty was applied only in cases of serious crime as Viet Nam supports the long-term objective of abolishing the death penalty.
In a memorandum sent to the Vietnamese authorities in June, Amnesty International welcomed the government's comments but urged it to address urgently two aspects of Vietnamese law relating to human rights - legislation which appears to contravene international human rights standards, and discrepancies between the principles embodied in the legislation and their interpretation in practice. The organization appealed to the government to demonstrate that the human rights of its citizens were protected in practice, and to release those imprisoned for the peaceful expression of their beliefs or for their legitimate political or religious activities. The memorandum also referred to the detention in April and May of nine known or suspected government critics. In July Vietnamese officials said that two of the nine had not been detained. This statement could not be independently verified. The officials did not clarify the situation of the other seven detainees.
In August in an oral statement to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International included a reference to prisoners of conscience being detained in Viet Nam on grounds of allegedly endangering national security.
