THAILAND
Three prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout 1990. There were new political arrests in connection with anti-govemment protest rallies. It was possible that some of those held might be prisoners of conscience. The police were accused of beating demonstrators and criminal suspects in custody. At least 13 death sentences were imposed or confirmed by the courts, but there were no reports of execu-tions. Government soldiers were accused of extrajudicially executing 12 Cambodian asylum-seekers. About 2,000 asylum-seekers and others from Myanmar (Biu'ma) were forcibly repatriated.
Three prisoners of conscience continued to serve sentences imposed in November 1988, when they were convicted of "lese majesty" (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
THAILAND
In March about 20 people were arrested for organizing a series of non-violent rallies in the capital, Bangkok, on behalf of the National Democratic Movement, which reportedly called on the government to "hand over administrative power to the people". They were charged with breaching the peace and refusing to disperse, but were released on bail. About a dozen of them were reportedly rearrested in October after a rally by a group called the People's Council. About 10 leading members of a group called the Revolutionary Council were also rearrested in October. They had previously been detained in May and lune 1989, reportedly after distributing leaflets which falsely proclaimed the abolition of parliament and assumption of power by an interim government. They had been released on bail while awaiting trial on charges of inciting unrest. Before their rearrest, the authorities alleged they were behind the protest activities of the National Democratic Movement and the People's Council. All those rearrested in October remained on trial at the end of 1990.
Police arrested two Muslim activists. Abdul Rahman Yuso and Hayi Mae Bue-heng, in July and August respectively. They were among about 20 Muslim activists sought by police following a gathering in June of over 10,000 people at a mosque in the southern province of Pattani. During the gathering some demonstrators allegedly called for separation of Muslim-populated provinces from Thailand, threatened or attacked local authorities and insulted King Bhumibol Adulyadej. Abdul Rahman Yuso and Hayi Mae Bueheng apparently acknowledged that they had been present at the gathering, but denied involvement in any violent or other illegal act. Both
prisoners were on trial at the end of 1990.
Amnesty International continued to investigate whether any of those detained in connection with the activities of the Revolutionary Council, the National Democratic Movement, the People's Council and Muslim protest rallies were prisoners of conscience.
Some of the 22 political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years for "communistic activities" and Muslim separatism remained in prison, but the precise number was not known. There was no further information about six alleged Muslim separatists and one alleged communist insurgent arrested in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Police officers reportedly beat people in custody. In April the police allegedly detained and severely beat several protesters during a rally by some 2,000 farmers and others in Mahasarakham province. The rally was in protest against pollution of land by rock-salt mining. Those injured included a farmer, who was beaten and kicked when he surrendered to the police, and a woman student. Also in April police officers in the southern province of Nakhorn Srithammaraat were said to have beaten a criminal suspect in an attempt to make him "confess". The suspect later collapsed from his injuries in court. In August police officers in Bangkok were accused of beating a 15-year-old criminal suspect diuing interrogation.
At least 13 people were either sentenced to death or had their death sentences upheld by the Appeals Court or the Supreme Court. All of them had been convicted of murder or drug-trafficking. No executions were reported.
Twelve Cambodian asylum-seekers were reportedly extrajudicially executed in June by Thai soldiers who detained them outside Site 2 refugee camp, apparently because they suspected them of involvement in an attack on a Thai village.
More than 2,000 asylum-seekers and others from Myanmar were reportedly repatriated against their will on separate occasions during the year, despite fears that they could be at risk of imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, or of torture or execution by the military authorities in Myanmar.
In June Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Chaatchai Chunhawan to express concern about the forcible
THAILAND/TOGO
repatriation of asylum-seekers to Myanmar and to seek information about the procedures by which they could apply for continued asylum in Thailand. Amnesty International also wrote to the government about the reported extrajudicial executions of Cambodian asylum-seekers and sought details about an army inquiry into the incident. The organization pressed for the release of prisoners of conscience and appealed to King Bhumibol Adulyadej to commute all death sentences finalized by the Supreme Court. No response was received.
