SUDAN
Hundreds of real and suspected government opponents were prisoners of conscience. Some were detained in 1989 and held without charge or trial throughout 1990. Over 150 others were arrested during the year. At least 90 prisoners of conscience were released. Some government opponents were sentenced to prison terms and 30 army officers were executed after grossly unfair trials. Govemment troops reportedly committed dozens of extrajudicial executions. At least three people convicted of criminal offences were executed. However, a prisoner of conscience sentenced to death in 1989 was pardoned and released.
The nationwide state of emergency declared by the National Salvation Revolution Command Council (nsrcc) following the June 1989 military coup (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990) remained in force throughout the year. Fighting continued in the south between govemment forces and the armed opposition Sudan People's Liberation Army (spla), which controlled large areas in the south. The spla continued to hold several senior members of its own organization who were suspected of opposing the spla leadership. At least 1,500 members of the Sudanese army were reported to be detained by the spla. In March the Spla agreed to join a coalition of opposition groups, the National Democratic Forum (ndf), and endorsed the ndf's charter which calls for popular opposition to the military government and a return to democratic mle in Sudan.
On 31 December the Head of State, Lieutenant-General Omar Hassan al-Bashir,
announced thai Shari'a (Islamic law) would be immediately implemented in northern Sudan. However, it was not clear whether this meant that the "September Laws", enacted in 1983 and partially suspended in 1985, would be reintroduced. Based on an interpretation of Islamic jurisprudence, these laws had provided for the judicial amputation of limbs, flogging as a penalty for numerous offences, and stoning and crucifixion as methods of execution.
The state of emergency continued to give the government extensive powers of administrative detention. Detainees were held without charge or trial on an indefinite basis. No reasons for their imprisonment were given. The detentions could not be challenged by the courts and were not reviewed by any form of independent tribunal. However, some detainees were freed, apparently after their cases were reviewed by nsrcc officials.
At least 250 suspected opponents of the nsrcc were prisoners of conscience at the start of the year. Of these, 90 were released by the end of March: government officials thereafter said that there were no political prisoners being held although further releases took place in August and October. However, more than 150 other non-violent critics or opponents of the government were arrested during the year and at least 300 prisoners of conscience were being held at the end of 1990.
Those released included most of the 80 political leaders and former government officials arrested after the June 1989 coup (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Several members of the Umma Party, however, were rearrested in October. Former prime minister Sadiq al-Mahdi was released from prison in January but placed under house arrest: during April he was confined to one room and denied all visits and medical treatment. Thereafter, he continued to be denied visits but was permitted to see his doctor.
One of the prisoners of conscience who remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1990 was Dr Ushari Ahmed Mahmoud, a university lecturer and prominent human rights activist who was arrested in 1989. In March he was moved to Shalla prison in Darfur where conditions were harsh, after he apparently refused to withdraw an allegation that an armed pro-government militia had been
SUDAN
responsible for a massacre of civilians in al-Daien in 1987. At least 12 lawyers, including Mustafa Abdelgadir, and dozens of trade union activists were also held without charge or trial throughout the year.
New arrests of trade union activists occurred in May after a rail strike. Most were released within a short time, but at least five railway workers' leaders were believed to be in detention at the end of the yecU. More than 65 other men and women were also arrested in May, mostly in Khartoum, and remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1990. Among them were two prominent members of the Umma Party, members of the Socialist Arab Ba'th Party and academics known to support the ndf.
Many arrests were reported in areas affected by the conflict with the Spla, notably in the south. In February about 200 suspected spla supporters were arrested and detained at an army barracks in Juba. Some were later released but an unknown number of others were apparently still held at the end of 1990. Dozens of other people of southern origin were arrested in Khartoum in February, March, September and December, including many who were still being held incommunicado and without charge or trial at Kober prison at the end of 1990.
A minority of those arrested were charged and brought to court, but they received unfair trials. In May, 24 army officers stood trial before military courts on charges of conspiring to overthrow the government: 23 were convicted and one was acquitted. Two of the convicted prisoners were sentenced to death but the Head of State immediately commuted their sentences to life imprisonment. Twenty others received prison sentences ranging from two years to life imprisonment, and one was set free. The trial was held in camera and the defendants were denied legal representation and the right to appeal to a higher court.
On 23 April the government announced that it had foiled a coup attempt and that army officers had been arrested. On the following day, 28 army officers were executed following a summary court-martial. Most had been arrested on 23 April, but two were already in custody before the alleged coup attempt. The trial lasted only two hours and the officers were denied legal representation and the right to appeal to a
SUDAN
higher court. Fourteen other officers were tried by military courts in connection with the same alleged coup attempt: four were sent to prison for periods ranging from three to 15 years: four were dismissed from the armed services; and six were acquitted. Two other officers were executed in July after they were convicted of involvement in the April coup attempt.
Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees, particularly those held incommunicado by the security services in secret detention centres in Khartoum, continued to be reported. The purpose appeared to be to obtain information or confessions and to punish suspected opponents of the military government. Commonly reported methods of torture included beatings with rifle butts and truncheons, flooding of cells with cold water, mock executions and sleep deprivation. Victims were also burned with cigarettes, suspended from trees, and forced to crouch during interrogation with stones gripped between their legs while being whipped.
Dr Ali Fadul, a prisoner of conscience, died in April, apparently as a result of torture at a secret detention centre. He had been an active member of the Sudan Doctors' Union, which was banned after the 1989 coup. The authorities said that he had died of malaria but refused to show his body to his family and denied their request for an independent autopsy. Unofficial sources said that he had died of an internal haemorrhage and a skull fracture caused by torture.
Conditions in Shalla prison in Darfur Province were reportedly harsh and political prisoners were transferred there as a punishment. Inmates were said to be held in overcrowded cells, given insufficient water and, in many cases, to have become ill owing to inadequate sanitation. Urgent medical treatment was reportedly denied or unavailable although two seriously ill prisoners were moved to Omdurman military hospital in April. Prisoners at Shalla were denied family visits, as were some political prisoners held elsewhere in the country.
There was an increase in public floggings. Street vendors operating without a licence, most of them women, were summarily tried in market places by Public Order Courts. Convicted vendors were flogged on the spot.
Extrajudicial executions of civilians by
government troops continued in southern Sudan. Between February and May, 13,000 government soldiers travelled from Malakal to Juba. reportedly burning and looting several villages and killing dozens of unarmed villagers. Among the dead were four elderly men who were burned inside their cattle shed by soldiers in Dior, near Ayod. In late May four men, including two Roman Catholic religious teachers, were arrested by government troops in Meridi in southern Sudan on suspicion of being spla supporters. They were tortured and set on fire by soldiers. One of them, Louis Laku, died in hospital on 16 September as a result of his injuries. Pro-government militias, known as the Popular Defence Forces, also extrajudicially executed unarmed civilians in Bahr al-Chazal province and other areas in the south.
At least 33 people were executed, including the 28 army officers executed on 24 April and the two others executed in luly. In addition, Gergis al-Ghous, who was sentenced to death in December 1989 for attempting to smuggle foreign currency out of the country (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1990), was hanged in February. Two further executions were reported in August. The victims, who had been convicted of theft and murder, were hanged in al-Fasher before a large crowd: their bodies were then taken down and crucified. At least two other people were sentenced to death for drug-trafficking but had not been executed by the end of the year. An army colonel convicted of embezzlement was sentenced to death in early December.
People sentenced to death since the June 1989 coup were not allowed to appeal against conviction to a higher court and were not allowed proper legal representation at their trials. Dr Maamum Mohamed Hussein, a prisoner of conscience who had been sentenced to death in December 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990), was pardoned by the Head of State and released in May along with another prisoner of conscience who had been sentenced to life imprisonment. More than 100 people convicted of murder in previous years were believed to remain under sentence of death.
Amnesty International repeatedly urged the Sudanese Government to release all prisoners of conscience and allow all those detained since the 1989 coup to challenge their imprisonment in court. It protested
SUDAN/SURINAME
about the use of torture and the increasing number of people sentenced to death. The organization also called for the commutation of the death sentence imposed on Dr Maamun Mohamed Hussein and of all other death sentences. It frequently urged the government to investigate reports of extrajudicial executions and to stop prisoners being killed by troops or militia. In August Amnesty International published a report, Sudan: The Mihtary Government's First Year in Power - A Permanent Human Rights Crisis, which detailed the wide range of human rights violations recorded since the June 1989 coup. In October Amnesty International's Secretary General met the Head of State to explain the organization's concerns.
In oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights and the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Sudan. Amnesty International also submitted a communication under the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights concerning "a series of serious or massive violations" of human rights guaranteed by the Charter.
