BANGLADESH
Hundreds of anti-govemment protesters were arrested, including prisoners of conscience who were detained without charge or trial. Torture of prisoners by police continued, sometimes leading to the death of the suspect. Scores of demonstrators were shot dead by police or paramilitary forces, including some in circumstances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed.
At least 19 people were sentenced to death. It was not known if there were any executions.
President Hossain Mohammad Ershad resigned on 6 December following eight weeks of demonstrations and strikes called by opposition parties. He handed over power to a caretaker vice-president nominated by the opposition parties, Chief Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed, who was appointed to head an interim administration lasting up to three months, during which parliamentary elections would be held.
In October, after police shot students dead during a demonstration in Dhaka, the Sarbodaliya Chhatra Oikya, All Party Students Unity, was formed to coordinate further protest action. The three main opposition alliances - the eight-party alliance led by the Awami League (al), the seven-party alliance led by the Bangladesh National Party (bnp) and the leftist five-party alliance - participated jointly in the anti-govemment protest movement. The ¡amaat-e-Islami, Party of Islam, and the trade union federation, Sramik Karmichari Oikya Parishad (skop), also called strikes and demonstrations.
A state of emergency declared on 27 November was lifted on 6 December. Under the state of emergency constitutional guarantees safeguarding human rights were suspended, including the right to challenge arbitrary or illegal detention in court.
In late October communal attacks against the Hindu minority resulted in at least two deaths and numerous rapes. The government imposed a curfew, but there were complaints that the police failed to intervene to protect victims from attacks, which continued in some areas during curfew hours.
Hundreds of opposition party workers, including probable prisoners of conscience, were detained in connection with the anti-govemment demonstrations. Sheikh Hasina Wajed, the President of the al. was placed under house arrest from 27 November to 4 December. Several others were also detained in November before the emergency was imposed, including the presidents of the Ramna and Dhaka City branches of the Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (jsd). National Socialist Party; a leader of the bnp youth wing, Mirza Abbas; and a leader of the al's youth wing,
BANGLADESH
Mostafa Mohiuddin Monto. Further arrests occurred during the state of emergency. Those detained included Abdul Quyyum Mukul, Secretary of the Dhaka City Committee of the Communist Party of Bangladesh, and Mohammad Rahmatullah of the al. In Sylhet about 20 people, including five students, were reportedly detained. All these detainees were released after the change of government.
The Special Powers Act (spa) empowers the government and local authorities to detain without charge or trial anyone alleged to have committed a "prejudicial act" likely or intended "to endanger public safety or the maintenance of public order". Detention orders extending beyond 30 days must be approved by the government and can be renewed indefinitely.
Some government opponents who were detained under the spa were also charged with criminal offences apparently for political reasons. Pankganj Bhattacharya, General Secretary of the Bangladesh National Awami Party, was detained under the spa in October and also charged in connection with attacks on private offices in Dhaka during a transport blockade organized by opposition parties. He was released soon afterwards, shortly before a habeas corpus action challenging the legality of his detention could be heard in court.
Hundreds of prisoners remained in detention under the spa, including an unknown number of possible prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners. In December the interim government issued warrants for the arrests under the spa of former president Hossain Mohammad Ershad and 16 ministers and officials who had served in his government, apparently in connection with investigations into corruption. Hossain Mohammad Ershad was arrested in December, as were former vice-president Moudud Ahmed, former deputy prime minister Shah Moazzem Hossain, former interior minister Mahmudul Hasan and former industries secretary Mosharaf Hossain and his wife, Zeenat. All remained in detention without charge at the end of the year.
New cases of torture of criminal and political suspects by the police were reported: seven suspects were said to have died as a result. Wazed Ali, a rickshaw-puller, died in custody in February at Kot-wali police station. Jessore, reportedly after a severe beating. His death was followed by
clashes between protesters and police during which at least four people died. The police said that Wazed Ali had committed suicide, but they apparently disposed of his body themselves.
In May Hasanul Karim, known as "Manik", a student leader, died a few hours after his arrest in Chittagong. A postmortem attributed his death to shock and brain haemorrhage, and found that the injuries that caused his death had been inflicted with blunt weapons. The police said that he had been attacked by members of the public at the time of his arrest but in a photograph taken shortly afterwards there was no sign of the injuries later found on his body.
Manirul Murshed, an asylum-seeker who had been active in the student wing of the al, was tortured after Swedish authorities returned him to Bangladesh in October. He was detained by airport police on his arrival. During the 13 hours of his detention he was beaten with a truncheon, including on the soles of his feet and his genitals, whipped with electric cable and kicked.
During anti-government demonstrations from October to December scores of demonstrators were reportedly shot dead by police and the paramilitary Bangladesh Rifles, sometimes in circumstances which suggested they were victims of extrajudicial executions. For example, on 10 October police reportedly shot three people dead near Gulistan, Dhaka. Witnesses said police officers dragged one person away who had been shot in the chest but was still alive. Officers then struck him on the head with a rifle butt, causing his death, and took his body away in a van.
At least 19 people were known to have been sentenced to death; 17 for murder and two for drug-smuggling. However, the true figure was believed to be considerably higher. It was not known if there were any executions. The government informed Amnesty International that there had been one execution in 1987 and two in 1988.
Amnesty International raised with the government four cases of death in custody which occurred in 1988 and 1989 and requested information on the inquiry the government said it had initiated into reprisal killings in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in June 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). The government responded in each case, but did not provide
BANGLADESH/BENIN
evidence that full and impartial investigations had been held.
In November Amnesty International urged the government to hold full and impartial investigations into the deaths of anti-govemment demonstrators and to ensure that law enforcement officers were instructed to use lethal force only when strictly necessary. The organization urged the government to release all prisoners detained for the non-violent expression of their political views, and to charge any prisoner against whom there was evidence of involvement in a recognizably criminal offence. Amnesty International also urged the government to abolish the death penalty. After the change of government in December, the organization urged the interim authorities to ratify international human rights instruments and to introduce strict limits on powers of administrative detention.
