UNITED KINGDOM
The cases of six prisoners sentenced in 1975 for bombings in Birmingham were referred to the Court of Appeal. A judicial inquiry into the wrongful convictions of the "Guildford Four" and related cases issued an interim report and three police officers involved in the "Guildford Four" cases were charged with conspiracy. The senior police officer who directed the investigation into a riot at Broadwater Farm in 1985 was found guilty by a disciplinary board of denying a 13-year-old suspect access to a lawyer, and new evidence cast doubt on the convictions of three people for the murder of a police officer during the riot. Six men of Kuwaiti and Bahraini origin were detained, possibly for their non-violent political activities. Suspects alleged ill-treatment while in police custody in Northern Ireland. The circumstances of several killings by security forces in Northern Ireland were disputed and coroners' inquests were delayed. A police inquiry into alleged collusion between security force personnel and Loyalist armed groups in Northern Ireland concluded that leaks of security information could not be eliminated.
There was an upsurge in violence in Northern Ireland by both Republican and Loyalist armed groups. Republican armed groups, notably the Irish Republican Army (ira), are predominantly Catholic and seek a British withdrawal from Northern Ireland and a united Ireland. Loyalist armed groups, notably the Ulster Volunteer Force (uvf) and the Ulster Freedom Fighters (uff), from the Protestant community, want Northern Ireland to remain a part of the United Kingdom. It was reported that in Northern Ireland during 1990, 44 people were killed by the ira, two by the Irish People's Liberation Organization, 19 by Loyalists, and 10 by British soldiers.
The government continued to derogate from those articles of the European Convention on Human Rights (echr) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) which state that anyone arrested has the right to be brought before a judge promptly. The European Court of Human Rights had ruled that this right was violated by the Prevention of Terrorism Act (pta) which allows suspects to be detained for up to seven days without judicial scrutiny.
The cases of the prisoners known as the "Birmingham Six", who have been imprisoned since 1974 for ira bombings, were referred in August to the Court of Appeal. The government's decision was based on an interim report of a police investigation which suggested that police evidence at the trial concerning one prisoner's confession may have been fabricated.
Another police investigation examined allegations of grave misconduct by the West Midlands Serious Crimes Squad, which had been involved in interrogating the "Birmingham Six" and was disbanded in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). It had not been completed by the end of the year but an interim report disclosed that many vital documents had disappeared from police offices.
A judicial inquiry into the wrongful convictions of the "Guildford Four" and related cases was not completed. The "Guildford Four" had been convicted of murder in 1975 for bomb attacks; their convictions were quashed and they were released in 1989 as a result of evidence of police malpractice (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). The judicial inquiry issued an interim report in July, dealing with the cases of seven members and
UNiTED KINGDOM
friends of the Maguire family arrested in connection with the "Guildford Four" cases. The seven had been convicted in 1976 of possessing and handling explosives on the basis of forensic evidence, and served prison sentences of between five and 14 years. The report concluded that the convictions were unsound and criticized the judges, the prosecution and scientists for mishandling crucial forensic evidence. The Home Secretary immediately referred these cases to the Court of Appeal. The inquiry planned to look at wider issues relating to scientific evidence, as well as at the wrongful convictions of the "Guildford Four" once criminal proceedings against police officers had ended. Three Surrey police officers involved in the interrogation of the "Guildford Four" were charged in November with conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.
The police officer who led the inquiry into disturbances at the Broadwater Farm housing estate in London in 1985 faced a closed disciplinary hearing in June (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1988, 1989 and 1990]. He was found guilty of denying 13-year-old Jason Hill access to a lawyer. Jason Hill, who was acquitted of murder, had been denied access to parents and lawyers during three days' detention and had made a confession while dressed only in underpants. In November disciplinary charges were brought against a police officer who had interrogated Jason Hill. New evidence, including psychological tests on two of the prisoners, cast further doubt on the convictions of three people for the murder of a policeman at Broadwater Farm. The case of Engin Raghip, one of the three, was referred to the Court of Appeal in December.
Six men of Kuwaiti and Bahraini origin, arrested in May under the pta, alleged that they were detained because of their nonviolent political activities. Four of them were released without charge; however, two were deported on national security grounds.
Suspects arrested under anti-terrorist legislation in Northern Ireland alleged that they had been ill-treated in police custody. Martin McSheffrey alleged that he had been ill-treated during interrogation at Castlereagh Police Centre in October 1989 and had confessed involuntarily as a result. He was acquitted in October 1990 after the judge heard medical evidence supporting
the allegations and declared his confessions inadmissible. Brian Gillen obtained an out-of-court settlement of his claim for damages against the Royal Ulster Constabulary (ruc) for assault (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989]. Ten people from Strabane alleged that they had been ill-treated during interrogation at Castlereagh in April and May. The allegations included slaps to the head, punches to the body, and fingers being bent back. The 10 were released without charge.
In lanuary three men were killed in West Belfast by undercover soldiers during an attempted robbery. John McNeill was shot as he sat unarmed and unmasked in a getaway car. Six shots had been fired at his head and body and at least one had been fired from less than 24 inches away. Edward Hale and Peter Thompson had been shot 13 and 10 times respectively. They were reportedly carrying imitation firearms. Eye-witnesses said that no apparent attempt had been made to arrest the three; that they had not been challenged before being fired at; and that two of the three were shot again while lying on the ground. In December the Director of Public Prosecutions announced that no one would be prosecuted in connection with the killings.
In September Martin Peake, 17, and Karen Reilly, 18, were shot dead by soldiers while driving a stolen car in West Belfast. Officials alleged that they had driven through an army checkpoint and hit a soldier. However, eye-witnesses, including a 16-year-old passenger in the stolen car, claimed there was no checkpoint.
In December Fergal Caraher, a member of Sinn Fein (the political counterpart of the rra), was shot dead and his brother Michael seriously wounded by British soldiers. Officials stated that the two unarmed men were shot after failing to stop their car at a border checkpoint in Armagh but this was disputed by eye-witnesses.
Police investigations continued into the killing in September 1989 of Brian Robinson, a member of the uvf. He was shot by undercover soldiers who had reportedly by chance seen him kill a Catholic man, and had then given chase. An eye-witness claimed that Brian Robinson was shot as he lay injured on the ground after soldiers had knocked him off his motor cycle.
Five House of Lords judges, sitting as the highest appeal court in the United
UNITED KINGDOM
Kingdom, unanimously overturned a 1988 ruling of the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal that compelled security force personnel involved in disputed killings to give evidence at inquests (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The House of Lords decision held that such personnel do not have to attend or testify, to protect them from exposure to the "embarrassment, in circumstances where they may be the subject of criminal proceedings, of invoking the privilege against self-incrimination".
Long overdue inquests into over 20 killings by security force personnel were further postponed because of another legal challenge to the Coroner's Rules, objecting to written evidence being admitted from security force personnel not present to be cross-examined. The Northern Ireland Court of Appeal upheld the existing rule in December; an appeal against the ruling went to the House of Lords.
A police inquiry led by Deputy Chief Constable John Stevens into collusion between security force personnel and Loyalist armed groups in Northern Ireland released a summary report in May (see Amnesty International Report 1990). As a result of the inquiry, 59 people were charged or reported to the Director of Public Prosecutions. They were not charged with collusion but with lesser offences such as possession of security documents. The overwhelming majority of those arrested were civilians (32 were members of Loyalist organizations). They included Brian Nelson, who was charged with possessing documents containing information about ira suspects likely to be of use to terrorists. Brian Nelson had reportedly been both a British military intelligence agent and the intelligence information officer of the Ulster Defence Association (uda), which has links with the uff. This gave rise to claims that the authorities had been aware for some years of collusion between the security forces and the uda. Charges against five uda men were dropped in October.
The Stevens inquiry report stated that "in the present climate" in Northern Ireland, leaks of official security information "may never be completely eliminated". However, it said that measures already taken had limited the opportunity for such leaks and that "the passing of information had been restricted to a small number of individuals". The inquiry was limited in
its scope and failed to identify members of the security forces involved in passing on information to armed Loyalist groups.
In May Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the decision to derogate indefinitely from echr and iccpr articles guaremteeing detainees the right to be brought before a judge promptly after arrest. The government said that "a satisfactory procedure for the review of the detention of terrorist suspects involving the judiciary has not been identified". Amnesty International was not convinced that the search for a solution had genuinely been exhausted, and urged the government to meet international standards.
Amnesty International continued to press the government for a review of the "Birmingham Six" cases, in particular for a speedy resolution after the cases had been referred to the Court of Appeal. The organization sent an observer to the preliminary hearing in December, which set a date in February 1991 for the appeal hearing.
Amnesty International welcomed the referral of Engin Raghip's case to the Court of Appeal. However, it continued to urge the government to review the cases of all Broadwater Farm defendants convicted of serious offences on the basis of uncorroborated confessions obtained in the absence of a lawyer. It also urged the government to investigate a pattern of alleged police misconduct during interrogation of suspects. The government stated that it did not believe there was a need for a separate investigation into the overall pattern of police behaviour because the investigation supervised by the Police Complaints Authority had been wide-ranging.
Amnesty International asked the government about the detention of the Kuwaiti and Bahraini men and expressed concern that they might have been detained for their non-violent political activities. The organization was further concerned that one of them, Anwar al-Harby, was not allowed to appeal against the refusal of his asylum application and may have been expelled for his well-known human rights work on Kuwait.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about recent disputed killings in Northern Ireland, which raised some of the same questions posed in previous incidents, namely whether the people could have been arrested rather
UNITED KINGDOM/UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
than killed; whether the use of lethal force was necessary in the circumstances; and whether they were planned operations (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990).
