INDIA
Several thousand political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial under special or preventive detention laws. Increasingly, politically motivated arrests were not officially acknowledged. Torture and ill-treatment were widespread and in some states systematic, resulting in scores of deaths in police custody. Dozens of people "disappeared" or appeared to have been extrajudicially executed in "encounters" staged by the police. Over 100 peaceful demonstrators were believed to have
INDIA
been victims of extrajudicial executions. A small number of death sentences were carried out.
Prime Minister Vishwanath Pratap Singh's National Front (nf) coalition government lost its majority in Parliament and resigned on 7 November. There had been widespread controversy over its plan to reserve more jobs in the public service for members of the underprivileged castes and its opposition to attempts by Hindus to take over a Muslim shrine in Ayodhya. A new minority government led by Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar, who had formed a breakaway faction of the Janata Dal party, called the Janata Dal (Socialist), took office three days later, after obtaining the support of the Congress party.
Earlier in the year the nf government, which had stated its commitment to accountability and respect for human rights, faced increasing violence by armed separatist groups, notably in Jammu and Kashmir. Punjab and Assam. According to Jammu and Kashmir's Director General of Police, 1,044 people were killed in the state by armed separatists between January and September, including 107 members of the security forces and 377 civilians -mostly alleged informers or victims of abductions. In Punjab at least "5,800 politically motivated killings were reportedly committed by government forces and armed separatists during the year - an unprecedented level of such deaths. In October alone Sikh separatists were officially said to have killed 265 people, including 68 members of the security forces. President's rule (direct rule from New Delhi) was extended for the eighth time in October for a further six months. In Jammu and Kashmir, the state assembly was suspended in January and direct rule was imposed. In luly the government applied to Jammu and Kashmir the Armed Forces Special Powers Act — already in force in northeast India - which empowered the security forces to shoot to kill with immunity from prosecution.
Well over 10,000 political prisoners were held under preventive detention laws - the National Security Act (nsa) and the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act - or under special "anti-terrorist" laws, notably the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (tada) and the Arms Act. Some political prisoners were held on criminal charges.
The nsa permits detention without charge or trial for up to one year. Nagaimu-gan was ordered to be detained for one year under its provisions in Tamil Nadu in April for making statements "likely to disrupt the country's unity". On 10 September a court ordered his release on technical grounds. Lai Adveini, leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party, and many party members were also briefly detained under nsa provisions in October, when communal violence was feared in Ayodhya. The tada allows up to one year's detention for investigation of suspected "terrorist" or broadly defined "disruptive" activities. Its provisions make bail difficult to obtain. The act was used mainly in Punjab, Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, and Jammu and Kashmir, where some 1,700 people were reportedly being detained under its provisions in mid-1990. Despite its name, those detained under the tada have included peaceful critics of the government in states where there was no armed opposition to the government. In Gujarat, for example, the act was used to detain trade union leaders and landless labourers demanding fair wages and land. One of 600 people held there under the tada in January was Zohrabibi. a 60-year-old woman who was said by the Indian press to have been detained by the Baroda police because she complained about the killing of her husband during communal rioting in 1982.
It was difficult to estimate the precise number of political prisoners held in India at any one time owing to the large numbers involved, their geographical spread and the rate of turnover. Official statistics were rarely given and often proved to be contradictory. For example, before releasing 600 untried political detainees, the government in New Delhi said in lanuary that 12,000 people were being held in Punjab alone: the state government, however, put the number at 6,000.
Hundreds more arrests were reported during 1990. No official figures were given in 1990 about the number of those being held for political reasons at any one time in Jammu and Kashmir, although unofficial sources in July estimated that between 10,000 and 15,000 people had been detained without trial in the state since January. Semi-ofRcial sources put the number held in September at 2,800, of whom 2,000 were said to be suspected armed secessionists and the others political
INDIA
leaders. One of the latter, Abdul Ghani Lone, was arrested in April for advocating a separate state. He was initially held without trial at Jodhpur Central Jail in Rajasthan, where it was difficult for relatives to visit him. The Director General of the Jammu and Kashmir police said that 602 people were arrested under the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act between January and September. About 1,000 others, mostly male youths aged between 14 and 18, were arrested in the state on the border with Pakistan.
Most of those arrested for political reasons were detained without charge or trial. They included some prisoners of conscience and in some cases their detention was not acknowledged. Yusuf Yameel, a Srinagar-based journalist reporting on developments in Jammu and Kashmir, was abducted by army officers on 2 June, detained for two days and interrogated. His detention was initially denied by the state government, but an inquiry was subsequently ordered. Its outcome was not known.
Trials of political prisoners were rare and subject to delay. "Naxalite" (Maoist revolutionary) political prisoners in West Bengal were denied the right to prompt and fair trial: foiur of them had awaited trial for over nine years.
Torture remained widespread. In lammu and Kashmir there were well-docu-mented reports of women being raped by members of the seciuity forces, especially during house-to-house searches. Released prisoners said they had been beaten, tortured with electric shocks, burned with cigarettes and suspended upside-down. In Punjab, torture was also systematically used: methods included rolling wooden bars across the thighs and inserting chilli powder into sensitive parts of the body. Relatives of alleged armed secessionists were among those arrested and tortured. Elsewhere, victims of torture included villagers detained in connection with demands for greater autonomy or separatism in Assam, Nagaland and Manipur, criminal suspects and people belonging to lower castes or tribal populations. In Bihar, people were tortured to deter them from asserting their demands to land rights and better pay.
Scores of people, including many members of the lower castes, died in police and military custody allegedly as a result of
torture. In Manipur, S. Joel was reportedly beaten and given electric shocks by members of the 20th Assam Rifles, who were seeking information about insurgent activities. His body was handed over to the police in late May: he was said to have been shot while trying to escape. Relatives who had seen him on the previous day, however, said that he was then unable to walk because of injuries he had sustained under torture. In some cases, medical evidence corroborated torture allegations. In July Raju Mohite, a member of the Scheduled Castes, died in a Bombay hospital one day after his release from 10 days' detention at Oshiwara police station. The police denied torture but a post-mortem revealed extensive injuries to his body, attributed to beatings with a "hard and blunt object".
Increasingly, political suspects were held in unaclaiowledged detention, sometimes for months. Some "disappeared" after arrest, especially in Punjab, where arrests were made and subsequently denied by plainclothes police or paramilitary forces. Habeas corpus applications resulted in the courts ordering some of those held to be produced, but such orders were often ignored by the security forces. In one case, the Punjab and Haryana High Court instituted contempt of court proceedings against Central Reserve Police Force officers who failed to produce three men -Devinder Singh Pujari, Rajinder Singh Pappu and Jurbaj Singh lago - in court on 22 March, although a High Court official had located them in secret detention two weeks earlier. At the end of the year, the whereabouts of the three men remained unknown.
Extrajudicial executions of suspected government opponents were reported, notably in Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and Andhra Pradesh. In Jammu and Kashmir unarmed demonstrators demanding independence were shot dead by the police without warning, including in May, when at least 47 people in a funeral procession were killed after anti-Indian slogans were shouted. The police said the victims had been caught in "cross-fire", but witnesses said that the police officers fired into the crowd without warning, Fifteen other unarmed civilians were shot dead on 1 October by the paramilitary Border Security Force in retaliation for the murder of one of their men by Kashmiri separatists.
In Punjab extrajudicial killings in
INDIA
"encounters" staged by the police continued to be reported. These allegations were hard to corroborate because there were rarely siuvivors of or witnesses to such killings. However, the Attorney General acknowledged that a policy of killing government opponents existed: he told the Supreme Court in April that an order issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, promising financial awards for the "liquidation" of 53 men described as "terrorists", had lapsed. In June the Governor of Punjab appealed to the police to stop fake encounters. Yet allegations of staged "encounter" killings continued to be made: Harpal Singh and Baljit Singh, both members of the All India Sikh Students Federation, were shot dead in June in what police maintained was an armed encounter near Kotla Ajner village. However, villagers said the two had been tortured for several hours and then killed by police officers. Official investigations into such reports were rare but this case was investigated by a magistrate who found that the "death of the two was not in the ordinary course of an encounter". The state's Home Secretary reportedly urged criminal prosecutions of those allegedly responsible, but the Director General of Police apparently opposed this because he thought it would demoralize the police.
During a campaign to build a Hindu temple at the site of an existing mosque at Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, the security forces allegedly killed several unarmed Hindus inside houses in early November. In November and December members of the Provincial Armed Constabulary were said to have deliberately killed several Muslims, including women and children, not connected with communal violence which had erupted in various towns in Uttar Pradesh.
Police officers allegedly responsible for human rights violations were sometimes suspended but rarely prosecuted. Moreover, when official investigations were conducted into alleged large-scale human rights violations, their outcomes were often withheld. The nf government had stated its commitment to repealing that part of the 1952 Commission of Inquiry Act enabling governments to withhold the findings of inquiries on grounds of state security. Despite this, it refused to disclose the findings of an official inquiry into alleged extrajudicial killings of Muslims in Meerut
in May 1987, saying the inquiry had "been treated as 'secret' by the government of Uttar Pradesh".
Dozens of people were sentenced to death and some executions were believed to have been carried out. However, the exact figures were not known. At least one mercy petition was rejected by the President.
Amnesty International sought information about possible prisoners of conscience and victims of "disappearances", and pressed the government to investigate and prevent extrajudicial killings, notably in Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir, and Uttar Pradesh. It urged full and impartial investigations into all deaths in custody, and appealed to the government not to execute prisoners sentenced to death. In October Amnesty International published two reports: 'Operation Bluebird', a case study of tortiure and extrajudicial executions in Manipur; and India: Summary of Amnesty International's Current Concerns.
In June the nf government partially lifted a lO-year-old ban on all Amnesty International visits to India, and said that the organization would be allowed to conduct "private visits" or talks with the government in New Delhi. The goverrmient subsequently failed to schedule such meetings although Amnesty International proposed dates in July, August, September and October. An Amnesty International delegation attending the World Congress on Human Rights in December met the Cabinet Secretary and Foreign Secretary, who said that there had been no change in the previous government's policy that Amnesty International could visit New Delhi for discussions with the government. However, the government had not decided whether to allow the organization to visit Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir.
In an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty Lntemational included reference to its concerns in India about the torture of detainees.
