CANADA
Several Mohawk Indians were allegedly ill-treated by the Quebec police after their arrest during an armed confTontation following from a land dispute. Extradition proceedings were started in the case of a prisoner charged with murder in the United States of America (usa) whose laws provide for the death penalty.
Conflict broke out in Quebec in early July between Mohawk Indians and the Canadian authorities over a land dispute. Armed Mohawk Warriors erected a blockade in the town of Oka, near Montreal, in protest at the town's proposals to extend a golf course on to ancestral land claimed by the Mohawk Nation. The conflict escalated on 11 July when armed provincial police tried to storm the barricades using tear-gas; a police officer was killed during the
CANADA/CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
confrontation. In the following weelcs, several hundred Mohawks held out behind barricades. Following negotiations with the federal and provincial governments, and after the federal government had promised to buy the disputed land for the Mohawks, most of the barricades were dismantled peacefully in the presence of international observers in late August and early September.
The conflict ended on 26 September when the last remaining group of 20 Mohawk Warriors and some 30 Mohawk women and children surrendered to the Canadian army. This followed federal government assurances that it would consider the Mohawks' grievances and speed up land claims. The army had been brought in on 1 September with the stated aim of maintaining the peace as tension mounted between the Mohawks and the provincial police and local population.
Several Mohawks arrested during the dispute alleged that they were ill-treated by the Quebec police in late August. Some claimed that they were initially denied access to lawyers. There were also allegations that Mohawks were ill-treated by police officers while detained at a military base in late September. About 100 Indians involved in the conflict were charged with offences which included possession of unlawful weapons and participation in a riot. Most were released on bail after their initial appearance in court.
An Amnesty International representative visited Montreal in November to collect information on the allegations of ill-treat-ment. Amnesty International was still investigating the allegations at the end of the year.
Lee Robert O'Bomsawin, an American Indian, faced possible extradition to the state of Florida, usa, on a charge of first-degree murder. If convicted, he could be sentenced to death. In September 1990, 313 people were on death row in Florida. The state carried out 25 executions between 1976 and December 1990.
Amnesty International wrote to the Canadian Minister of Justice in April requesting that Lee Robert O'Bomsawin not be returned to Florida unless the state offered assurances that he would not be sentenced to death. The minister replied that all submissions made on Lee Robert O'Bom-sawin's behalf would be considered before any decision on extradition was made.
