LIBERIA
Human rights violations on a massive scale were perpetrated throughout the year by the Armed Forces of Liberia and by rebel forces. Thousands of people were extrajudicially executed or executed after grossly unfair trials. Ten prisoners of conscience were released. Three possible prisoners of conscience were sentenced to life imprisonment after an unfair trial.
The government of President Samuel Doe was overthrown in a rebellion in which thousands of civilians were killed by both sides. An estimated 700,000 people fled the country and the infrastructure of the state collapsed. Following an invasion of Nimba County in northeast Liberia by a force of about 100 exiled government opponents in December 1989, government forces destroyed villages and killed civilians not involved in the uprising. People belonging to the local Gio and Mano ethnic groups, previously the target of army killings in 1985, swelled the ranks of the rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (npfl). led by Charles Taylor, a former government official. Human rights violations escalated dramatically as the nffi and a breakaway group of rebels, the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (inpfl), led by Prince Yeduo Johnson, pushed towards the capital, Monrovia. The flight of refugees and displaced people became a flood as the government's position grew increasingly insecure and as the rebels took control of parts of Monrovia in July.
In late August member governments of the Economic Community of West African States (ecowas) sent a joint military force to Monrovia to try to enforce a cease-fire. This
force became engaged in fighting the npfl, which surrounded Monrovia and opposed intervention from abroad. President Doe was captured and brutally killed by the forces of Prince Johnson in September. At a meeting of ecowas heads of state in November, the npfl agreed to a cease-fire. However, the npfl refused to recognize an interim civilian government led by Dr Amos Sawyer, which had been installed in Monrovia by the ecowas force, saying that it had already established its own government in Gbarnga, Bong County.
Thousands of people were killed, tortured or brutally ill-treated both by President Doe's forces and by those opposed to them, and these abuses continued after the President's death. Most victims were civilians targeted because of their ethnic group.
The predominantly Gio and Mano rebel forces summarily killed government officials and others considered to be supporters of President Doe's government, particularly members of his Krahn ethnic group and the Muslim Mandingo community in areas they took over or while the victims were fleeing Monrovia. Further large-scale killings occurred when they entered Monrovia in July. One rebel leader was said by eye-witnesses to have personally shot four people dead in cold blood, including a Red Cross worker and a woman whom he shot in the face in front of her child. In Grand Gedeh County, President Doe's home area. Charles Taylor's npfl forces were responsible for indiscriminate killings of people belonging to the Krahn ethnic group. In August former government minister Senator Fred J. Blay and Congressman William T. Jabbah were reportedly executed by the inpfl; they did not appear to have had any form of trial.
In response to the invasion, government troops exacted brutal reprisals against members of the Gio and Mano ethnic groups in Nimba County, leading to a mass exodus into neighbouring countries. Gios, Manos and Americo-Liberian critics of the government were also arrested in Monrovia and extrajudicially executed, particularly as the rebels approached the capital. On 30 May at least 30 Gio and Mano men, women and children were abducted by government soldiers from a United Nations compound where hundreds were seeking protection. They were then apparently executed extrajudicially; the bodies of some of them were found the next day. In July about 600
LIBERIA
defenceless people - including many women and children from the Gio and Mano communities - were extrajudicially executed by government troops who broke into a church refuge for displaced people in Monrovia.
It was impossible to estimate how many people were taken prisoner by government and rebel forces. In January the government said a number of rebels had been captured and would be brought to trial, but they appeared to include Gio and Mano civilians arrested in Monrovia. None was brought to trial and their fate was unknown. In June several hundred Gio and Mano soldiers were reported to have been arrested. Some appeared to have been extrajudicially executed - their bodies were found in the streets - although the government later said that 150 had been released.
An unknown number of prisoners were executed after unfair trials before special courts set up by the rebels. At least 100 people - government officials and members of the Krahn and Mandingo ethnic groups - were reportedly executed after being convicted of "crimes against the people" or of supporting the government. They had been tried by three courts set up by the npfl in June, one of which was reportedly presided over by a school teacher.
In August both the npfl and inpfl seized a number of foreigners in an attempt to influence the actions of other governments. About 50 foreigners, including Americans, were detained by the inpfl, which sought direct United States intervention in the conflict. The npfl took prisoner at least 30 Nigerians, as well as nationals of Guinea and Ghana, in an attempt to deter their governments from contributing to the ecowas force. There were reports of widespread arrests among the Ghanaian community living in areas under the npfl's control. All foreigners known to be held by the inpfl were believed to have been released by the end of the year but the npfl was still holding an unknown number. Two Nigerian journalists detained by the npfl, Tayo Awotunsin and Krees Imodibie, were reportedly executed extrajudicially in October. Both were said to have been deprived of food and water for several days and forced to bury abandoned corpses.
Before the collapse of the government, Gabriel William Kpoleh and nine other prisoners of conscience were released in a
presidential amnesty in March. They had been convicted of treason in 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990). In January the Supreme Court found that the trial court had made a "patent and blatant blunder" and ordered a retrial. In April charges against them were formally withdrawn.
Three people sentenced to life imprisonment in May for complicity to murder appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Angeline Watta Allison and two others were convicted of involvement in a ritual murder allegedly ordered by her husband, former defence minister Major-General Gray Dioh Allison, as part of a plot to overthrow the govemment. Major-General Allison had himself been sentenced to death in 1989 after an unfair trial before a special military court (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Angeline Watta Allison's two co-accused told the court that they had been threatened with death and ill-treated to make them confess and implicate the Allisons.
Two others charged in the case died in detention in 1989, apparently as a result of torture and medical neglect, and three prosecution witnesses were still held in detention although charges against them had been withdrawn. All the defendants lodged appeals with the Supreme Court, but it was not known whether they and Majdr-General Allison, who was awaiting a presidential decision on his clemency appeal against the death penalty, survived the subsequent killings.
No death sentences were known to have been passed by the ordineiry courts, but one govemment soldier was executed by firing-squad in June after being convicted by a court-martial of murdering a civilian.
Amnesty International publicly appealed for an end to torture, extrajudicial executions and other abuses by both government and rebel troops. It also urged governments worldwide, particularly those with influence over the Liberian Government or the rebels, to use every effort to protect prisoners, civilians and others from human rights violations.
