BHUTAN
Six prisoners of conscience were detained without trial throughout the year for alleged "anti-national" activities.
Protests by groups of Nepali-speaking southern Bhutanese against the government policy, introduced in 1989, of national cultural integration intensified, and from February or March included the use of intimidation and violence. This policy involved the compulsory wearing of distinctive Bhutanese dress, the promotion of Dzongkha — the language of the majority northern Bhutanese — as the national language, and the promotion of driglam namzha, the northern Bhutanese "code of conduct".
The government of King Druk Gyalpo Jigme Singye Wangchuck informed Amnesty International in June that 42 people had been arrested between October and December 1989 in connection with "anti-national" activity in southern Bhutan (see Amnesty International Report 1990]. Three further prisoners were extradited from Nepal in November and imprisoned in Bhutan. All but six of the prisoners were released on the King's orders,
The six, whom the authorities regarded as ringleaders, were believed by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience. They were held without trial throughout 1990 at unknown places of detention. The government said that all of them had committed treason by writing, publishing and distributing literature critical of the government's policy of cultural integration.
Under Bhutanese law, treason is punishable by death. However, King Druk Gyalpo Jigme Singye Wangchuck said that
the prisoners would not be executed.
Further detentions in southern Bhutan were reported during the year as political unrest continued. During a tour of southern districts in September the King reportedly released all but 47 of more than 400 prisoners held in the south at that time. Amnesty International did not know the identities of the remaining 47 prisoners or whether they were charged or tried.
Amnesty International appealed throughout the year for the release of the six prisoners of conscience detained since 1989. In June the government told Amnesty International that the six had been involved in violent criminal activity in southern Bhutan and could not be considered prisoners of conscience. However, the government produced no evidence to show that they had been involved in violent crime, and the crimes for which they were apparently being blamed had clearly been committed by other people months after the six had been imprisoned.
At a meeting with Amnesty International in September, the Foreign Minister explained the context of unrest among "anti-nationals" in southern Bhutan, and provided details on the rise of violent criminal acts by these groups during 1990. He said the six had not been tried and that the King hoped to release them after a solution to the problems of southern Bhutan had been negotiated, In December Amnesty International requested further information from the government about the 47 prisoners reportedly detained in southern Bhutan.
