SURINAME
At least three people died in circumstances suggesting that they were extrajudicially executed. There were new reports that government soldiers killed people suspected of collaborating with the Jungle Commando, an armed opposition group. At least four members of an armed Amerindian group associated with the army were feared killed following an
internal conflict. Most human rights violations committed before the civilian government took ofBce in 1988 had still not been investigated.
The armed conflict which started in 1986 in opposition to the military government continued after the change to a democratically elected government in 1988. Negotiations to end the conflict had not succeeded by the end of 1990. In May the National Assembly passed a law withdrawing from the military police the power to arrest civilians and to conduct criminal investigations into offences involving civilians. The exercise of these powers over a number of years had led to human rights violations and a deterioration of the relationship between the police force and the army; police personnel investigating criminal offences allegedly committed by members of the army had received threats, including death threats. In late December Lieutenant-Colonel Desi Bouterse resigned as Army Commander following alleged disagreements with President Ramsewar Shankar. Two days later, on 24 December, the military took power in a bloodless coup which led to the resignation of the President. The National Assembly appointed lohan Kraag as President. The military promised to hold elections within 100 days. Lieutenant-Colonel Bouterse subsequently returned to the post of Army Commander.
Government soldiers killed three people in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed. In March Stewart Deel and John Apai, bodyguards of Ronny Brunswick, the leader of the lungle Commando, were killed while accompanying him to a meeting with the head of the army, held as part of the negotiations to end the armed conflict. The two men were reportedly shot by soldiers at Lieutenant-Colonel Bouterse's office in Paramaribo; the victims were reportedly unarmed, Ronny Brunswick and other members of the group were arrested and held for two days by the army, purportedly on suspicion of drug-trafficking, but were released on government orders.
In August police Inspector Herman Goodings was killed shortly after leaving the military headquarters at Fort Zeelandia where he and a colleague were investigating the arrest of two police officers by members of the army. His car was intercepted by a military vehicle and his
SURINAME/SWAZILAND
colleague was allowed or forced to leave. Inspector Goodings' body, with gunshot wounds, was found the following day near the area where his car had been stopped. Inspector Goodings had investigated the involvement of an army officer in the killing of a group of people near Mungota-pu in November 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1987] and had expressed dissatisfaction when the officer was released on an order from Lieutenant-Colonel Bouterse. The government appointed a commission to investigate his killing but there was no indication that the investigation had been completed by the end of the year.
In July two men, believed to have been unarmed, were reported to have been killed in Nieuw Aurora because they were suspected of cooperating with the Jungle Commando. One of them was reportedly shot and then beaten to death with guns, There was no indication that the authorities investigated these deaths.
In February dissenting members of the Tucayana Amazonas, an armed Amerindian group generally associated with the army, sought asylum in Guyana but were returned to military custody in Suriname. While in custody four of them were taken away, allegedly by a group of unknown armed men. The authorities had not clarified their fate or whereabouts by the end of the year.
Most of the human rights violations committed before the civilian government took office were not investigated. The chances of such investigations ever taking place were considerably reduced when fires, reportedly started intentionally, destroyed several public buildings containing important evidence.
Amnesty International wrote to the President in September expressing concern about the killings of Stewart Deel, John Apai and Inspector Herman Goodings. The organization said it was concerned that Inspector Goodings could have been killed in retaliation for his investigation of members of the army. It requested information about the investigation into his death and about any investigation undertaken into the killing of Stewart Deel and John Apai. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
