GUYANA
Three people charged with treason were acquitted when confession statements allegedly signed as a result of ill-treatment in police custody were ruled inadmissible by the trial court. A trial was pending in the case of six others charged with treason, which carries a mandatory death sentence. Eight people were hanged for murder; in one case there was new evidence raising questions about the prisoner's guilt. At least 24 people convicted of murder were under sentence of death.
In October the treason trial opened in the cases of Karran Persaud Deokarran, Bhoj Pertab Singh and Neville Wordsworth, members of the opposition People's Progressive Party (ppp), who had been charged with plotting to overthrow the government in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). After hearing two weeks of testimony about the circumstances of their arrest and police detention, the court ruled that the defendants' confessions had not been made freely and voluntarily and were therefore inadmissible. The prosecution
offered no further evidence in the case. The defendants, who had spent nearly 18 months in custody, were acquitted of all charges and released.
The accused had alleged that unidentified police officers arrested them at their homes in Mahaicony (East Demerara) in the early hours of 28 April 1989 and took them blindfolded to an unknown place of detention. They said they were held incommunicado for six days in dark, unsanitary cells and subjected to threats and violence by police officers during repeated interrogation. The accused alleged that, on the night of 3 May 1989, they were taken to a roadside and immediately rearrested by other police officers. They said they signed confessions at police headquarters on 4 May after further threats and beatings.
The police had acknowledged that the defendants were being detained only after habeas corpus proceedings were initiated by the prisoners' lawyers on 3 May 1989, but denied that the defendants had been in custody since 28 April. During the trial two lawyers testified about their unsuccessful attempts to locate the defendants after having been contacted by relatives who had witnessed them being taken from their homes. The lawyers did not see the defendants until 5 May 1989, despite repeated inquiries at police stations from 28 April onwards.
Six people, including an assistant police superintendent and an army officer, were charged with treason on 9 October. They were accused of having been involved in military training with unknown people between June and October as part of a conspiracy to overthrow the government. Warrants were issued for the arrest of three others detained for the same offence who had reportedly escaped from police custody. The trial was pending at the end of the year.
A bill passed by the National Assembly in 1989, which would extend the death penalty to certain drug-related offences, had not been signed into law by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1990].
Eight prisoners were hanged for murder, bringing to 18 the number of executions since 1985, when hangings resumed after a 15-year moratorium. Several of those hanged in 1990 had been sentenced to death during the moratorium.
GUYANA/HAITI
Sylvester Sturge was executed in February despite new evidence raising questions about his guilt. He and two co-defendants were convicted and sentenced to death in 1987 for the murder of two men on a coconut plantation. The evidence against Sylvester Sturge at his trial consisted largely of his confession, which he later retracted. He alleged that he had signed the statement after four police officers beat him in an unoccupied building on the way to the police station. Those alleged to have been involved in the ill-treatment included the chief investigating officer, who was related by marriage to one of the murder victims. The court ruled that the confession statement was admissible despite contradictions in police testimony as to who was present when the confession was taken and the submission by the defence of a bloodstained shirt which Sylvester Sturge said he was wearing when he was beaten.
When warrants were issued for the execution of Sylvester Sturge and a co-defendant, Elroy Aaron, in February, Elroy Aaron told prison officials that Sylvester Sturge was innocent and had not been present during the murder. This statement was brought to the attention of President Desmond Hoyte and the Attorney General. Although a judge advising the Mercy Committee was reportedly asked to review the case shortly before the execution, the prisoners themselves- were not interviewed. Both executions went ahead as scheduled. The third defendant in the case had earlier had his murder conviction quashed on appeal.
Amnesty International appealed for clemency whenever it learned that an execution was scheduled. In Sylvester Sturge's case, the organization also urged President Hoyte to grant a stay of execution to allow time for the new evidence to be considered by the courts.
An Amnesty International observer attended part of the treason trial of Karran Persaud Deokarran, Bhoj Pertab Singh and Neville Wordsworth.
Hundreds of people, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested without warrant and detained without charge or trial for short periods of time. Many detainees, including children, were ill-treated or tortured, and at least four died, apparently as a result of torture. Prison conditions continued to be harsh. The security forces were reportedly responsible for indiscriminate shootings and extrajudicial executions of civilians.
In January President Prosper Avril declared a state of siege and imposed restrictions on news broadcasts, following the assassination of army Colonel André Neptune. During the state of siege, which lasted until the end of January, there were widespread arrests and raids on several independent radio stations.
In March President Avril resigned following widespread popular protest against his government, and a transitional government took over, headed by Ertha Pascal-Trouillot and a Council of State [Consei! d'Etat). Presidential elections held on 16 December were won by Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the candidate for the Front national pour le changement et la démocratie, National Front for Change and Democracy. He was expected to succeed President Pascal-Trouillot in February 1991.
Violent crime, indiscriminate shootings and killings by heavily armed men. sometimes in military uniforms, continued to be widespread. There appeared to be no political motivation for their actions. Haitians referred to the situation as "l'insécurité", the insecurity. There was evidence that many of these acts were committed by members of the security forces.
In January over 20 politicians, journalists and human rights activists were arrested following the assassination of
