EL SALVADOR
There was a sharp rise in the number of "death squad" murders in the first eight months of the year. Other people were killed in overt military operations in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions. Members of the armed opposition reportedly killed several captives. Torture was frequently used during police and military custody and at least two people died in detention as a result. Irregularities in legal proceedings against many of the approximately 200 political prisoners included the use of confessions extracted under torture as a basis for charges. New "disappearance" cases were reported and the authorities failed to clarify thousands of others reported in previous years. Virtually no measures were taken to bring those responsible for human rights violations to justice.
A state of siege remained in force until April by which time constitutional guarantees, suspended in November 1989 following a major offensive by the armed
opposition Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberación Nacional (fmln), Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, had been fully restored. By March most of the students, trade unionists, church representatives, and others who had been rounded up in November and December 1989 had been released. Many of them reported having been tortured during up to 15 days' incommunicado detention in police or military custody before their transfer to prison.
The lifting of emergency measures coincided with renewed talks between the government and the fmln, this time under the auspices of the United Nations (un) Secretary-General, to settle the armed conflict. Both parties signed an Agreement on Human Rights in July which committed them to take immediate steps to prevent killings, torture and "disappearances" and also provided for the establishment of a un verification mission to monitor human rights once a cease-fire had been agreed. By the end of the year, peace talks had not been concluded and agreement was still pending, especially regarding army reforms and the punishment of those responsible for human rights violations. While the Agreement on Human Rights was regarded as a positive initiative, many of its provisions were already in force under existing legislation, which had been frequently violated in the past. The armed conflict intensified during the last two months of the year when the fmln launched a series of attacks, the stated intention of which was to put pressure on the authorities to negotiate reforms.
The number of killings by "death squads" linked to the armed forces rose sharply between January and August, with a total of 51 cases reported - more than double the figure for the same period in 1989. Many of the bodies, often mutilated, were found dumped by the roadside: identity cards had been removed to prevent identification. Among the victims were cooperative members Angel Flores Aragón and Julia Ponce Flores, who were abducted in December 1989. A soldier told relatives that they had been handed over to the National Police but the police denied holding them. In mid-January their bodies were found by the side of a road,
In April Colonel Juan Manuel Zepeda, Vice-Minister for Defence, told Amnesty International delegates that he had detected a "typical" death squad unit, made up
EL SALVADOR
of three or four soldiers armed with handguns, but denied that such units operated under official orders.
Scores of unarmed civilians were killed by the military in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions. Many of these killings occurred in rural areas. Roberto Vásquez was shot dead on 20 April when soldiers raided the farming cooperative of which he was President. The government claimed he died in an armed confrontation but witnesses said there was no exchange of gunfire and alleged that he was killed deliberately.
Some detainees were apparently secretly executed after arrest by the military, among them 16-year-old José Acosta Castillo, whose body was found with bullet wounds on 5 May. He was not identified until 19 June when the body was exhumed at the request of Tutela Lega!, the legal aid office of the Archdiocese of San Salvador. José Acosta had "disappeared" on 5 May after being taken into military custody with two members of his family who were later transferred to prison, accused of supporting the fmln. Soldiers had reportedly said they were taking José Acosta to the mountains to indicate the location of fmln camps.
Some reports were received of the execution of detainees by the fmln. Most of the victims were alleged to be informers or to have other links with the military or security forces. Some of those killed were shot in front of witnesses. In October eight fmln members were said to have taken a peasant and former soldier they had detained, Salvador Araña Martínez, to a farm and summoned those who lived there out of their homes. They reportedly made the detainee lie face down, accused him of killing a worker on another farm, and then shot him four times in the back. The army press agency known as coprefa said he was tortured before he died but the autopsy report examined by Tutela Legal recorded only the four bullet wounds. A number of people were reportedly abducted by the fmln and in some cases their bodies were subsequently found.
In December it was announced that the judge investigating the November 1989 killing of six Jesuit priests, their cook and her daughter had committed an army colonel and eight soldiers to trial for their role in ordering or carrying out the murders (see Amnesty International
Report 1990). The colonel and seven of the soldiers had been arrested in January following investigations by the Special Investigative Unit and a specially appointed Commission of Honour. Military personnel repeatedly obstructed or delayed the proceedings by destroying evidence, giving false or contradictory testimony and failing to provide information or answer court summonses promptly. President Alfredo Cristiani, who had given public assurances on several occasions that the case would be clarified as soon as possible, publicly admitted for the first time in July that he had authorized a raid on the Central American University - where the killings occurred - two days before the murders. In October the United Slates (us) authorities presented the court with a statement, made 10 months earlier by a us colonel but retracted shortly afterwards, which suggested that high-ranking Salvadorian military officers knew of plans to kill the priests several days before the incident occurred. Chain of command responsibility for the killings had not been established by the end of the year.
The authorities failed to identify those responsible for most other apparent extrajudicial executions in 1990 and previous years. Those cases which were in the hands of investigative bodies, including the October 1989 bombing of the offices of the Federación Nacional Sindical de Trabajadores (fenastras), National Trade Union Federation of Workers, in which 10 people died, made no significant progress. In May all but one of the 13 soldiers charged with killing 10 peasants in San Francisco in September 1988 were acquitted. The remaining defendant, an army major accused of ordering the massacre, was committed to trial but no trial date had been set by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Irregularities in detention procedures, including illegal and often unacknowledged arrests, were repeatedly reported, even after new operational guidelines were issued to police and military units at the end of July. In August, an Office of Information on Detainees was opened within the judiciary to provide information about arrests. The security forces were required to present the office with a list of detainees every 24 hours. Initial reports suggested that they did not always do so, and that the office's information was often incomplete.
EL SALVADOR
Military units, which frequently carried out arrests even when not empowered to do so, were not required to provide lists of those arrested,
Although the period of police-military custody was reduced from 15 days to 72 hours in March, the use of torture during incommunicado detention persisted, even after the inclusion of provisions banning such practices in the Agreement on Human Rights and the new directives on detention procedures. Beatings, sleep and food deprivation, suspension by the wrists, subjection to extreme hot or cold temperatures and near-suffocation in the capucha, a rubber hood sometimes ñlled with lime, were the most common methods of torture described. Torture was most likely to occur during the period before the arrest was acknowledged.
In September political prisoner Carlos López was removed from his prison cell in San Salvador in the middle of the night. He said that armed men, believed to be from the Treasury Police, forced him into a vehicle, in which he was repeatedly interrogated, beaten and threatened with death before being transferred to a prison in Gotera.
The same month 15-year-old Herson Rivera, detained by National Guard members, was reportedly kicked, punched, beaten and threatened with rape. Pressure was applied to his throat and a knife was placed at his neck to try to force him to confess to belonging to the fmln.
At least two detainees reportedly died in custody as a result of torture. Julian Rosales López was arrested in February and taken to an unknown destination by soldiers of the Atlacatl Battalion. Several days later his family were informed that his body was in the National Police headquarters. An autopsy report showed severe injuries to his head and other parts of his body reportedly caused by torture. Mauricio Quinteros was abducted by armed men in plain clothes in San Salvador on 30 July. His family eventually located him in police custody but were not allowed to see him. On 10 August they were told that he had committed suicide by hanging. However, the autopsy carried out by the judicial authorities showed injuries which could not have resulted from hanging, and human rights workers concluded he had died under torture.
At the end of the year approximately
200 detainees accused of politically motivated offences remained in prison. Human rights lawyers alleged that many had been committed to pre-trial detention on the basis of confessions extracted under torture. Mauricio Gabriel Barrera Ardon alleged that when he was taken to court in May police officers threatened to kill him if he refused to ratify the statement they had drawn up on his behalf. When he tried to deny its contents before a court official, a policeman reportedly pulled his hair and discreetly hit him in the back. He alleged that while in poUce custody he had been beaten, denied food and sleep for five days, and had his head submerged several times in water.
Jorge Alberto Miranda Arévalo was acquitted in April of the 1987 murder of human rights worker Herbert Anaya Sanabria after the judge concluded that his confession had been extracted under duress {see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1990]. However, he remained in prison pending an appeal by the prosecution and because he was facing other charges of "subversive association".
Among the "disappearance" cases reported to Amnesty International was that of Angel Sebastian Lico Matozo. He was reportedly abducted by uniformed soldiers of the Destacamento Militar No. 7 (dm7). Military Detachment No. 7 in the town of Ahuachapan in March, dm7 officials denied he had been in detention, but a former detainee in the dm7 said he had heard Angel Lico being interrogated there. Amnesty International also received information about the "disappearance" of 17-year-old Erik Romero Canales following his arrest by First Brigade soldiers on 18 November 1989. His mother was allowed to take him food at the military checkpoint where he was held overnight. On the following day his mother saw him being taken away blindfold to an unknown destination. By the end of 1990 the case remained unclarified, in spite of eyewitness evidence of his arrest.
The authorities said they were investigating the "disappearance" of six members of the San Cayetano farming cooperative in Ahuachapàn. All were abducted in December 1989 by individuals allegedly linked to the dm7 and at the end of 1990 their whereabouts remained unknown. The dm7 repeatedly denied allegations that they had been involved in the abductions. There
EL SALVADOR/EQUATORIAL GUINEA
was no progress in investigations into the "disappearances" of Sara Cristina Chan Chan Medina and Juan Francisco Massi Chdvez, abducted in August 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990].
Throughout the year, Amnesty International called on the authorities to take steps to prevent arbitrary arrest, torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, to clarify the fate of the "disappeared", to investigate human rights violations and to bring those responsible to justice. An Amnesty International delegation visited El Salvador in April for talks with civilian and military officials, including from the dm4 and dm7, the Vice-Minister of Defence, and representatives of human rights and other non-governmental organizations. The delegation met victims of human rights violations or their relatives.
In October Amnesty International published a report, EI Salvador: Killings, Torture and "Disappearances", which was presented to the government. It detailed the organization's concerns, including the rise in the number of "death squad" killings, and contained 34 recommendations to the government for the protection of human rights. The organization called on the Salvadorian authorities to take effective measures to ensure that their stated commitments to human rights were fully implemented in practice. The Minister of Justice wrote to Amnesty International in November stating that he shared the organization's commitment to human rights. However, the letter did not address any of the issues or cases included in Arrmesty International's report.
