NAMIBIA
Namibia became an independent republic on 21 March after more than 60 years' administration by South Africa. The Constitution abolished the death penalty and guaranteed human rights. However, there were some reports of prisoners being tortured or ill-treated by police. Moreover, hundreds of people who had died or "disappeared" before independence in the custody of the South African authorities in Namibia or in detention camps run by the South West Afnca People's Organisation (swAPo) in Angola remained unaccounted for.
After multi-party elections in March, swapo's leader, Samuel Shaafishuna Nujoma, became President. The human rights guarantees of the new constitution broadly accord with relevant provisions of the principal international human rights
standards. The United Nations (un) Transition Assistance Group which helped to administer the independence process left Namibia in May. A new police force and army were recruited from former swapo guerrillas and the former South African-controlled secxnity forces: some, including senior officers, had allegedly been responsible for killing or torturing prisoners in the past. In February a 1989 amnesty law exempting returning exiles from prosecution for abuses committed in the past was extended to South African security force personnel with respect to crimes committed in the course of their duties before independence.
Nine white men suspected of stealing a large quantity of weapons from arsenals as part of a right-wing plot to overthrow the government were arrested between August and October. They were charged with high treason and related offences. Their trial was set for early 1991. In a separate case, 15 people arrested in September were suspected of politically motivated offences as they were found in possession of ammunition. They included two relatives of Hans Diergaardt, a leader of the ethnically based local administration at Rehoboth before independence, who had barricaded himself in his state-owned residence until his eviction in September. He had apparently hoped to declare Rehoboth independent from Namibia. Hans Diergaardt's son was convicted in November and ordered to pay a fine; the others were acquitted of the same charges.
Nine convicted political prisoners were released under amnesty decrees connected with the independence process. Five who were imprisoned in Walvis Bay (a South African enclave in Namibia) for public violence offences during a protest in Walvis Bay in June 1988 against the siting of military bases near schools in northern Namibia were freed by the South African authorities in February. Four swapo members who did not qualify for release during Namibia's transition to independence were released soon after independence (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The case of another swapo member was referred to a commission which reviewed the cases of all prisoners and reduced the sentences of many.
There were dozens of allegations of torture or ill-treatment. Some criminal suspects alleged they had been tortured in
NAMIBIA/NEPAL
police stations. For example, Malakia End-jambi, a diamond mine employee, alleged he had been severely beaten at Oranje-mund in June. The Oranjemund police commander was subsequently charged with assault but he had not been tried by the end of 1990. Most complaints of torture or ill-treatment concerned "special constables". former soldiers who had received minimal training before being posted as border police. In a widely reported case in August, "special constables" allegedly tortured two South African tourists and forced them to confess that they had been spying for South Africa. One was reportedly beaten with a pole while suspended horizontally from a tree. The "special constables" were withdrawn in September and a Cabinet Committee was set up to recommend measures to prevent abuses by the pohce. The committee had not reported publicly by the end of 1990.
There was little progress in accounting for hundreds of people who had "disappeared" before independence, both in the custody of the South African authorities and in swapo detention camps in Angola. swapo failed to comply with a Supreme Court instruction of May 1989 to account for five of them by December 1989 (see Amnesty Internatíonal Report 1990). It did, however, draw up a list of over 600 missing people. A heated controversy arose in October over the appointment as Army Commander of a swapo official allegedly responsible for detaining and torturing swAPO members in Angola.
An all-party parliamentary committee set up in June to consider how to account for those who had died or "disappeared" in custody before independence apparently held no substantive discussions. However, Prime Minister Hage Geingob consulted various interest groups and reported to the National Assembly in November. As a result, the National Assembly requested the International Committee of the Red Cross to investigate the cases of those still unaccounted for in both Angola and Namibia.
Little further information became available about deaths in 1989 which appeared to be extrajudicial executions (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Amnesty International learned in 1990 that inquests into the deaths of about 300 swapo combatants killed by South African security forces in April 1989 had not found evidence of unlawful killings. An inquest in February
found that the policeman who shot Petrus Joseph in August 1989 had acted in self-defence but the court noted that the police had not kept proper records of the incident.
At the beginning of the year 10 prisoners were under sentence of death for murder. In early March two had their sentences commuted on appeal to 15-year prison terms. The eight remaining death sentences were necessarily commuted when the death penalty was abolished, but by the end of 1990 the authorities had not yet decided on substitute prison terms.
Soon after independence, and again later in the year, Amnesty International wrote to the government to call for an independent and impartial inquiry to establish the fate or whereabouts of people who had died or "disappeared" or had been tortured in custody before independence. It also urged the authorities to ensure, at the very least, that those directly responsible for human rights abuses should not again be given any authority over prisoners. In addition, Amnesty International urged that police and military personnel should receive thorough training in human rights.
In August Amnesty International published a report, Namibia: the Human Rights Situation at Independence, which summarized human rights developments since September 1989.
