CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
At least 37 pro-democracy activists were arrested; 25 were still being held but had not been tried at the end of the year. Most appeared to be prisoners of conscience. More than a dozen other suspected government opponents arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, remained in detention without trial. One was reportedly beaten and ill-treated. Three prisoners remained under sentence of death. No death sentences were known to have been imposed or carried out in 1990.
The government faced increasing pressure for political reform and multi-party democracy but maintained that all shades of political opinion were being accommodated within the ruling BassewbJement démocratique centrafricain (rdc). Central African Democratic Alliance, the only political party allowed by the Constitution. In May more than 200 people signed an open letter to President André Kolingba, calling for a national conference to discuss the introduction of a multi-party system. A Comité de coordination pour la convocation de ¡a conférence nationale (ccccn). Coordination Committee for the Convening of a National Conference, was formed in mid-May by the leading advocates of multiparty democracy. In June the ccccn published a memorandiun calling for an end to one-party rule.
Twenty members of the ccccn were arrested on 12 September, when a meeting called to plan a national conference was broken up by the security forces. Among those arrested were two former prisoners of
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC/CHAD
conscience: Abel Goumba, a former vice-president and leader of the Front patriotique oubanguien-Parti du travail (fpo-pt), Oubangui Patriotic Front-Labour Party; and Aristide Sokambi, President of the cœcN. At least 17 more arrests were made in the days after a peaceful ccccn meeting on 13 October; the meeting was followed by violent demonstrations in which around 40 people were injured. At least four ccgcn members were among the 17 people arrested, including Thomas Koazo, a journalist and former prisoner of conscience released in September 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990), and General Timothée Malendoma, a former army officer. All of those arrested on 12 September and five of those arrested on 13 October remained held; the 25 detainees were charged with state security offences but none had been tried by the end of the year.
In July Maître Nicolas Tiangaye, a lawyer supporting the ccccn campaign, was officially restricted from leaving the capital, Bangui, by the Minister of Public Security while disciplinary proceedings against him were being considered. The restrictions were imposed after he criticized the army in a way which the authorities apparently considered seditious. The Justice Minister said the restrictions were unlawful; as a result he was dismissed from office. The restrictions on Nicolas Tiangaye were lifted in October, when a panel of judges acquitted him of professional misconduct.
Untried political detainees arrested in previous years continued to be held. They included Jacques Ngoli, who was arrested in May 1987 apparently for helping to draft a tract which criticized the government, and Jeanne-Marie Ruth Rolland, a former prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1990). Jeanne-Marie Ruth Rolland was arrested in December 1989 after refusing to move out of the way of a government motorcade. She was initially held at the Bangui headquarters of the paramilitary Compagnie Nationale de Sécurité, national security agency, where she was kept handcuffed and reportedly denied medical treatment. In mid-1990 she was moved to an undisclosed place of detention.
Twelve political opponents of the government, who were forcibly returned from Benin in 1989 (see Amnesty /niernaijono/ Report 1990), remained in detention with-
out charge or trial and were held incommunicado. One of the detainees. General François Bozize, was reportedly beaten severely and ill-treated in July; the authorities said he had tried to escape. General Bozize's brother. Honoré Cocksiss Ouilébona, and several others who were arrested in late 1989 as suspected political supporters of the General, also remained in detention throughout 1990 without being charged.
Three people convicted in 1982 remained under sentence of death (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Amnesty International did not learn of any new death sentences or executions during the year.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of pro-democracy activists and other prisoners of conscience, and sought information about other political detainees held without trial. Amnesty International called for an inquiry into allegations that General Bozize had been beaten and urged the authorities to take steps to protect all prisoners from beatings and other ill-treatment, and to allow prisoners regular access to their families, doctors and lawyers.
