CAMBODIA
At least six people arrested in May and still held at the end of the year were believed to be prisoners of conscience. More than 200 political prisoners arrested in previous years were believed to be held, either without charge or trial or after unfair trials, and the situation of more than 700 others was not known. New information was received about the alleged torture of political detainees in 1989. Guerrilla forces fighting the Phnom Penh government reportedly detained and summarily killed members of their own armed forces as well as captured civilians.
The Government of the State of Cambodia, headed by Chairperson of the Council of Ministers Hun Sen. maintained its opposition to the establishment of political parties other than the ruling Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party (kprp) despite provisions in favour of the "right to set up associations" in the 1989 Constitution.
The government continued to face armed opposition from the guerrilla forces of the National Government of Cambodia (ngc), formerly known as the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea. It comprised the Partie of Democratic Kampuchea (the "Khmer Rouge") and two other groups. A framework for the settlement of the Cambodian conflict put forward by the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council contained provisions on safeguards for human rights, but these appeared to be inadequate.
In Phnom Penh, six government officials and possibly other people were reportedly detained in May in connection with attempts to form a political party,
They included Ung Phan, the Minister of Transport and Telecommunications, Thun Saray, the acting Director of the Institute of Sociology, and Khay Mathury, an architect and former army lieutenant-colonel. They had reportedly written and attempted to publish the charter of a new political party. No charges were known to have been brought against them by the end of the year.
According to official media reports. 775 political suspects were detained by the police and military forces between January and August, mainly in the western provinces. They were alleged to have been involved in the activities of the armed coalition opposing the government. Some apparently remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year but no details of these cases were known to have been made public. There was no new information on the fate of political suspects whose detention was reported in the official news media in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). However, Amnesty International learned of the names of 213 political prisoners arrested between 1979 and 1988 and believed still held without trial or after unfair trials.
Three former political prisoners who had been held in 1989 for suspected involvement in armed opposition to the Phnom Penh government in Sisophon, capital of the northwestern province of Banteay Meanchey, alleged that they were tortured in detention by local security authorities. Two of them, both rice farmers from Thmar Puok district, were reportedly detained by soldiers in early 1989 and handed over to the police in Sisophon. They said they were held without charge or trial for more than one year during which they were tortured three times about their alleged links with locally active guerrilla forces. They said they were shackled by the hands and feet and severely beaten, and in one case denied "reasonable amounts" of food and water for over four months, in an attempt to make them confess to planting land mines and acting as guides for the guerrillas. The third former political prisoner said he had been shackled by both feet and both hands during three months' detention at the Corrections Offices of Military Region 4 in western Cambodia after he was arrested in late 1989.
Opposition guerrilla forces operated near the Thai border and staged attacks on
CAMBODIA/CAMEROON
lines of communication deeper inside Cambodia. In one train attack in July, guerrilla forces said to belong to the "Khmer Rouge" reportedly captured and subsequently murdered about 26 civilian passengers on a train travelling from Batdambang to Phnom Penh.
Thirty members of the "Khmer Rouge" armed forces were reportedly detained and summarily executed on 27 July in an area known as Zone 1003 in northern Cambodia, after "Khmer Rouge" military police accused them of leading a movement demanding greater personal and economic freedoms in accordance with earlier "Khmer Rouge" statements. Six of those killed, including Buntheuan, the chairman of a company of Division 616 special forces, were reportedly shot dead in their beds at dawn on 27 July. The other 24 were reportedly taken to a nearby forest and executed. The 30 victims had apparently been named in "confessions" extracted by military police interrogators from some of the 70 people detained in underground cells in Choam Sla, in Zone 1003, and allegedly severely ill-treated.
In September Amnesty International wrote to leaders of the ngc guerrilla forces to express grave concern about the reported killings of train passengers by "Khmer Rouge" forces. It reiterated its call for those responsible for the killing of prisoners to be brought to justice. In December the organization wrote to ngc leaders to express concern about the reported summary exe' cution of 30 members of the "Khmer Rouge" armed forces and to urge an independent and impartial investigation, the results of which should be made public.
In March the Phnom Penh government wrote to Amnesty International indicating its agreement in principle to the organization's long-standing request to visit the country. It promised to set a date for the visit, but had not done so by the end of the year.
In September Amnesty International expressed its concern to the Phnom Penh government about the May arrest and detention of government officials. It called on the authorities to make public their whereabouts and either to charge them with recognizably criminal offences or release them.
In October and November Amnesty International answered a request by the Phnom Penh Ministry of Foreign Affairs to
submit a list of prisoners of concern to the organization. The organization provided the names of the 213 political prisoners known to it and asked the Cambodian Government to name and indicate the whereabouts of hundreds of political prisoners reportedly detained in recent years. It further called for investigations into allegations that detainees held in Sisophon had been tortured.
In November Amnesty International wrote an open letter to governments involved in the peace process and to the Cambodian parties themselves, highlighting the organization's concerns about political prisoners, torture, executions and the need to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations. Amnesty International urged that human rights provisions in the peace settlement should be strengthened and that they should provide for political prisoners to be either released or given a new and fair trial. Amnesty International added that information about political prisoners should be made public and urged that appropriate international and non-governmental organizations be granted access to such prisoners.
