MOZAMBIQUE
A new constitution abolished the death penalty and extended human rights guarantees. Over 500 untried political detainees were released, but more than 200 were still held at the end of 1990. Dozens of prisoners were convicted of political offences and jailed: it was not clear whether their trials satisfied international standards for fair trial. An escaped prisoner was reportedly recaptured and tortured to death. The authorities punished some members of the security forces for abusing human rights.
The new constitution came into force in November, following country-wide discussions of a draft published in January. The Constitution provided for a multi-party political system in place of a one-party state. It abolished the death penalty, which had not been imposed since 1986. New safeguards for prisoners included the prohibition of torture, arbitrary arrest and indefinite detention without charge, as well as the inclusion of the right to challenge the legality of imprisonment through habeas corpus procedures. The Constitution thus invalidated a 1975 law which prevented prisoners suspected of crimes against the security of the state from using habeas corpus procedures and which permitted their indefinite detention without charge or trial. However, proposed new legislation to limit the period during which a suspect may be detained by the security forces before referral to the judicial authorities had not been introduced by the end of 1990.
The conflict continued between government forces, aided by Zimbabwean troops,
and the armed opposition group Resistên-cia Nacional Moçambicana (renamo), Mozambique National Resistance, which was said to have received financial or military assistance from sources in South Aft'ica. Talks between the government and renamo aimed at ending the war were inconclusive, although a limited cease-fire was agreed in December, Hundreds of civilians were killed in the fighting. Millions of displaced people continued to be dependent on emergency relief supplies and hunger was widespread.
There were further reports of abuses by renamo including the abduction and killing of civilians, renamo released eight foreign nationals captured in 1989 and 1990 and two others escaped. There were also reports that government soldiers killed civilians suspected of assisting renamo. However, it was not possible to obtain independent corroboration of reports of abuses committed in areas affected by the fighting.
On 7 March Mozambique acceded to the Organization of African Unity's African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
Several hundred people were reportedly captured or arrested on suspicion of committing crimes on behalf of renamo. According to government sources, by the end of October 60 prisoners, including people accused of politically motivated crimes and soldiers accused of military offences, had been tried and convicted. A further 519 people had been released untried, 180 others were awaiting trial and the cases of about 40 people were under investigation.
At the beginning of 1990 there were about 140 untried political prisoners in the custody of the national security service, some of whom had been held for over two years. Some were tried and convicted of politically motivated violent crimes during the year but few details of the trials were reported, Others were released on the grounds that they had already spent at least half as long in detention without trial as any prison term to which they might be sentenced if tried and convicted. Over 20 political prisoners captured in previous years were still awaiting trial at the end of 1990.
Insufficient information was available to assess whether the trials of political prisoners were fair. Franz Sam Tembe, one of the prisoners whose cases were referred to
MOZAMBIQUE/MYANMAR (BURMA)
the ordinary courts after the abolition of the Revolutionary Military Tribunal (see Amnesty International Report 1990), had been arrested in Maputo in 1987. He was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in April 1990 after he had apparently admitted to recruiting for renamo. Later, however, he said that his officially appointed defence counsel had spent only 10 minutes with him before the trial.
It was reported in the local press in luly that Antônio Sitoi, a renamo member who had escaped from a prison in Gaza province, had been killed by members of the militia. After his recapture he had apparently been taken to a cemetery and forced to dig his own grave, in which he was then buried alive.
The authorities investigated several cases of alleged human rights violations by members of the security forces. Tomé Griche, a radio journalist, was arrested in July by soldiers after he published an article about the reorganization of the army in Sofala province. The authorities ordered his release and the procuracy began an inquiry into the circumstances of his arrest, which could lead to the prosecution of the soldiers involved.
A soldier convicted in July of killing one prisoner and mortally wounding another in November 1989 received a 16-year prison sentence. The victims had been arrested in Dondo, Sofala province, and questioned about the movements of a renamo group. Amnesty International learned in 1990 that three soldiers accused of arresting and torturing a radio journalist in May 1989 were tried in mid-1989 and each sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. The results of an inquiry into allegations that prisoners convicted of fraud in September 1989 had been tortured while they were interrogated by the criminal investigation police had not been published by the end of 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
There was no news of dozens of people who "disappeared" in "re-education" camps after being arrested in the mid-1970s (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
After the draft constitution was published Amnesty International called for the inclusion of strong human rights guarantees. It welcomed the abolition of the death penalty and the additional human rights guarantees in the Constitution which was
adopted in November. Amnesty International continued to ask for information about "disappeared" prisoners.
