ARGENTINA
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the police increased. One person allegedly "disappeared" after being taken into police custody. Investigations were not completed into allegations that in 1989 some members of an opposition group had been extrajudicially executed or had "disappeared", and that others had been tortured or ill-treated. An attempt by the President to reintroduce the death penalty failed. The President pardoned eight former military officers and four others; among them was a former army general who was awaiting trial on 39 miu'der charges relating to human rights violations.
On 3 December there was a military uprising against the government of President Carlos Menem. The rebellion, involving a few hundred soldiers, was defeated. Thirteen people were killed, including five civilians. The President declared a state of siege on 3 December which was lifted the following day. He said that those involved would be tried by military courts and noted that the penalties provided for rebellion included execution. He subsequently retracted his support for the death penalty.
On 29 December President Menem pardoned and released the leaders of the military government which ruled Argentina between 1976 and 1983, and other high-ranking officers jailed for crimes corrunit-ted during the "Dirty War". Also included in the presidential pardon and release were the past military government's economy minister, José Alfredo Martinez de Hoz; the former leader of the Montonero guerrilla group, Mario Firmenich; and two former Peronist activists, Duilio Brunello and Norma Kennedy. Among the military officers pardoned by President Menem was former army general Carlos Suárez Mason, extradited from the United States of America in 1988, who had been awaiting trial on 39 murder charges relating to human rights violations.
ARGENTINA
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police custody in Buenos Aires province were more frequent than in previous years. It appeared that the police were reluctant to investigate complaints against members of the police, other security agencies and the armed forces.
In October Luis Patti, the Deputy Police Chief of Pilar, Buenos Aires province, was detained and charged with beating Daniel Barsola and Miguel Angel Guerrero and torturing them by electric shocks. The two men had been detained on 12 September on suspicion of burglary. Following a public outcry against Deputy Police Chief Patti's detention, the judge who had ordered the detention received telephone threats. He was then taken off the case by an appeal court on the grounds that he might not be able to judge the case fairly. Deputy Police Chief Patti was released shortly afterwards, pending the outcome of the judicial investigation.
In September Andrés Alberto Nuñez, from La Plata, Buenos Aires province, reportedly "disappeared" after being taken into custody by the Investigations Force of La Plata. He was reportedly detained at his home on 28 September on suspicion of theft. A witness claimed to have seen Andrés Alberto Nuñez being beaten at the Investigations Force headquarters. The police denied that he had been detained. An investigation into the case was begun by the Criminal Court of La Plata, but Andrés Alberto Nuñez' fate and whereabouts remained unknown at the end of the year.
Argentine human rights organizations alleged that the Human Rights Directorate in the Ministry of the Interior failed to follow up consistently the cases of over
150 children who had "disappeared" with their parents or who had been born to women who were held in secret detention centres during the period of military rule between 1976 and 1983. Many of these children had allegedly been given to police and military families.
Investigations remained open into the treatment in 1989 of members of the Movimiento Todos por la Patria (mtp). All for the Fatherland Movement, who had been involved in an armed attack on the Third Infantry Regiment barracks at La Tablada, Buenos Aires province, in January 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Significant evidence had supported allegations that two mtp prisoners were extrajudicially executed after surrender and that three others "disappeared" after giving themselves up to military personnel. There was also evidence that several mtp prisoners were tortured and ill-treated, by beatings and threats among other methods, while in military, police and prison custody.
The investigations into these allegations continued in the Federal Court of the District of Morón, Buenos Aires province, and in other criminal courts. In October 1989 a judge of the 6th Criminal Court of Buenos Aires had ruled that the case against police and prison officers for the alleged assault on five mtp prisoners in the cells of Tribunales, the main courthouse in Buenos Aires, should be dismissed. An appeal against this decision was lodged in 1989 by the state prosecutor and by lawyers acting for the complainants. By the end of 1990 the case had not been resolved, nor had other investigations into alleged violations against mtp prisoners resulted in any prosecutions.
In August President Menem sent draft legislation to the Argentine Congress to reintroduce the death penalty for certain crimes, including kidnapping resulting in death, and drug-trafficking. However, the legislation was withdrawn shortly afterwards owing to opposition from most legislators and several influential organizations, including the Roman Catholic Church.
In March Amnesty International published a report. The Attack on the Third Infantry Regiment Barracks at La Tablada: Investigations into Allegations of Torture, "Disappearances" and Extrajudicial Executions, which concluded that there was compelling evidence to support allegations
ARGENTINA/AUSTRALIVAUSTRIA
that after surrender some mtp prisoners had been extrajudicially executed or had "disappeared", and others had been tortured or ill-treated. The organization urged the government to take swift action to prevent further such abuses and said that delays into the investigations of these allegations amounted to a denial of the right to a prompt, thorough and effective investigation.
In November Amnesty International requested information from the authorities about measures taken in connection with allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police custody in Buenos Aires province. The organization continued to press the authorities to establish the whereabouts of children who had "disappeared". In August Amnesty International wrote to President Menem urging him not to make further proposals to reintroduce the death penalty. The organization pointed out that the réintroduction of the death penalty would be contrary to both world and regional trends and would contravene the American Convention on Human Rights which provides that the death penalty shall not be re-established in states that have abolished it.
