ITALY
Reports of ill-treatment in prisons and police custody continued. Excessive delays were reported in the investigation and judgment of a number of such allegations made in previous years. Several trials involving law-enforcement agents and prison guards accused of torture and ill-treatment resulted in suspended prison sentences or amnesties.
A draft law on conscientious objection to military service, replacing existing legislation and pending final parliamentary approval since April 1989, had still not been introduced (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990].
International standards requiring trial within a reasonable time had been breached in a number of cases during the 1980s and, despite the introduction of a new code of penal procedure in October 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990], the criminal justice system continued to be criticized for being slow and
inefficient. There were reported difficulties in implementing the new code and the government was criticized for making inadequate provision for essential structural and administrative reforms.
No progress was reported in the preparation of legislation to abolish the death penalty from the Wartime Military Penal Code and thus for all offences under Italian law, as requested by the Chamber of Deputies in August 1989.
In February Italy signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty. It had not yet been ratified by the end of the year,
Reports of the ill-treatment of prisoners continued. On 30 January around 20 prisoners in Novara Maximum Security Prison attempted to remain in the exercise yard for an extra 30 minutes, in protest at disciplinary action taken against a fellow prisoner. It was alleged that when they refiased to disperse, water hoses were turned on them and about 80 guards attacked them with truncheons and iron bars. Some of the prisoners were reportedly beaten after they had been knocked to the ground. It was claimed that a number of prisoners were beaten again during transfer to the prison infirmary and that at least two prisoners, Nicola De Maria and Bruno Ghirardi, were also beaten the next morning. Nicola De Maria's lawyer visited the prison on 2 February and, after interviewing some of the prisoners and receiving reports about the physical condition of others, he submitted a written complaint to the Novara Public Prosecutor's office. He estimated that between 10 and 15 prisoners had suffered fractured bones during the distiu:-bances, and that a similar number had required treatment for head wounds. Judicial and administrative inquiries were opened into the incidents but no results had been published by the end of the year.
Several criminal prosecutions opened in previous years in connection with the alleged torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were concluded, some after long delays.
In May, nearly five years after Salvatore Marino's death in a Palermo police station in August 1985, the verdicts were announced in the trial of 15 law-enforcement agents charged with participating in involuntary homicide (see Amnesty International Reports 1986 to 1990). A
ITALY/JAMAICA
forensic report established that Salvatore Marino had been forced to swallow large quantities of salt water and had sustained numerous injuries all over his body. The court found 10 defendants guilty of the lesser offence of manslaughter, and sentenced them to two years' suspended imprisonment and a two-year suspended prohibition on holding state employment. The charge against two other defendants was reduced to "causing involuntary physical injury", qualifying them for an immediate amnesty. The remaining three defendants were acquitted. The public prosecutor appealed against the verdicts.
A number of judicial inquiries opened in previous years into allegations of ill-treatment in police custody remained unresolved (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 to 1990). No progress was reported in an inquiry into the alleged ill-treatment of at least 47 detainees in Milan in 1988 nor in an investigation into around 30 such cases opened in Naples in 1986. However, according to unconfirmed reports, criminal proceedings brought against a carabinieri officer who shot and injured 15-year-old Antonio Leone in a Naples police station in July 1988 ended in an amnesty (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
The judicial investigation into tjie case of three police officers accused of ill-treating Francesco Badano in a Padua police station in May 1988 ended in April 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The police had stated that Francesco Badano's various injuries were attributable to a violent struggle at the time of arrest, but forensic reports concluded that injuries to the soles of his feet could not have been incurred in this way. Francesco Badano was transferred to Padua hospital the evening of his arrest to receive urgent treatment for his injuries. An autopsy concluded that the circumstances of his death in the maximum security wing the following morning were consistent with suicide. The investigating magistrate considered it "reasonably proven" that Francesco Badano had been physically ill-treated while in police custody but stated that it had not been possible to collect sufficient evidence to prove that the accused officers were those responsible; they could not, therefore, be committed for trial. The magistrate also commented on the lack of cooperation shown by other police officers interviewed about the case. However, no administrative
inquiry appeared to have been opened into Francesco Badano's treatment in police custody.
Administrative inquiries into allegations of ill-treatment, if opened, rarely resulted in disciplinary proceedings against those responsible, even when the ill-treatment had been judicially proven.
There were claims that immigrants, particularly those of North African origin, were frequently subjected to ill-treatment by law-enforcement agents but that they rarely made formal complaints because they feared police harassment, further ill-treatment or counter-charges of calumny. As a result it was difficult to assess the number of such cases.
Amnesty International continued to seek information from the government and other soxuces on the steps taken to investigate allegations of ill-treatment. It expressed concern about the lack of progress in a number of judicial and administrative inquiries opened into such allegations in previous years. Amnesty International pressed the authorities to make further efforts to identify those responsible for Francesco Badano's treatment in police custody. The organization also investigated cases where charges of calumny were brought against detainees, apparently without full investigation of their original complaints.
