CUBA
At least 70 government critics, most of them probable prisoners of conscience, were detained. Many of them were released after short periods; others were held for up to eight months without access to lawyers. At least eight prisoners of conscience were serving prison sentences at the end of the year; five others were released, most after completing their sentences. Trials of political prisoners continued to fall short of international standards for fair trial. No executions were known to have taken place but at least two death sentences were believed to be pending appeal before the People's Supreme Court.
The changing situation in Eastern Europe had serious political and economic repercussions on Cuba. The Cuban Government called on the public to openly discuss the weaknesses of the country's political system, but continued to take harsh action against small unofficial opposition and human rights groups calling for radical political change or an extension of civil rights.
In March large crowds attacked the homes of two former political prisoners, brothers Gustavo and Sebastián Arcos Bergnes, leaders of the Comité Cubano Pro Derechos Humanos (ccpdh), Cuban Committee for Human Rights, when meetings of human rights activists were taking place there. Security forces reportedly stood by and watched the crowds shout insults and throw stones, causing serious damage to the buildings.
In August the Attorney General said that fewer than 200 people were in detention for "counter-revolutionary" crimes. This figure, however, did not include those prisoners convicted of certain criminal offences for which prisoners of conscience are often held, such as illegal association,
CUBA
clandestine printing and trying to leave the country illegally.
Betv^reen January and March about 50 people were arrested apparently in connection with their political, human rights or religious activities. Most were believed to have been released within a few days, but some were held for several months.
In January two mathematics students at Havana University, Jorge Quintana and Carlos Ortega, were arrested and taken to the Havana headquarters of the Departamento de Seguridad del Estado (dse). Department of State Security. Both were members of the Unión de Jóvenes Comunistas (ujc), Union of Young Communists, the youth wing of the Cuban Communist Party (the only legal political party in Cuba). They were accused of belonging to an opposition group and of criticizing President Fidel Castro. They were held until November, when the prosecutor changed the charge against them from "enemy propaganda" to the criminal offence of "disrespect". Jorge Quintana and Carlos Ortega were given non-custodial sentences of three years' and two years' "restricted liberty" respectively, which required them to report regularly to the police.
Six people were reportedly arrested in Sagua La Grande, Villa Clara Province, in January and charged with illegally producing religious literature for the banned Jehovah's Witnesses. It was not known whether they remained in detention.
Also in January Aurea Feria Cano and Jesús Contreras, said to be leaders of an unofficial political group, the Unión Democrática Indio-Feria, Indio-Feria Democratic Union, were detained in Havana and taken to the dse headquarters. They were held until November when they were tried with four other people for "enemy propaganda" on the grounds that they were planning to distribute "counterrevolutionary" pamphlets. The outcome of the trial was not known.
In March eight members of the Partido Pro Derechos Humanos en Cuba (ppdhc), Party for Human Rights in Cuba, were arrested in Havana. Shortly afterwards a senior official announced that they were being accused of serving the interests of the United States of America by trying to change Cuba's socialist government and constitution, and of belonging to a "counter-revolutionary organization", hi July two of the detainees - Teinia Diaz
Castro and Pablo Roberto Pupo Sánchez -appeared on Cuban television alleging that Cuban human rights groups, including the ppdhc, were being manipulated by foreign diplomats. This coincided with the attempt by several Cubans to obtain asylum in foreign embassies in the capital, Havana. Two months later, the two, together with the six other ppdhc members detained with them, were released. In November the eight were convicted of "illegal association" and given sentences ranging from three months' to one year's "restricted liberty".
ppdhc Secretary General Dr Alfredo Samuel Martinez Lara was also arrested in March, only a few days after he had been released from prison (see Amnesty International Report 1990). He had completed a nine-month sentence for "illegal association, demonstration and meeting" in December 1989, and was then given an additional sentence for "disrespect", allegedly for insulting President Ccistro. He was released on 27 February. After his rearrest in March, Dr Martinez Lara was apparently taken to the dse headquarters where he was still being held at the end of the year. Reports were received that he was being subjected to psychological pressures. In November he was allowed one brief visit from a lawyer who reportedly found that no formal charges had been brought against him. However, some sources said that the authorities were investigating the possibility that he was connected with 11 young people who were arrested in January and tried in July on charges including terrorism and rebellion. The 11 were accused of belonging to the Asociación Juvenil Pro Derechos Humanos (ajpdh), Youth Association for Human Rights, said by the authorities to be the armed wing of the ppdhc. They received sentences ranging from three years' "restricted liberty" to 15 years' imprisonment. Little information was available concerning the circumstances of their arrest and trial.
In June the trial took place of Esteban González González and six other prisoners of conscience who had been arrested in September 1989. They were charged with rebellion and "other acts against state security" on the basis of their membership of the unoflicial Movimiento Integra-cionista Democrática (mid), Movement for Democratic Integration, of which Esteban González González was the founder and leader. They were convicted on charges
CUBA
including possessing and disseminating "counter-revolutionary propaganda" and planning to carry out a campaign of civil disobedience with a view to changing the political and social system and restoring capitalism. Esteban González González was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment; the others to between three years' "restricted liberty" and six years' imprisonment. The mid calls for political reform and full respect for human rights in Cuba but specifically rules out the use of violence. The seven had been held for several months in the dse headquarters without access to lawyers before being transferred to prison.
Information was received concerning six other prisoners who may be prisoners of conscience. Juan Mayo Méndez, held in Boniato Prison; Agustín Figueredo, Ernesto Bonilla Fonseca and Alexis Maestre Savorit, held in Las Mangas Prison, Bay-amo; and ccpdh member Alexis Morejón Rodríguez, held in Camaguey Province, were all accused of "enemy propaganda", mainly for writing or shouting anti-government slogans. Pedro Alvarez Martinez, a ppdhc delegate for Pinar del Rio, was arrested in December 1989 and given a five-year sentence for offences including "clandestine printing".
ccpdh member José Irene Padrón Dueñas was detained in Havana on 4 September and taken to the dse headquarters, possibly because he had denounced the arrest of his brother-in-law Alexis Morejón Rodriguez (see above). At the end of the year it was not known whether he was still in detention.
Reports continued to be received that several hundred people were imprisoned for trying to leave the country illegally, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. A letter smuggled out of Combinado del Este Prison in July 1990 said that 335 people were being held in the prison for that offence. However, little detailed information on individual cases was available.
Prisoner of conscience Hiram Abi Cobas Núñez was released from prison in November on grounds of illness and allowed to serve the remainder of his sentence at home. In March 1990 he and co-defendant Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz had appealed unsuccessfully against the sentences imposed on them in November 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Prisoner of conscience Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz remained in prison at the end of the year.
Four other known prisoners of conscience were released, most after completing their sentences: Manuel González González in January; Edita Esther Cruz Rodriguez in February; Javier Roberto Bahamonde Masot in July; and David Moya Alfonso in October (see .Amnesty International Report 1990.)
Alfredo Mustelier Nuevo, one of three remaining "plantados históricos" (political prisoners held since the 1960s and 1970s who reftised to take part in prison rehabilitation programs or to obey certain prison regulations), was released in March.
No executions were known to have taken place during 1990. At least two death sentences, including that of Jorge Luis González Norona who was convicted of triple murder, were believed to be pending appeal before the People's Supreme Court. There was concern at reports that the authorities were considering extending the already wide range of offences punishable by death to include serious drug-related crimes.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience and sought information from the authorities about the legal status of political prisoners. In March the organization expressed concern about the attacks on the homes of CCPdh members, No written response was received to these commimi-cations. However, Amnesty International delegates to the Eighth United Nations (un) Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, which took place in Havana from 27 August until 7 September, were able to raise the organization's concerns with senior Cuban officials, including the Attorney General and the President of the People's Supreme Court.
In August Amnesty International referred to the cases of Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz, Hiram Abi Cobas Núñez and Hubert Jérez Mariño in an oral statement about prisoners of conscience made to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
