PORTUGAL
There were reports of ill-treatment in police custody and prisons.
In March Portugal ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In October it ratified the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty.
The reports of ill-treatment concerned detained criminal suspects and convicted prisoners. It was claimed that many detainees and prisoners with substantive evidence of ill-treatment, such as medical reports, did not make official complaints because of intimidation and threats of counter-charges by police and prison officers.
According to press reports, in the early hours of 1 October José Luis Barros, Paolo Jorge Gomes Almeida and a friend were returning to their homes in Oporto when the friend was attacked without warning by an unidentified man who punched him in the face. The man then hit José Luis Barros and when the friend came to his aid. threatened them with a gun. They went immediately to a station of the Public Security Police to complain. José Luis Barros alleged that he and his companions were then attacked and hit by members of the Public Security Police at the entrance to the station. The man whom José Luis Barros recognized as having punched him in the street reappeared dressed in police
PORTUGAL
uniform. When Paolo Jorge Gomes Almeida protested about the man having pulled a gun on them, a policeman reportedly seized him by the neck and threw him through a plate-glass door. He was taken to hospital and received 59 stitches to his right arm.
José Luis Barros was held in the station until morning. Paolo Jorge Gomes Almeida alleged that, while he was in hospital, the officer who had thrown him through the door told him to remember that he had tripped and fallen in the street and that it would be useless to complain to a court. Officers stationed in the police post within the hospital allegedly refused to register his complaint of assault. A judicial inquiry was opened in October.
Daniel Rodriguez Perez continued to allege that he had been beaten by officers of the Public Security Police and the Judicial Police during three interrogations in 1988 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). In January the Prosecutor in Chaves indicted him for assaulting a member of the Judicial Police during his second interrogation on 6 May 1988. In February the authorities stated that he had fallen and cut his head before his first interrogation and that other injuries were self-inflicted. However, new information received during the year revealed that the Chaves prison doctor had examined him after each interrogation and, on 12 May 1988, had registered a formal complaint regarding his physical condition with the Chaves. CQurt. The doctor recorded a stitched scalp-wound, bruising of different degrees of severity to his face, chest, throat, shoulders and arms, and blood in his ears.
During the judicial investigation which was opened in 1988 into the alleged ill-
treatment of Daniel Rodriguez Perez, the Judicial Police had informed the Prosecutor that the complaint should be archived because there was insufficient evidence to indicate any breach of discipline by police officers. The Prosecutor ordered the complaint to be archived in July 1989. Daniel Rodriguez Perez' trial on charges of assault, set for September 1990, was postponed at the last moment and had not taken place by the end of the year.
A number of allegations of ill-treatment concerned inmates of Linhó prison. On 5 March, following reported violent clashes between prisoners and prison guards, 19 prisoners were assembled in the exercise yard for transfer. Relatives of the prisoners alleged that officers of the Intervention Squad of the General Directorate of Prison Services then beat the prisoners with truncheons. insulting them and referring to complaints that Linhó prisoners had made to their families and the press about their ill-treatment. On 10 March the Director General of Prison Services stated that an administrative inquiry had been opened into the reported incident.
The results of an administrative inquiry carried out at Linhó prison following the death of Mario Manuel da Luz in June 1989 were made public in February. The autopsy had apparently concluded that he had died of bronchia! pneumonia caused by injuries. Fellow prisoners at Linhó prison had alleged that during his detention in a punishment cell he was subjected to systematic ill-treatment by prison guards (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). The Director General of Prison Services stated that acts committed in the prison's punishment cells and maximum security wing constituted "serious breaches of discipline and, probably, criminal offences". The prison governor had already been suspended by February 1990, in connection with allegations of ill-treatment involving four prisoners in the security wing. In August the Director General reported that disciplinary proceedings had been opened against the prison governor, the prison doctor and other prison officers.
Amnesty International sought information on the steps taken to investigate allegations of ill-treatment and asked to be informed of the progress and outcome of judicial and administrative inquiries into such allegations. In September an Amnesty International delegate visited Chaves to
PORTUGAL/ROMANIA
attend the trial of Daniel Rodriguez Perez and, in view of the prison doctor's medical report, asked the Provedor de fustiga (Ombudsman) for a review of the decision to archive the complaint of ill-treatment.
