POLAND
Several people were reportedly ill-treated in custody, leading in one case to death. A woman was killed in an arson attack for which members of the security forces were alleged to be responsible. The death penalty remained in force although there were no executions.
Under the government of the formerly banned trade union SoUdarnosc. Solidarity, a comprehensive reform of the legal system continued. The National Judiciary Council was set up in February to promote the independence of the judiciary and freedom of the courts, and a new Supreme Court was inaugurated in July. A new system of appeal courts was also established and the misdemeanour courts, which had often been used for political cases, were transferred from the disbanded People's Councils to the Justice Ministry. In March the Prosecutor General's office was dissolved and the prosecution system put under the control of the Justice Ministry. The Penal Code and Petty Offences Code continued to be under review throughout the year. Investigations continued into past human rights abuses which occurred under former communist governments, including the murder of opposition activists. In December Solidarity Chairperson and former prisoner of conscience Lech Walesa was elected president.
In March the Ministry of the Interior stated that a detainee in Slupsk had died, apparently as a result of beatings in custody by a police officer. Reportedly, a special commission of inquiry was set up and proceedings were begun against the police officer.
In April an arson attack on the home of lerzy Jachowicz caused the death of his wife, Maria Jachowicz. He had allegedly received a number of death threats following publication in the newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza of a series of reports he had written on the workings of the Polish security forces. A high-level commission of inquiry was set up to investigate the attack.
Amnesty International expressed its concern about reports of ill-treatment in detention and requested to be informed of the findings of special commissions set up to investigate the death in Slupsk in March, and the arson attack in April. The organization also urged the authorities to abolish the death penalty.
