DENMARK
Investigations continued into allegations that asylum-seekers had been ill-treated in 1988. It was alleged that a foreign visitor had been ill-treated while in police custody.
In February Denmark signed the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty. It had not yet ratified this instrument by the end of the year.
In January 1990 a court began to hear a civil suit brought by the Prison Officers' Union against two prison nurses for making allegedly defamatory statements. The
nurses had alleged in an article published in Amnesty Nyt in September 1988 that asylum-seekers, who were being detained with ordinary prisoners, had been beaten by prison officers and subjected to racist insults in Copenhagen prisons. They reported that special cells existed in which detainees were strapped down and bright lights were left on continuously. Following the publication of the article, the Danish Parliament decided that asylum-seekers should be detained at a special centre and not with criminal prisoners.
In April the court ruled against the Prison Officers' Union on four of its five complaints about the nurses' allegations of racist abuse, ill-treatment and forcible restraint of asylum-seekers, However, the nurses' unqualified statement about an alleged severe beating was found to be unjustified and they were fined.
In September Himid Hassan Juma, a Tanzanian national, was allegedly beaten by guards at the prison of Copenhagen Central Police Station. He had been visiting Denmark as a tourist when he was detained by police on suspicion of possessing a false passport. The government announced in November that a judicial investigation would be established to look into the case.
Amnesty International sent an observer to the civil proceedings brought by the Prison Officers' Union, In May Amnesty International wrote to the government inquiring whether it had initiated an independent investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment and whether it had taken steps to prevent the recurrence of such treatment.
The government replied in August that it was initiating an independent judicial inquiry into the allegations and had taken a
DENMARK/DJIBOUTI/DOMINICA
number of other measures, including new and extended training of prison officers and a mechanism to interview detainees who were punished by solitary confinement. Amnesty International welcomed the initiatives and requested to be kept informed about their implementation.
In October Amnesty International urged the government to initiate a prompt and thorough investigation into the allegation that Himid Hassan luma had been ill-treated, and to make the findings public.
