NICARAGUA
All remaining contra prisoners and detained former members of the National Guard were released before the new government took office in April. Two amnesty laws were passed effectively blocking investigations into past human rights violations. At least two clandestine graves were discovered: a local human rights group claimed they contained the remains of detainees who had "disappeared" in 1982 and 1983.
In April Violeta Chamorro, representing the 14-party Unión Nacional Opositora (uno), National Opposition Union, took office as President after defeating President Daniel Ortega in February elections.
Following the election, leaders of the Nicaraguan Resistance, an armed opposition group commonly known as the contra, agreed to an internationally supervised demobilization program which officially ended at the beginning of July, although weapons continued to be collected after that date. Contra members and their families, many of them returning from Honduras, were to be resettled mainly in rural areas which were designated "development poles". A special rural police force made up of former contra members was established in the resettlement zones.
Political violence increased towards the end of the year, sparked off by complaints fi?om former contra members about delays in providing land. Protest actions took the form of land seizures, hostage-taking, attacks on police stations, the occupation of churches, government and other public
NICARAGUA
buildings, and road blockades. At least 25 people, including police officers, were reportedly killed between October and December. Some died in clashes between police and protesters; a few were killed during counter-actions by cooperativists whose land had been occupied by former contra members.
In February Nicaragua signed the Second Optional Protocol to the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty. In August the government signed the Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights to Abolish the Death Penalty. It had not ratified either of these instruments by the end of the year.
On 15 November the police arrested former contra adviser Aristides Sánchez, whom the govemment accused of plotting to destabilize the country. There were claims that he was subjected to psychological pressure by police officers and forced to sign a letter naming people alleged to be involved in the destabilization plot. The authorities denied the allegations and told a National Assembly commission looking into the incident that he had been alone in his cell when he wrote the letter. Aristides Sánchez was allowed to leave the country "on humanitarian grounds" shortly after his arrest.
Four leaders of the Sandinista-led Frente Nacional de los Trabajadores, National Workers Front, were held by police for two hours on 4 luly during a national strike protesting against the gov-emment's economic policies. There were violent clashes when armed government supporters tried to prevent the strike. A 17-year-old youth was reportedly killed when two armed men on a motor cycle shot at a group of strikers. Three other men were killed in another strike incident in unclear circumstances.
By 25 April, when Daniel Ortega left office, the authorities had released all remaining contra detainees, 39 former National Guardsmen who had been imprisoned for alleged offences under the Somoza govemment, and some members of the Popular Sandinista Army accused of hiunan rights violations. Some were released imder the Law of General Amnesty and National Reconciliation (Law 81), which was passed in March. This granted an unconditional amnesty to all those who had committed crimes against
state security, and civil and military personnel who may have committed crimes during the investigation of such offences between 1979 and 12 March 1990.
In May a second amnesty law revoked Law 81 but granted an amnesty to anyone responsible for "political crimes or common crimes related to them" committed at any time prior to the passing of the law, including those not yet sentenced or detained. The two amnesty laws effectively blocked investigations into past human rights violations, including those which had been opened into a number of cases of "disappearances" and killings of civilians carried out by government troops in previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Several unmarked graves were foimd in areas near the Honduran border which had been affected by contra and counter-insur-gency activity in the past. The Asociación Nicaragüense pro Derechos Humanos (anpdh), Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights, announced the discovery in June of an unmarked grave in Mokorón, Wiwilí, containing the partial remains of at least 10 people as well as items of clothing and nylon rope of the type used to tie wrists together. The organization claimed that the remains included those of seven peasants who had "disappeared" after their arrest in October 1983. Six of them had reportedly been arrested by soldiers in a house in San losé de Bocay, not far from Wiwili, when they tried to evade military service. The owner of the house had also been detained. A forensic report on the remains requested by the anpdh suggested that the cause of death could have been degollamiento, slitting of the throat, because there was no evidence of bullet wounds, although not all the remains had been found. The examining doctor based his conclusions regarding the identity of the bodies on statements by relatives, who said they recognized some of the clothing and gold-filled teeth also found in the grave. However, another human rights group, the Centro Nicaragüense de Derechos Humanos, Nicaraguan Centre for Human Rights, concluded that these forensic investigations were insufficient to establish the time and cause of death, or to confirm the identity of the bodies. An investigation was reportedly initiated by the military authorities but the results were not known by the end of the year.
NICARAGUA/NIGER
In August reports emerged of the discovery of another unmarked grave in Murra containing 16 skulls, some of them with bullet holes, and other human remains and clothing. Identity cards from an agricultural workers' union were also said to have been found. The cards belonged to six members of a group of 14 evangelists who were reportedly arrested in April 1982 by govemment froops. They were reportedly detained when they left a Sunday religious gathering after receiving a message summoning them to a meeting. The arrests were never acknowledged. The grave was said to have been discovered a few days after the men's alleged arrest but its existence was not made public until after the change of govemment because of fear of reprisals. Relatives of the six people whose identity cards were found, and of four others, said they recognized pieces of clothing or other items found in the grave as belonging to the missing detainees.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of the unmarked graves. The organization was concerned that full and effective investigations should be carried out by the authorities, with the collaboration of forensic anthropologists, to determine the identity and fate of those who died, and to bring to justice those responsible.
On 11 April Amnesty International wrote to President Ortega expressing concern that Law 81 would block investigations into extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". The outgoing President of the official National Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights replied shortly afterwards stating that the Commission was opposed in principle to amnesty laws but that Law 81 should be seen in the context of reconciliation in that it favoured not only army personnel but also members of the contra involved in serious crimes. The Commission denied that the law was an invitation to impunity, pointing out that the Sandinista Government had made efforts to punish members of the army responsible for human rights violations.
In a letter to President Chamorro in July, Amnesty International reiterated its concern about the blocking of investigations into human rights violations following the passing of a second amnesty law in May. It also requested information about steps being taken by the authorities to clarify the
fate of those who "disappeared" in previous years after their abduction by either the military or the contra. No response was received.
