FIJI
	> > . %
> A	/
	
"^fifîssi	■ 1 .
	- ^ - v
r	
	V
A leading critic of the government was abducted and tortured. After his release he and six others were charged with sedition and unlawful assembly. Three journalists also faced charges in connection with a newspaper report. All 10 were at liberty and had not been tried by the end of the year.
A new constitution was promulgated in luly to replace the one suspended after the 1987 military coup. It guarantees power for indigenous Fijians, although they comprise just under half the population.
Dr Anirudh Singh, a lecturer at the University of the South Pacific (usp) and chairman of a local civil rights organization, the Group Against Racial Discrimination (card), was abducted by soldiers on 24 October, taken to woodland and tortured. He was held for 11 hours during which he was tied up, beaten severely and had his hair burned with cigarettes. He was apparently questioned about a peacefiil protest on 18 October by around 200 ethnic Indians, during which a copy of Fiji's new constitution was burned. The government ordered an investigation into the protest, which it described as illegal, "despicable and treasonous".
Three journalists working for the Daily Post newspaper were arrested in October and charged under Section 15(a) of the 1976 Public Order Act. The arrests followed a report in the newspaper that a further protest was to take place at the university over the abduction and torture of Dr Singh, at which more copies of the Constitution would be burned. On the day that the report appeared, the government banned all meetings, processions and assemblies at the university campus in the interests of "public safety" and "public order". The card, however, reportedly denied that protests were planned.
Dr Singh and six others - four usp lecturers, a medical doctor and a former school teacher - were arrested and charged with sedition and unlawful assembly on 1 November. Their trial had not taken place by the end of 1990. If imprisoned, it appeared likely that they as well as the three journalists would be prisoners of conscience.
The trial of 21 people charged with arms-smuggling in 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and J 990), resulted in 19 being conditionally discharged and one being acquitted. One of the accused had left the country before charges were brought.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the abduction and torture of Dr Singh to Prime Minister Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara and called for an urgent and impartial inquiry. The government replied that a police investigation had been initiated. It also said that there was no indication that the military or police had been involved in the incident. However, following the investigation five soldiers were charged with the abduction of Dr Singh with intent to cause
FIJI/FINLAND/FRANCE
grievous bodily harm. They pleaded guilty and on 21 November received suspended prison sentences.
