DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
One person was killed in circumstances suggesting he may have been extrajudicially executed. A detainee remained in prison despite the fact that a judge had reportedly ordered his release, and many detainees were not brought before a judge after arrest. A community activist received death threats from the police.
President Joaquin Balaguer of the Partido Reformista Social Cristiano, the Social Christian Reformist Party, was reelected in May by a slim margin over Juan Bosch of the Partido de la Liberación Dominicana, the Dominican Liberation Party. He was inaugurated for his fifth term as President in August amid claims from
opposition leaders of election fraud. On the eve of his inauguration, disturbances throughout the country culminated in a 48-hour general strike, with confrontations between police and protesters leaving over a dozen dead and hundreds wounded.
Further general strikes were held in September and November, in protest against the government's economic measures. The police and army used firearms and detained briefly hundreds of demonstrators in their attempt to control mass protests, some of them violent. At least three demonstrators reportedly died in these clashes.
On 28 September Jesús Diplán Martinez, a young community leader, was killed in the town of Salcedo in circumstances suggesting he may have been extrajudicially executed. According to eyewitness reports, he was shot in the street by members of the security forces after being arrested. A commission of inquiry to investigate the case was reportedly set up, but to Amnesty International's knowledge the results had not been made public and no one had been charged by the end of the year.
Luis Lizardo, who was arrested in May 1989 for alleged involvement in a bombing, remained in detention (see Amnesty International Report 1990). A judge had reportedly ordered his release after a habeas corpus petition was filed in May 1989, but the police apparently refused to comply with the order. There was no official response to requests for information about his exact legal situation.
Many detainees were reportedly not brought before a competent judicial authority within 48 hours of their arrest, as specified by Article 8 of the Constitution. For example, Ramón Almánzar, a community activist affiliated to the Colectivo de Organizaciones Populares, the Collective of Popular Organizations, was detained on
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC/ECUADOR
1 October by the police in connection with their inquiries into the use of violence by protesters during countrywide demonstrations. He was reportedly held without charge for at least 12 days before being released.
Another political activist involved in mobilizing opposition to the government's economic policies, Fernando Peña Segura (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990], reportedly received numerous death threats from the police.
Following the death of Jesús Diplán Martínez, Amnesty International appealed for a thorough and impartial inquiry into the killing.
