SRI LANKA
Thousands of people "disappeared" or were extrajudicially executed in the northeast; many were tortured and then killed in custody. An unknown number of others were detained in the area. In the south, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions continued to be committed by government forces and "death squads" linked to them, but on a lesser scale than in 1989. About 9,000 political prisoners remained in detention without trial for alleged connections with an armed Sinhalese opposition group. The government took no steps to clarify the fate of thousands of people who had "disappeared" in the south since 1987, nor of over 680 people who had "disappeared" in the northeast in previous years.
Indian troops, who had been responsible for the security of the northeast since July 1987, completed their withdrawal by late March. Following heavy fighting with rival Tamil groups, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (ltte) - the "Tamil Tigers" -took control of Northeastern Province and continued negotiations with the Sri Lanka Government about the future administration of the province. Members of the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation, Front (eprlf) and allied groups, who had
controlled the provincial council under Indian patronage, fled the area.
In June the ltte captured numerous police stations in the east and took prisoner hundreds of police officers who surrendered. Most Sinhalese and Muslim officers among them were reportedly beaten and killed in captivity. Many Tamil officers were released but some reportedly remained in captivity at the end of the year. Fighting ensued between government forces and the ltte, which evacuated major towns in the east as government forces moved in. Most of the Jaffna peninsula, where about 200 government soldiers and police remained besieged in Jafftia fort until September, remained in ltte control at the end of the year.
Reprisal killings of Tamil civilians by Muslim groups in the east, some of whom were apparently armed by the government, were reported in August after hundreds of Muslim civilians were killed, apparently by the ltte. In October the ltte issued an ultimatum to Muslims in Mannar, Mullaittivu, Kilinochchi and Jaffna districts to leave the area or be killed: tens of thousands fled.
In the south, the government said in January that it had destroyed the armed opposition fanatha Vimukthi Peramuna (fvp), People's Liberation Front. According to government figures, the jv? had murdered 6,517 people between late 1987 and March 1990. There were markedly fewer reports of killings by the IVP in 1990 than in 1989. However, 15 members of a village "vigilance committee", which had reported on suspected subversives to the security forces, were murdered in Matara District in July. The government attributed the killings to the ivp.
In the northeast the ltte was allegedly responsible for hundreds of killings, including the murder of many hundred Sinhalese and Muslim civilians. For example, the ltte reportedly killed 27 Sinhalese civilians whom they dragged from a bus near Trincomalee in August and about 140 Muslim worshippers in mosques at Kattankudy in August. The ltte also reportedly tortured and killed prisoners, killed or imprisoned numerous members or sympathizers of rival Tamil groups, and imprisoned Tamil civilians for ransom.
Outside the northeast, the ltte was widely suspected of responsibility for the assassination in Colombo of an eprlf
SRI LANKA
member of parliament in May and for the murders in Madras, India, of 14 eprlf central committee members in June.
In February President Ranasinghe Pre-madasa repealed Emergency Regulation 55ff which had permitted police to dispose of bodies without post-mortem or inquest. However, the remaining Emergency Regulations still enabled security forces to dispose of bodies secretly and extrajudicial executions continued. Several other regulations were repealed or amended, but the state of emergency remained in force at the end of the year.
Government forces in the northeast were reported to have extrajudicially executed thousands of defenceless civilians in areas they had regained, using counter-terror tactics similar to those employed in the south in 1989 (see Amnesty Interna-tionai Report 1990). Victims were reportedly shot, bayoneted, stabbed or hacked to death; some were said by witnesses to have been burned alive. In eastern areas, besides helping the army round up suspects, Muslim Home Guards also reportedly committed extrajudicial executions.
Victims' bodies were regularly left in the open. The identities of many remained unknown; others, presumably killed in custody, were identified as people who had been detained by security forces days earlier. Some had been burned beyond recognition or mutilated. In Amparai District, where the Special Task Force, a police commando unit, was especially active, bodies - some without heads -began to be washed up on the beaches from September.
In Amparai District alone at least 3,000 Tamil people were reportedly killed or "disappeared" between June and October, many of whom were believed to have been victims of extrajudicial execution. In Bat-ticaloa and Vavuniya districts, as well as in other areas, widespread extrajudicial executions were also reported after government troops moved in.
Both the security forces and the government refused to acknowledge that many defenceless people had been deliberately killed. Government statements referred only to atrocities committed by the ltte and the deaths in combat of "Tamil Tigers" and security forces personnel.
Thousands of men and women reportedly "disappeared" in the northeast after widespread arbitrary detentions by govern-
ment forces, and were feared to have been killed in custody. Victims included babies and their mothers, children, and elderly men and women. In Batticaloa town alone over 1,200 people reportedly "disappeared" between June and October.
Government security forces often refused to acknowledge individual detentions and the authorities, despite widespread detentions, did not disclose how many political prisoners were held in the northeast nor whether any had been charged. Any person suspected of even minimal contact with the ltte was at risk of detention, "disappearance" or extrajudicial execution. Members of Tamil and Muslim armed groups which opposed the ltte helped the security forces to identify ltte suspects, and in some areas armed cadres of certain Tamil groups were deployed alongside government security forces.
In the predominantly Sinhalese south, hundreds of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" were reported, although this represented a marked reduction from 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1990). In June scores of corpses were found near former army camps, apparently the bodies of prisoners killed at the camps before troops were redeployed to the northeast. Bodies of suspected victims of extrajudicial execution continued to be found in the following months.
Richard de Zoysa, a journalist who had reported on human rights issues, was among those killed in February. He was abducted by gunmen from his home in the capital, Colombo. The following day his naked body was found in the sea with bullet wounds to his neck and head. Although his mother identified one of the alleged killers as a senior police officer, a magisterial inquiry into his death was discontinued in August and no action was taken against the police officer allegedly involved. Richard de Zoysa's mother and her lawyer both received death threats in May when they pressed for a full inquiry into his murder, Other human rights defenders were also at risk: at least five members of parliament who had raised human rights cases received death threats. In September Kumaraguru Kugamoorthy, a radio producer and human rights activist, "disappeared" after being abducted in Colombo by an armed group believed to be connected with the security forces.
SRI LANKA
"Disappearances" continued to be reported from the south following detentions by uniformed police officers and abductions by plainclothes squads believed to be attached to the security forces. The victims included former fvp suspects who had previously been detained but then released, and young Tamil men apparently suspected of links with the ltte. In Colombo and elsewhere hundreds of young Tamil men were detained by both uniformed and plainclothes personnel following the outbreak of hostilities in the northeast in June. Many were released after questioning but at least seven reportedly "disappeared". The Eelam People's Democratic Party, an anti-ltte Tamil group, reportedly detained and interrogated suspects in Colombo with the assent of the government, before handing them over to the police.
The government took no steps to investigate the thousands of "disappearances" reported in recent years. Evidence mounted during 1990 of the massive scale of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions which took place in 1988 and 1989 and were believed to number tens of thousands. In September the police confiscated details of 533 "disappearances" from an opposition member of parliament who was about to take them to a meeting of the United Nations (unJ Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances in Geneva. The papers were returned to him in October after he filed a petition in the courts alleging infringement of his fundamental rights.
In January the government announced that detainees held without charge or trial in the south under Emergency Regulations would be screened for involvement with the |vp. Criminal charges would be brought where there was evidence of serious involvement; those marginally involved would be released on probation; those believed to have been involved but against whom there was no evidence would remain in detention for "rehabilitation", although the legal basis for such rehabilitation was unclear. At the end of 1990 about 9,000 prisoners remained in detention without trial.
Detentions of jvp suspects continued in the south. Suspects' relatives were at times detained in place of the wanted person. In one reported case a six-year-old child was detained in October by Kuliyapitiyas police who had sought the father as a jvp
suspect. The child was later released and the father arrested. The father spent one month in detention before his arrest was acknowledged.
Emergency Regulations provide for indefinite detention without charge or trial, and the Prevention of Terrorism Act (pta) provides for up to 18 months' detention without charge or trial. Detainees are frequently held incommunicado, providing a ready context for torture and ill-treatment.
Charges were brought against security forces personnel for extrajudicial executions in only a few cases. Among those charged were eight police officers, who were accused of murdering 12 prisoners at Nittambuwa, Gampaha District, in February. A prisoner who survived with injuries witnessed the executions in a jungle clearing. The following morning he led people to the site, where the naked and charred bodies of the victims were found. The case was widely publicized, and an inquiry was held. No security forces personnel was known to have been charged in connection with "disappearances".
The trial of three police officers accused of murdering Wijedasa Liyanarachchi in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989] continued without conclusion.
Five people charged under the pta and Emergency Regulations with a grenade attack on the parliament building in August 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988) and other offences were acquitted. The court found that their confessions had not been made voluntarily. On their release in December, two of the defendants were immediately detained under a fresh detention order and the state filed an appeal against the judgment,
The Supreme Court awarded damages to several victims of illegal detention and torture, including in April to a lawyer who had been illegally detained in 1987 for 10 months, and in July to a 16-year-old girl who had been illegally detained and tortured in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). There were reports of the intimidation of people who had filed fundamental rights petitions.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the government to implement effective safeguards against extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture in all areas of the country. It urged that independent commissions of inquiry be
SRI LANKA/SUDAN
established into reported extrajudicial executions and "disappearances", that those found responsible be brought to justice and that victims or their relatives be compensated.
In May Amnesty Intemational called for an immediate halt to illegal killings and incommunicado detention by forces of the ltte.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights and the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Sri Lanka about extrajudicial executions and incommunicado detention under Emergency Regulations and the pta.
In September Amnesty International published a major report, Sri Lanka: Extrajudicial Executions. "Disappearances" and Torture, 1987 to 1990, which covered the period to June 1990, and a further report including new violations committed by both government forces and the ltte which had occurred in the northeast after June. Amnesty International publicly urged the government to take action to halt the longstanding pattern of gross human rights violations and to introduce effective safeguards for human rights.
In December Amnesty Intemational expressed concem that a "Special Task Force" created by the govemment in November to "monitor and deal effectively with all violations of human rights" was not an independent body, and that its objectives placed too great an emphasis on countering intemational expressions of concem about Sri Lanka's human rights record rather than on the full investigation and remedy of past and continuing violations.
In January two govemment ministers claimed publicly that Amnesty Intemational was a "terrorist organization" which had funded jvp propaganda, but were unable to produce evidence to support this false allegation when challenged to do so.
In December a letter to Amnesty International from a presidential adviser was published in a Colombo newspaper which argued that "when security forces have to deal with terrorist groups...excesses are bound to occur".
Amnesty International told the govemment several times of its wish to send a delegation to Sri Lanka to discuss its concems, but received no response.
