NIGER
Hundreds of people belonging to the Tuareg ethnic group were arrested, tor-tured or extrajudicially executed. Some of those held appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Others reportedly died in detention as a result of torture or ill-treatment. At least three students were shot dead when the security forces opened fire on a demonstration.
There were calls for the introduction of a multi-party political system and in November the government announced the end of the one-party state set up in 1989. Multi-party elections were scheduled for 1992.
Tension between the government and the Tuareg community erupted into violence in May when an armed group of Tuareg attacked a prison and police station at Tchin-Tabaraden, killing three officials and three civilians. Government troops who were sent to the area attacked Tuareg encampments and were reported to have committed hundreds of exfrajudicial executions. The victims included children. Two Tuareg prisoners were reportedly shot dead by soldiers in the centre of Tchin-Tabaraden on 7 May. At least two other Tuareg were said to have died in Tchin-Tabaraden on the same day, and other Tuareg were summarily killed at Gharo and In Gal. At Tilia, at least 25 people were said to have been extrajudicially executed including Hamazoutou Ag Naissoun.
NIGER/NIGERIA
Hundreds of Tuareg were arrested, with about 500 reportedly detained in the Tahoua area alone. The arrests had begun in mid-March, when at least 28 people, including Attawa Egour and Karimoun Matachi, were arrested in Iferouane and Agadez area. They were reported to have been stripped naked, beaten and subjected to electric shock torture while in custody.
Among those arrested in May were prominent members of the Tuareg community such as Abdoulahi Mohamed, a former government minister, and Khamed Ibrahim El Moumine, a village leader. Some appeared to be prisoners of conscience, detained because of their position in the community rather than for any involvement in the violence. At least eight of the detainees, including Abdoullatif Mohamed, were transferred to Niamey after reportedly being tortured in Tahoua. Others were moved to Bilma and Nguigmi, where 93 were apparently being held in May, as well as to Tillabery and Kollo. Seven of the eight detainees moved to Niamey were reportedly released by the end of August: the eighth was moved to Kollo prison. However, the authorities later said that 70 others were to be charged with state security offences and would remain in custody to await trial. None had been brought to trial by the end of the year.
Many of those arrested in May were reported to have been tortured in Tahoua military barracks. People were said to have heard screams from the barracks and at least four prisoners reportedly died in custody. They included Abdoulmoumine Ag Mohamed. a teacher, and Mouhamadou Ag Abdourabahi, known as "Daragat". One former prisoner alleged in a radio interview that he and his relatives had been tortured in Tahoua barracks and that his brother and other relatives had died.
Earlier in the year, at least three school students were shot dead in Niamey in February when security forces opened fire on a student demonstration against government plans to reduce student grants and restrict civil service recruitment, Two university lecturers were detained but released uncharged after five days. One, Sanoussi Jackou, was a former prisoner of conscience. President Ali Saibou publicly apologized for the students' deaths, and an inquiry was announced. Several senior government officials resigned or were dismissed and a number of junior police
officers were reportedly arrested. A magistrate was appointed to investigate, but his findings were not made public by the end of 1990 and no one was brought to trial.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the allegations of torture and extrajudicial executions of Tuareg, and called for an urgent inquiry. It also called for the release of all those held solely on account of their ethnic origin or non-violent opinions. In response, the government denied the use of torture and extrajudicial executions, saying that all 63 people who had been killed had died in clashes between armed Tuareg and the security forces. The government said no prisoners or unarmed civilians had been killed by soldiers, and refused to investigate specific cases in which torture or extrajudicial executions were alleged. The government also invited Amnesty International to visit Niger: such a visit was arranged for November but then delayed at short notice at the government's request. It was expected to take place early in 1991.
Following the February shootings. Amnesty International called for an official investigation and urged the authorities to ensure that standing orders issued to security forces concerning the use of live ammunition conformed fully to international standards.
