MAURITIUS
Four people faced charges that could result in their becoming prisoners of conscience. No new death sentences were reported, but six prisoners remained under sentence of death. There were no executions.
In lune the government established a committee to review laws with provisions that provide for imprisonment in violation of human rights. The laws included the 1970 Public Order Act, which permits detention without charge or trial, the 1973 Industrial Relations Act, which limits the right to strike, and the 1984 Newspaper and Periodicals (Amendment) Act, which makes it illegal to publish false news. The committee had not reported by the end of the year.
Harish Boodhoo, leader of the Parti socialiste mauricien (psm), Mauritian
MAURITIUS/MEXICO
Socialist Party, and Vedi Ballah, editor of the psm newspaper. Le Socialiste [The Socialist), were awaiting trial on charges of giving out false information. If convicted they could become prisoners of conscience. They were charged in January 1989 after publicly calling for an inquiry into the alleged involvement of government ministers in the sale of Mauritian passports (see Amnesty International Report 2990); they were expected to stand trial in 1991. In November the Supreme Court rejected an application by the two men, who were at liberty throughout 1990, to have the charges against them declared unconstitutional.
In May 1990 Sydney Selvon, Vice-Presi-dent of the Mauritius Union of Journalists and Chief Editor of the daily newspaper, Le Mauricien [The Mauritian), and Harish Chundunsing, a journalist employed by Le Mauricien, were also charged with publishing false news. This followed publication by the newspaper of an article which wrongly reported that the government had dropped charges against a sea captain accused of illegal fishing in Mauritian waters. They remained at liberty and were expected to stand trial in 1991.
Charges brought in August 1989 against seven trade unionists and a journalist accused of participating in an illegal demonstration were dropped in July (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
In March the Supreme Court turned down the appeal of Radha Krishna Kun-nath, an Indian national sentenced to death in August 1989 for drug-trafiîcking (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The court granted him permission to appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (îcpc) in the United Kingdom, the highest Court of Appeal for Mauritius. Five other prisoners under sentence of death, four for drug-trafficking and one for murder, continued to wait for their appeals to be heard by the icpc. There were no executions.
Amnesty International continued to appeal to the Mauritian Government to commute all death sentences. It also urged the government to abolish the death penalty.
