TAIWAN
One advocate of an independent Taiwan state was imprisoned as a prisoner of conscience. Six other prisoners of conscience were released. Five military officers were arrested after a prisoner died in military custody. Over 70 people convicted of criminal offences were reportedly executed. The death penalty was abolished for corruption.
President Lee Teng-hui was elected for a new term by the National Assembly and at his inauguration in May declared an amnesty under which nine political prisoners were released. He also promised to^ abolish the 1948 Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion and to make "forward-looking
and necessary revisions to portions of the Constitution". Subsequently the authorities started to review the laws and regulations affected by the Temporary Provisions, including the National Security Law and the offences of sedition and treason.
Huang Hua, a leading opposition activist, was arrested and tried in November on charges of sedition. He was accused of advocating an independent Taiwan state in speeches, by organizing demonstrations as part of his New Country Movement, and by supporting pro-independence candidates in the 1989 parliamentary elections. He was convicted in December and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. He was considered a prisoner of conscience.
Six other prisoners of conscience were released (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Hsu Tsao-teh was released on parole in April, after serving half his sentence. Three were released imder the presidential amnesty; Shih Ming-teh, held since 1980, and Tsai Yu-chuan and Dr Huang Kuang-hsiung, held since 1987. Chuang Kuo-ming also benefited from the amnesty but remained in custody on criminal charges. Luo Yi-shih was released in December after completing a 10-month prison sentence (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990]. In October the High Court had acquitted him of a charge of sedition arising fi:om speeches he had made advocating independence for Taiwan. Chen Sheng-nan, sentenced to seven years and two months' imprisonment in 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990], was also released on bail. Amnesty International had no information on the result of his appeal.
Cheung Ki-lok was allowed to return to Hong Kong in November (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). The High Court
TAfWAH/T/y^ZANIA
acquitted him in January and again in October of belonging to a seditious group, but the prosecution appealed against the verdicts.
In October five military officers were arrested for causing the death of an inmate in a military prison. They reportedly admitted beating him and applying an electric prod to various peirts of his body.
The Statute for the Punishment of Corruption was amended in October and the death penalty abolished under that law. However, over 70 people convicted of criminal offences were reported to have been executed. The execution in July of three young kidnappers who had released their victim unharmed generated particular controversy in Taiwan.
Amnesty International urged the government to release prisoners of conscience and expressed concern about the executions. In response, the Ministry of Justice stated in August that the sentences on the three kidnappers had been lawfully passed and that both an official commission which had studied the death penalty in 1974 and public opinion supported the retention of this punishment.
In September the Judicial Yuan (council) made public its response to the report on Taiwan contained in Amnesty ihierna-tional Report 1990. It denied that prisoners convicted by the courts included prisoners of conscience and stressed that the courts had applied existing laws. It also said that three police officers whose arrests were referred to in the report had been given suspended sentences for torturing a suspect. It stated that the courts imposed death sentences with great care and for a limited number of offences.
