EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Seven people were reportedly arrested in December because of their political views or activities. Six prisoners of conscience continued to serve sentences imposed after an unfair trial in 1988: a seventh was released in February. Five political prison-ers were released in August: they too had been sentenced after an unfair trial. There were new reports of torture of criminal suspects in both 1989 and 1990, and of at least 10 deaths as a result of torture. At
least one death sentence was reported but was later said to have been commuted.
In late September the government of President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbaso-go announced that a national human rights commission would be established. The announcement came one week after Amnesty International had published a report on torture of prisoners in Equatorial Guinea. The commission will reportedly be attached to the National Assembly. Its tasks are to include investigating reports of human rights violations and publicizing the government's actions in the field of human rights.
In late November the Vice-President of the Chamber of People's Representatives, Antonio Ebang Mbele. was reportedly placed under house arrest because of his support for political changes. A week earlier the Central Committee of the Partido Democratico de Guinea Ecuatorial (pdge). Equatorial Guinea Democratic Party, the only party allowed by law, had said that the country "could adapt" to political pluralism. In early December there were reports that at least six people, including Marcelino Asumu Nsué, a former minister of agriculture, other civilians and soldiers, were arrested in Ebebiyin in the northeast of the mainland province of Rio Muni and later transferred to prisons in the capital, Malabo, or Bata in Rio Muni province. They were reportedly suspected of favouring political changes or of contacting government opponents in exile. Some of those detained were reportedly ill-treated.
At the beginning of the year seven prisoners of conscience were serving sentences imposed in September 1988. One of them, Primo José Esono Mikà, was released in February at the President's orders. They
EQUATORIAL GUINEA/ETHIOPIA
had been convicted, on the basis of statements extracted under torture, of attempting to overthrow the government. However, the real reason for their imprisonment was their membership of, or suspected connection with an exile opposition party (see Amnesty Internotional Reports 1989 and 1990).
Five political prisoners were released in August on the 11th anniversary of the government's accession to power. They had been convicted in 1986 of attempting to overthrow the government. One other, Sergeant Venancio Mikó, had his sentence reduced to just under nine years' imprisonment. He had been sentenced to death in 1983 for attempting to overthrow the government but the sentence was later commuted to 30 years' imprisonment (see Amnesty International Reports 1984, 1987 and 1989). All six had been tried unfairly by military courts. In September the government announced that it had released political detainees but did not provide further details.
New information became available during the year about the torture of criminal suspects in both 1989 and 1990. A total of 10 people reportedly died as a result.
At least 20 people from Ebebiyin were reported to have been tortured in early
1989,	initially in Ebebiyin and again after they had been transferred to Bata. They were apparently suspected of using a form of sorcery, known locally as kong, to kill people and turn them into obedient spirits or "zombies". Nine of those held reportedly died as a result of torture: the others were acquitted of murder in mid-1989, although reports suggested that they may have been retried in May 1990 and sentenced to prison terms.
Two other criminal suspects were reportedly tortured in Bata in January
1990.	José Eneme, Equatorial Guinea's consul in Douala in neighbouring Cameroon, and his friend Alberto Nsué were arrested in Equatorial Guinea and accused of using kong to cause the death of José Eneme's deputy, José Máseme, who had died in a road accident in Cameroon. Alberto Nsué was said to have died as a direct result of torture. José Eneme sustained injuries to his face, legs and feet. He was then apparently convicted of homicide in Ebebiyin in May and sentenced to death; the sentence was reportedly commuted to 30 years' imprisonment.
Juan Eyeme Nguema, a former director of the National Institute of Social Security, was also reported to have been tortured when he was detained from April until early June, apparently in connection with financial questions.
Amnesty International pressed for the release of the six prisoners of conscience still held at the end of 1990 after receiving information which confirmed that they and the three others sentenced with them had not used or advocated violence. In July it wrote to the government about the recent reports of torture and deaths in custody, and called for immediate action to prevent further abuses. Having received no response, Amnesty International publicized its concerns in September in a report, Equatorial Guinea: Torture. This described the use of torture to extract confessions and punish convicted prisoners. It also detailed the torture of dozens of political prisoners arrested in August 1988 and of criminal suspects in 1989 and 1990. Amnesty International urged the government to state publicly that torture would no longer be tolerated, to set up an independent and impartial inquiry into reports of torture, and to introduce effective safeguards against torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
In October Amnesty International responded to a government invitation to visit Equatorial Guinea by confirming its wish to visit Equatorial Guinea and asking for previously requested information about its concerns to be made available in advance of any visit. It also asked the government to indicate the steps it would take to investigate and prevent torture.
