MEXICO
The widespread use of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement agents, in some cases leading to the death of detainees, continued to be reported. Hundreds of people were arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by security forces in the context of forced evictions of peasants and of widespread protests against alleged electoral fi^aud. Dozens were detained for political reasons; in a number of such cases, charges were based on forced confessions. At least six people "disappeared" and little progress was reported in clarifying the whereabouts of several hundred who "disappeared" in previous years. Evidence suggested that at least three people were extrajudicially executed. Several others, including a renowned human rights lawyer, were believed to have been killed because of their peacefiil hiunan rights or political activities.
Following an increasing number of reports of human rights violations. President Ccirlos Salinas de Gortari announced in June the creation of the National Human Rights Commission, which incorporated its predecessor, the Directorate of Human Rights. The main functions of the Commission are to investigate human rights abuses and to issue recommendations to the authorities. By the end of the year it had received hundreds of complaints and had issued 33 recommendations regarding well-documented cases of human rights abuses. Most of these recommendations had not been implemented by the end of the year.
Allegations of electoral fi-aud by the governing Partido Revolucionario Institucional (pri), Institutional Revolutionary
MEXICO
Party, during state and local elections in December 1989 triggered widespread protests, principally involving members of the centre-left Partido de la Revolución Democrática (prd). Democratic Revolutionary Party. Following accusations of electoral ft"aud in previous years, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued a series of recommendations in May 1990, calling on the government to "assure the free and full exercise of political rights and judicial protection" for those participating in electoral processes.
Torture was frequently used by law-enforcement agents throughout the country, particularly by the state and federal judicial police. It was often used to extract confessions from detainees, and such statements continued to be admissible as evidence in courts. Torture methods reported included beatings, electric shocks, near-asphyxiation in water or by covering the head of the victim with a plastic bag, forcing carbonated water with chilli pepper into the nose, and psychological torture. Adequate medical treatment was rarely made available to victims and official forensic doctors frequently failed to fully document cases of torture. Despite a public outcry and numerous formal complaints to the authorities about torture and other human rights violations, very few of those responsible were brought to justice.
Scores of torture cases were reported in the context of federal judicial police operations aimed at preventing the cultivation and trafficking of drugs.
In March Rubén Oropeza Hurtado was detained in the town of Tijuana by the federal judicial police, He was reportedly forced to confess under torture to drugs offences and was denied adequate medical treatment. In July he was admitted to a local clinic in a critical condition, apparently resulting from beatings suffered in detention, and underwent a major abdominal operation. He died in October. Those allegedly responsible were not brought to justice, despite recommendations on this case by the National Human Rights Commission.
In October Pedro Yescas Martínez died I in detention, five days after his arrest in the I town of Durango, reportedly as a conse-Iquence of torture inflicted by the federal judicial police. According to witnesses, [he was forced to confess to drugs offences and was later denied medical treatment.
despite his injuries. Protests in the press and complaints by relatives prompted an investigation, but those responsible had not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
Children and youths were among those reported to have been tortured and ill-treated by the security forces. Seventy-six well-documented complaints against the Tijuana juvenile justice system were filed in April by the Centro Bi-Naciona¡ de Derechos Humanos, Bi-National Human Rights Centre, in Tijuana. No investigations into these allegations were known to have been initiated by the end of the year.
Between January and April at least 15 people were killed by the security forces during the protests against alleged vote-rigging. Scores of people were arrested, dozens reportedly suffered torture or ill-treatment and four "disappeared" after their arrest. Most of the victims belonged to opposition parties, principally the prd. Government officials reportedly ill-treated protesters, particularly during forced evictions of activists occupying local municipal buildings as a form of protest.
The most serious abuses were reported in the states of Guerrero and Michoacán, two strongholds of the prd. In March at least 250 police agents surrounded the municipality of Omatepec, Guerrero, to evict approximately 50 prd protesters. According to witnesses the police shot at the protesters, wounding many and killing at least one, Román de la Cruz Zacapela. Many were detained for short periods during which some were reportedly tortured. Vicente de Jesús, Miguel Silverio, Daniel Alvarez and Andrés de la Cruz Zacapela were reported to have "disappeared" after their arrest. Despite formal complaints by victims and their families, proceedings were not initiated against those responsible.
Hundreds of people were arbitrarily detained and ill-treated during forced evictions of peasants by security forces, usually aided by local landowners and pistoleros (gunmen), in rural areas. In April police agents and pistoleros forcibly evicted more than 100 peasant families from the communities of Paso Achiote, Unión y Progreso and Emiliano Zapata in the State of Chiapas from communal land which they claimed had been promised to them by the authorities. Men, women and children were arrested and dozens suffered ill-
MEXICO
treatment and injuries; 14 of them were held until September.
Sócimo Hernández, a peasant activist from Embocadero, continued to be imprisoned on a murder charge. He was reported to have confessed after being tortured with beatings, near-asphyxiation and threats. He had been arrested in November 1989 and accused of the minder of Pedro Hernández Hernández (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
In May Salomón Mendoza Barajas, prd mayor of Aguililla and well known for his denunciations of human rights violations by anti-narcotics squads operating in the region, was arrested. He had complained to the police about the alleged harassment, arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment of local residents. While in custody he was said to have been subjected to near-asphyxiation and beatings to force him to confess to murder and drugs possession. He was also reportedly denied adequate medical treatment and as a result is permanently disabled. In November the National Human Rights Commission recommended that he should be released, together with other Aguililla residents who had been detained and reportedly ill-treated. It also recommended that charges against them should be dropped and that those responsible for the abuses in Aguililla should be brought to justice. In December Salomón Mendoza Barajas and one other detainee were released, after the Attorney General's Office dropped the charges against them. However. at the end of the year several other detainees from Aguililla remained in prison, despite a recommendation by the National Human Rights Commission that they should be released.
The authorities promised to investigate cases of "disappearance" - more than 500 people were known to have "disappeared" in Mexico, mostly during the 1970s and early 1980s. However, little progress was reported. The whereabouts of José Ramón García (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990) remained unknown and no progress was reported in bringing to justice those responsible for his "disappearance". At least six new cases of "disappearance" were reported in 1990.
In June Francisco Quijano Garcia, who was investigating the alleged murder of his three sons by federal judicial police, "disappeared" in Mexico City. He had allegedly received several anonymous
death threats before his "disappearance". No progress was made by the end of the year in establishing his whereabouts.
Among the killings reported were those of Francisco Quijano Garcia's sons Hector, Jaime and Erik in the State of Mexico in January. The police stated that they died during an armed confrontation. However, according to witnesses and forensic evidence, they were unarmed at the time of the killings and were extrajudicially executed by an anti-narcotics squad. The same squad had reportedly also tortured Hector Garcia in the cells of the Attorney General's Office before taking him to the site of the killings. At the end of the year, no developments in the investigation into these killings had been reported.
In February three Venezuelan teachers and a Mexican lawyer were reportedly abducted in the town of Culiacán by members of the federal judicial pohce. In response to inquiries from the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Mexican authorities at first confirmed, but later denied, that the three Venezuelans were being held by the Federal Attorney General on arms-smuggling charges. Their bullet-riddled bodies, all showing signs of torture, were found in March. No progress was reported in the investigations announced into these killings.
Norma Corona Sapién, a human rights lawyer, was murdered in May in the town of Culiacán. She had been investigating the alleged participation of federal judicial police agents in the reported torture and killing of the three Venezuelans and the Mexican. The federal government established a commission of inquiry and five people allegedly responsible for her killing were detained and charged, including two former federal judicial police agents. Local human rights organizations expressed concern that the full truth about Norma Corona's killing had not been established and continued to call for further investigations.
Amnesty International repeatedly called for full investigations into human rights violations including extrajudicial executions, torture and "disappearances" and urged the authorities to bring all those responsible to justice. In September it published Mexico: Human Rights Violations Against the Triquis in Oaxaca, which examined past human rights violations reportedly suffered by members of the Triqui indigenous communities in western
MEXICO/MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
Oaxaca, including killings, torture and the "disappearance" of two children.
In November the Executive Secretary of the National Human Rights Commission met Amnesty International to discuss the Commission's work. Amnesty International welcomed the creation of the Commission but expressed concern about the apparently limited effectiveness, thus far, of its recommendations.
