UGANDA
At least 2,500 uncharged political detainees were released, but new arrests took place and more than 1,300 people remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. Seventy-five prisoners were charged with treason, which carries a mandatory death sentence. Detainees were reported to have been tortured or ill-treated, and in some cases to have died as a result. Government forces allegedly committed over 100 extrajudicial executions in the course of counter-insurgency operations. At least 16 people were sentenced to death, six of whom, all soldiers, were executed.
UGANDA
The government of President Yoweri Museveni continued to face armed opposition in the northeast, north and southwest of the country. As in previous years, hundreds of people were detained by the government's National Resistance Army (nra) and imprisoned outside the framework of the law, particularly in the northeast. However, a law passed in 1989 to allow suspected insurgents to be tried summarily was not invoked (see Amnesty International Report 1990]. Rebels were responsible for the deliberate killing of captives.
The Penal Code (Amendment) Bill enacted in June increased the number of offences punishable by death. The amendment, which made sexual relations with children under 13 or with prisoners capital offences, was presented as a measure to curb the spread of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (aids).
Hundreds of new arrests meant that at the end of 1990 there were over 1,300 people in detention without charge or trial, many in district prisons and military barracks. However, approximately 2,500 detainees were released uncharged during the year. The majority were civilians arrested by the nra as suspected rebel supporters and held without any legal status in civil prisons where they were referred to as "lodgers". In January, 328 "lodgers" from Gulu District, some detained for over two years, were released, among them 11 children under the age of 13. A further 2,182 detainees from Kumi and Soroti Districts were released in April. Major Fred Mpiso, detained since being acquitted of treason in March 1988, was released in September following the filing of a writ of habeas corpus in February (see Amnesty International Report 1990].
Three journalists were arrested in February and charged with defamation after allegedly asking Zambia's President Kenneth Kaunda "impertinent" questions at a news conference in Entebbe. One. Hussein Abdi Hassan, was refused bail for five weeks but then acquitted in September. However, the government appealed against his acquittal and he and the two others still faced charges at the end of 1990. All were fireed on bail.
Seventy-five prisoners, more than half of whom had already been held for a year or more, were charged with treason during 1990. Only four were brought to trial. It appeared that in some cases the long delays and the vague nature of the charges were being used to prolong the imprisonment of government opponents against whom evidence was lacking. Forty-three soldiers and civilians charged in January had been in military custody for 15 months: at least eight others arrested with them were still apparently detained without charge at the end of 1990.
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners by nra soldiers, Local Defence Unit militia personnel and prison staff, In March soldiers in Nebbi, northwest Uganda, were said to have beaten three suspected smugglers so severely that one of them died. Marks on the body indicated that his elbows, wrists and ankles had been tied together behind his back, a form of tying similar to the method known as kandooya, which was formally banned in the nra in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). In Kampala, a detainee was alleged to have suffered brain damage after being beaten and given electric shocks by soldiers in Lubiri Barracks in September. Another detainee reportedly died in November after beatings by soldiers there. In August four prison warders in Mbarara were charged with murder after a prisoner died as a result of beatings.
Extrajudicial executions by nra forces were reported from areas in which armed opponents of the government were active, including Gulu, Tororo and Kumi Districts. In March, 16 people were allegedly burned to death by soldiers at Got Ngur in Gulu District. Further extrajudicial executions reportedly occurred in Soroti District in August and September after the deployment there of an army brigade accused of human rights violations elsewhere. In Bugondo, 16 people were reportedly
UGANDMJNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
burned to death and in Scroti town. 20 were reportedly battered to death by soldiers. After this. 30 soldiers were arrested and the brigade was withdrawn.
The authorities announced investigations into some alleged abuses by government forces but the investigation process was protracted. Official investigations into alleged extrajudicial executions in 1988 and other years had still not been concluded by the end of 1990.
Two students were killed and three seriously injured in December when police opened fire without warning on a demonstration at Makerere University. On this occasion, the authorities suspended Uganda's two senior police officers, arrested 27 others and set up a commission of inquiry headed by a Supreme Court judge.
The General Court Martial, the highest military court, sentenced at least two nra officers to death, one for treason and the other for robbery with violence. At least six soldiers were executed by firing-squad after appearing before other military tribunals on charges of murder or rape. Those convicted by such courts had no right of appeal.
The High Court also imposed a number of death sentences. In July, six people, including Captain Frank Kibuuka, were sentenced to death for treason (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Several hundred other prisoners convicted in previous years remained under sentence of death and at least two appeals against death sentences imposed in previous years were dismissed by the Supreme Court. However, no prisoners sentenced to death by the High Court were reported to have been executed.
Amnesty International representatives visited Uganda in February to seek information about individual prisoners and to discuss the organization's concerns with government officials. Amnesty International welcomed the releases of untried political detainees but urged the government to bring to trial promptly and fairly all political detainees, or release them. It also called for urgent and impartial investigation of reported extrajudicial executions and pressed for official action to prevent such killings. It expressed concern about the apparent failure of official' inquiries into alleged extrajudicial executions by the nra in 1988 to reach any findings or make any recommendations
(see Amnesfv International Reports 1989 and 1990). In response the government reaffirmed its opposition to extrajudicial executions and told Amnesty International in September that recent incidents in Gulu. Tororo and Kumi Districts were being investigated, and that a report into the 1988 killings in Gulu had been delayed by logistical problems but would be forthcoming. In December Amnesty International expressed concern at the killings of students at Makerere University and published a report, Uganda: Death in the Countryside, describing killings of prisoners and non-combatants by the army in 1990. It renewed its calls to the government to investigate reports of extrajudicial executions, to bring those responsible to justice, and to review army practices and procedures to prevent further killings.
