COMOROS
At least 20 people were detained in connection with an alleged conspiracy against the government but they had not been brought to trial by the end of 1990. One of them died in custody, apparently as a result of torture, and another was also reported to have been tortured.
Said Mohamed Djohar, who had been Acting President since December 1989, was
COMOROS/CONGO
elected President in March for a six-year term. After the result was announced, there were clashes in early April between security forces and opposition demonstrators.
At least 20 people were arrested in August following an annoimcement by the authorities that an attempt to destabilize the government, involving European mercenaries, had been foiled. In October the government said that Max Veillard, described as a French mercenary who promoted the alleged plot, had been killed in an exchange of fire with the security forces. Those arrested were supporters of Mohamed Taki, leader of the Union nationale pour la démocratie aux Comores, National Union for Democracy in the Comoros, who was a candidate in the March presidential elections. Mohamed Taki himself was not arrested. One of the detainees, Said Mlindé, died in custody on 15 September apparently as a result of torture, although the authorities did not clarify the circumstances of his death. Ali Soihili, a journalist detained in connection with the same alleged coup plot, was also said to have been tortured. He reportedly told another journalist who saw him when he was taken before the juge d'instruction (examining magistrate), that he had been tortured for more than five horn's, handcuffed to a wall for two days shortly after his arrest, and denied food.
Those arrested in August were charged with involvement in an attempt to destabilize the government but they had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
Amnesty International expressed concern about reports of torture and the death in custody of Said Mlindé, and urged the government to initiate a hill and impartial investigation. The organization also sought information about the legal status of those arrested in August.
