INDONESIA/ EAST TIMOR
At least 20 alleged opponents of the government were imprisoned as prisoners of conscience during 1990. Together with more than 100 other prisoners of conscience convicted in previous years, they were sentenced after trials whose fairness was in serious doubt. Some had been imprisoned for more than 20 years. Hundreds of other political opponents of the government were detained in Aceh, Irian Jaya and East Timor; most were released uncharged but some were still held at the end of the year. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees, peaceful protesters and criminal suspects, some of whom died as a result. Hundreds of bodies were found in Aceh and North Sumatra; scores of the victims were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed by government forces. Three people were sentenced to death and four political prisoners were executed after more than 20 years in prison; eight other political prisoners remained in imminent danger of execution.
The government of President Suharto faced armed resistance from advocates of independence in the territories of East Timor, Irian Jaya and Aceh, and open political opposition from pro-democracy activists throughout the country. In East Timor, scores of people were briefly detained when hundreds of protesters, many of them students, took part in a series of peaceful demonstrations. In Aceh, where more than 5,000 government troops were deployed to combat armed rebels.
hundreds of people were killed and hundreds arrested. Elsewhere, university students, Islamic activists and national opposition figures criticized what they said was the government's authoritarian rule.
In August President Suharto and other government officials called publicly for greater political openness and respect for human rights. In practice, however, serious human rights violations continued. Hundreds of thousands of former Indonesian Communist Party (pki) members and prisoners continued to be required to report regularly to local military authorities. A new system was introduced - known as "Special Research" [Penelitian Khusus or Utsus) - for vetting former pki prisoners and other possible communist sympathizers. This broadened the criteria by which people could be considered "influenced" by communist thinking and then subjected to restrictions on their employment and civil rights.
At least seven university students sentenced to prison terms during the year were believed to be prisoners of conscience. One, Bonar Tigor Naipospos, a student at Gajah Mada University in Yogyakarta, was jailed for eight and a half years after an apparently unfair trial. He was convicted of subversion for possessing and distributing literature said to contain communist ideas, and of disseminating Marxist teachings in university discussion groups and through his own writings. Six students were sentenced to three-year prison terms in February for "expressing feelings of hostility, hatred or contempt" towards the government after a peaceful demonstration at the Bandung Institute of Technology in August 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
At least 50 of some 140 political prisoners in Irian Jaya were believed to be prisoners of conscience. About 20 were sentenced during 1990 for advocating the independence of the province of Irian Jaya. They included Jacob Rumbiak and three others who had sought refuge in the Papua New Guinea Consulate in Jayapura in December 1989. They apparently received assurances that they would be fairly treated but were later arrested, tried for subversion and sentenced to between 12 and 15 years in prison. Dr Thomas Wainggai and 36 others convicted of subversion in 1989 remained in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Dr Wainggai and his wife
INDONESIA-EAST TIMOR/IRAN
were transferred to Jakarta, making visits by relatives extremely difficult.
At least 20 Islamic activists, some of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience. were convicted in a series of subversion trials which began in 1989 in Aceh, Bandung, Bima, Bogor, Jakarta, Lampung and Madura. Most were accused of undermining the state ideology PancasUa and attempting to establish an Islamic state. Their trials may not have been fair. At least 40 of an estimated 300 imprisoned Islamic activists sentenced for subversion in previous years were prisoners of conscience. They were convicted of involvement with usroh groups, which advocated closer ties among Muslims and a stricter adherence to Muslim teachings. Haji Abdul Ghani Masykur's sentence was reduced from 11 to eight years on appeal (see Amnesty International Report 1990].
About 50 prisoners arrested in the late 1960s for alleged involvement in the 1965 coup attempt or for pki membership remained in prison throughout 1990. Many were believed to be prisoners of conscience, such as Pudjo Prasetio, an alleged PK] member in Bali who was arrested in 1967 but only brought to trial in 1979. He was serving a life sentence imposed for subversion and was reportedly in poor health.
One prisoner of conscience. Lieutenant General Dharsono, was released in September (see Amnesty International Reports 1985 and 1986). Amnesty International learned of the release of two political prisoners who had been in prison for more than 20 years; they had been convicted of involvement in the 1965 coup attempt after trials whose fairness was in doubt. In January it was learned that Abdul Syukur, arrested in 1969 and sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 1976, had been released in August 1989. Murdjani, arrested in 1968 and sentenced to 19 years' imprisonment in 1977, was released in May.
There continued to be serious doubts about the fairness of political trials, particularly those held under the broadly worded Anti-Subversion Law. Defendants were frequently held for months before being charged or tried and some were apparently convicted on the basis of uncorroborated confessions extracted under duress. Bonar Tigor Naipospos, for example, was held for almost one year before being formally charged and tried. Before
his trial, senior military officials with responsibility for political trials had publicly implied his guilt. He was reported to have been convicted on the basis of witnesses' statements obtained by coercion. A witness who alleged that he had been forced to make a statement by interrogators was prevented from testifying about this by the court.
Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and criminal suspects were widespread and reportedly caused several deaths. In East Timor, scores of people were beaten by security forces during peaceful pro-independence demonstrations or were detained without charge and tortured or ill-treated in custody. Donaciano da Costa Gomes was one of several young people detained for over two weeks after peaceful demonstrations in Dili in January. He said that he and other detainees had been tortured with electric shocks, immersed for long periods in fetid water, kicked, punched, slashed with knives and hung ft-om the ceiling.
Members of the police and police auxiliary forces beat or tortured criminal suspects to extract confessions, sometimes causing serious injury or death. Cecep Suherman, a boy of 13, died after being clubbed on the head and kicked in the chest by two police auxiliaries at a Jakarta recreation park in June. The police authorities originally said that he might have died as a result of a fall but according to four eye-witnesses, the dead boy and at least two of his friends had been beaten for entering the park without paying, The two police auxiliaries allegedly responsible were brought to trial and sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
Dozens of other police and military personnel were also tried for torturing or ill-treating criminal suspects. Some were convicted but generally received short prison sentences. In March, 12 Semarang city police officers were convicted by a military court of torturing three young criminal suspects, one of whom died of his injuries within hours. Witnesses testified that 10 of the police officers had taken turns to kick and beat their victims on the head and body with lengths of wood, an iron pipe and a police helmet for over eight hours. They were jailed for between 15 days and one year.
Extrajudicial executions by government forces and paramilitary groups backed by
INDONESIA-EAST TIMOR/IRAN
local military commanders were reported in East Timor, Irian Jaya and Aceh. In some cases, victims were tortured and ill-treated before being killed. In March Candido Amaral, a father of five, was detained by members of the Indonesian security forces in East Timor. He was said to have been kicked and punched during questioning about armed opposition activities and then had his genitals burned with cigarettes. The following day he was taken away and shot by firing-squad without any form of trial. The military authorities said that those responsible would be disciplined but it was not clear whether anyone had been brought to justice by the end of the year.
In Aceh, where government forces faced armed opposition from rebel forces who themselves committed acts of violence including murder, scores of people were reportedly victims of extrajudicial executions. From September onwards, villagers in parts of Aceh and North Sumatra discovered hundreds of corpses in shallow graves, ditches and rivers. Some were still blindfold with their hands and feet bound, and many bore signs of torture and had bullet wounds to the head. Government and military officials admitted killing more than 40 suspected rebels during the year, but said that the corpses were those of the victims of rebel attacks. However, human rights activists and local political and religious leaders said that some were the victims of extrajudicial killings by government troops and government-backed paramilitary forces.
Four elderly political prisoners — Satar Suryanto, Yohanes Surono, Simon Petrus Soleiman and Noor Rohayan - were executed by firing-squad in February, more than 20 years after being imprisoned for alleged involvement in the 1965 coup attempt. It was confirmed that two others -Mochtar Effendi bin Sirait and Tohong Harahap - who were accused of similar offences had been executed in October 1989. These executions brought the total number of death sentences carried out since 1985 to 28. Of these. 22 were "pki" prisoners, foiu were Islamic activists and two had been convicted of murder.
Three people were sentenced to death for murder, bringing the number on death row to at least 29. Of these, eight were believed to be in imminent danger of execution: seven had been convicted of involvement in the 1965 coup attempt or of
PKI membership; and one was an Islamic activist convicted of subversion in 1982. The death penalty was retained in a revised version of the Criminal Code proposed in October but not adopted by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed throughout the year for the release of prisoners of conscience and for a review of other cases involving unfair trials. The organization expressed concern about the detention, torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and peaceful protesters in Indonesia and East Timor. It expressed dismay at the execution of four political prisoners in February and urged the government to commute all outstanding death sentences.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Indonesia. In a submission to the un Special Committee on Decolonization in the same month, it drew attention to continued reports of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in East Timor and the emergence of a pattern of short-term detention, ill-treatment and torture of alleged political opponents of Indonesian rule in the territory.
In meetings with representatives of the Indonesian Government, Amnesty International reiterated its proposal, submitted in 1989, to visit Indonesia and East Timor. The government said that the proposal was still under consideration but there was no progress on this by the end of the year.
