GERMANY
On 3 October the German Democratic Republic (gdr) acceded to the Federal Republic of Germany (frg). Most federal law came into force throughout the unified country. Before unification, laws which had been used in the gdr to imprison prisoners of conscience were reformed or repealed. In the frg a defendant accused of defaming the state by publishing leaflets was acquitted. Political prisoners who may not have received a fair trial in the gdr continued to be detained. Prisoners detained imder anti-terrorist legislation in the frg continued to be held in virtual isolation.
In July a law revising the gdr Penal Code came into force which reformed or abolished provisions that had been used to detain people for exercising their rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly and movement.
Following the accession of the gdr
GERMANY
under Article 23 of the frg Constitution, the unified country was named the Federal Republic of Germany. The Unification Treaty between the gdr and the frg, signed in August, contained inter alia provisions on constitutional and legal reform. On 3 October the frg Constitution and most federal law came into force in the five re-established Lander (states) -Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Sachsen, Sachsen-Anhalt and Thüringen -and international treaties and obligations undertaken by the frg before unification became applicable. International treaty obligations of the gdr were to be reviewed as to their continued application, adjustment or expiry. Former gdr law remained valid as far as it was compatible with the Constitution. The Treaty provided that victims of politically motivated prosecutions and convictions of the "Sed [the former ruling party] regime of injustice" would be rehabilitated, and would receive compensation. Judicial decisions by the former gdr courts remained in force, but those convicted by the criminal courts would be given the right to have their convictions and sentences reviewed.
In February the frg ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and in October ratified the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The frg also signed in February the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty, which it had not ratified by the end of the year. The gdr ratified the Second Optional Protocol in August.
All-German elections took place on 2 December, in which the centre-right coalition led by Helmut Kohl won a decisive victory. Richard von Weizsäcker remained Head of State.
In April Christiane Schneider, who had been accused of maliciously defaming the state through the dissemination of written materials, was acquitted by the Cologne District Court. She had admitted publishing leaflets which included a declaration by a prisoner describing the government policy towards Red Army Faction prisoners as an "extermination program" and the isolation of prisoners as "isolation torture". An Amnesty International delegate attended the trial in order to assess whether, if imprisoned, Christiane Schneider would be a prisoner of conscience.
In September prisoners in 38 prisons in the gdr participated in rooftop occupations and hunger-strikes demanding, among other things, a review of their sentences. Later that month a law on remission of sentences came into force in the gdr reducing by one-third most prison sentences passed before July by gdr courts. In addition the law gave every prisoner sentenced before July the right to apply to have his or her sentence reviewed by an independent committee.
Prisoners detained under anti-terrorist legislation in the frg continued to be held in virtual isolation. Prolonged isolation may have serious effects on the physical and mental health of prisoners and may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment (see Amnesty International Report 1990].
One woman was held in virtual isolation in Stuttgart (sometimes known as Stammheim) prison. Previously, the Baden-Württemberg Ministry of Justice had said that Stuttgart prison was not suitable for the long-term detention of women prisoners. Brigitte Mohnhaupt, imprisoned since 1982 under anti-terrorist legislation, was moved to Stuttgart prison in June. Reportedly, she spent 23 hours in isolation in her cell and had one hour's exercise a day, which she took alone every other day and on alternate days with three other women prisoners who were foreign. Communication with the three women was difficult, as reportedly only one of them spoke a little German. According to her lawyer, Brigitte Mohnhaupt's concentration had deteriorated owing to years of isolation. In November
GERMANY/GHANA
she was moved to Aichach prison in Bavaria, where she reportedly continued to be kept in virtual isolation.
The authorities said in August that Andrea Sievering (see Amnesty International Report 1990] was still held in Stuttgart prison as she was a witness in a trial taking place in Stuttgart.
The government informed Amnesty International in December that it had repeatedly looked into allegations that prisoners detained under anti-terrorist legislation were subjected to "inhuman isolation" by the authorities. The government said it did not believe that isolation occurred when there was regular contact with other people and the outside world through radio, television and correspondence. In its reply. Amnesty International expressed concern that the degree of social isolation in which prisoners detained under anti-terrorist legislation were held may have been harmful and therefore may have amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The organization referred to past examples, including the case of Brigitte Mohnhaupt, which indicated that in several cases the health of these prisoners had been impaired as a consequence of their prison conditions. It called on the government to consider increasing social contact for these prisoners and asked what steps it had taken to this effect. Amnesty International also asked to be informed in detail about the reviews carried out by the government of allegations that the prisoners were held in inhuman isolation.
During the year Amnesty International wrote to the gdr Procurator General and five regional public procurators requesting copies of court documents relating to the trials of 11 prisoners who had been convicted in the gdr. The organization expressed concern that they might not have been given a fair trial because trials in the gdr had in the past regularly been held in camera and court documents had often not been available. The public procurators replied that two prisoners had been released, and that some of the cases would be investigated to establish whether the sentences should be quashed. By the end of the year Amnesty International had not received the requested court documents.
In June Amnesty International wrote to the Chancellor of the frg and to the Prime Minister of the gdr submitting a number of papers describing its concerns in both
countries. The organization asked for the papers to be brought to the attention of the fro and gdr representatives of joint commissions which had been set up to examine ways in which the social, economic and political systems of the two countries could be brought into harmony to facilitate unification. In July the frg Federal Ministry of Justice replied that it had brought the informatioii submitted by Amnesty International to the attention of the relevant representatives.
