PARAGUAY
Members of peasant communities involved in land disputes were detained in increasing numbers. Many were held without charge or trial for several weeks and some were ill-treated or tortured. Criminal suspects, including minors, were tortured or ill-treated by police officers while in custody. Little progress was made in judicial investigations into past human rights violations. Two convicted criminals were sentenced to death, although the last execution took place in 1928.
In March Paraguay ratified the United Nations Convention against Tortiue and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Inter-Ameri-can Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
In November President Andrés Rodríguez vetoed a bill passed by Congress which had proposed establishing a bicameral human rights commission mandated to investigate past and future human rights violations.
The unprecedented wave of land occupations which followed the change of government in 1989 continued throughout 1990. Hundreds of landless peasant families invaded large landholdings, often the property of absentee landowners, throughout the country. Dozens of peasant communities attempting to establish land claims were violently expelled by army and police
personnel, sometimes operating in conjunction with armed civilians reportedly paid by landowners. In many cases forcible expulsion was accompanied by mass arrests, sometimes without judicial order, and torture or ill-treatment of detainees. The majority of detainees were released without charge or trial after weeks or months in custody.
In January some 120 families were forcibly expelled from land they had been occupying since 1986 in Curepi-cue, Naranjito, San Pedro department. A group of about 15 armed civilians, believed to have been hired by the landowner, burned the peasants' huts and destroyed their belongings, before forcing several of the peasants on to lorries and driving them to a police post in General Resquin. During the journey at least two of the peasants were said to have been beaten. The peasants were handed over to the local police chief who reportedly held them for over 12 hours before releasing them without charge.
The department of Alto Paraná bordering Brazil was one of the areas most affected by violence in the context of land conflicts. Peasants detained during expulsions and held in regional prisons repeatedly complained about conditions of detention and ill-treatment by prison staff. In June 132 detainees held in the prison at the regional governmental headquarters in the provincial capital. Ciudad del Este, sent an open letter to judicial and congressional authorities denouncing police torture of prisoners. They accused the police of using methods such as beatings, near-asphyxiation, high-pressure water hoses directed into the mouths of prisoners and electric shocks. An investigation of the prisoners' complaints was publicly announced by judicial officials, but it was not known whether it had been initiated by the end of the year.
In some instances peasants were arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by police forces with the apparent intention of preempting possible land occupations. In October a group of 130 peasant families were reportedly arrested without judicial order in Itá Cajón, Naranjito, Itapúa department. The peasants had been camped for over one year outside a property they had formally requested be expropriated in their favour. Several of the peasants, men and women, alleged that the police had beaten
PARAGUAY/PERU
them with rifle butts during the operation to expel them from their camp.
In November the director of the Emboscada juvenile detention centre testified before the human rights commission of the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house of Congress). According to the prison director, a 16-year-old youth had been tortured in Lambaré police station, on the outskirts of Asunción. He stated that the boy had been beaten and kicked by police as a result of which he had suffered a hernia and sustained injuries to his arms and legs. In December several inmates of Emboscada prison testified before a criminal court judge investigating allegations of the ill-treatment of minors by police and anti-narcotics personnel. A 17-year-old youth told the judge that he had been arrested in July and held for two days in the Departamento de Investigaciones de la Policía (dipc), Police Investigations Department, and that he had been beaten with truncheons and subjected to electric shocks.
Judicial investigations into human rights violations which had occurred under the previous government continued, although little progress was made (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Some senior police officers in the former administration of General Alfredo Stroessner remained in custody while trial proceedings against them continued. They faced a variety of charges, including the arbitrary arrest, torture and murder of scores of political opposition figures in the 1960s and 1970s.
Victims of human rights violations under the previous administration continued to come forward to present complaints to the courts. In October a formal criminal complaint was lodged by former prisoner of conscience Captain Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza against former president General Stroessner, former minister of the interior Edgar L. Ynsfrán, and several former high-ranking police officials. He accused them of abuses including arbitrary detention, torture and defamation. Captain Ortigoza had been released in December 1987 after completing a 25-year sentence for his alleged part in a conspiracy to overthrow President Stroessner in 1962 (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 and 1989).
No information was made available concerning the inquiry into the killings of two construction workers by army personnel
during a strike at the Itaipii hydroelectric dam project in December 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The army officer who commanded the operation to break up the strikers' demonstration was suspended from duty immediately following the incident, pending results of the investigation. However, in May he was promoted by Congress.
At least two people were sentenced to death in separate cases in September; one for parricide and the other for homicide during an armed robbery. However, since 1928 death sentences imposed by trial judges have been commuted on appeal, generally to 30 years' imprisonment.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to introduce measures to prevent the use of torture and ill-treatment. The organization expressed its concern about reported attacks on peasant communities and ill-treatment of peasants and called for full and impartial investigations. It also reiterated the principle that all past human rights violations should be independently investigated, notwithstanding a change of government.
