MALAYSIA
Four alleged advocates of the secession of Sabah state from Malaysia were detained without charge or trial. There were new allegations of police ill-treatment of criminal suspects. Three people were reported to have died in police custody, one of whom was said to have been ill-treated. At least 54 death sentences were imposed and 12 people executed, of whom 11 had been convicted for drugs offences.
The National Front coalition led by Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad was reelected in October with a two-thirds majority in parliament. Soon after the election, the Prime Minister indicated that his government would retain the Internal Security Act (isa) which permits detention without charge or trial.
Four people from Sabah state were arrested in May and June 1990 and detained under the isa, accused of advocating secession from Malaysia. All four -Abdul Rahman Ahmad, Benedict Topin, Wencelous Damit Undikai and Albinus Yudah - were arrested at a time of tension between the federal authorities and the state government of Sabah, which is dominated by the Parti Bersatu Sabah (pbs). United Sabah Party. The four, who were known to be close to the pbs, were publicly accused by the police of involvement in a conspiracy to take Sabah out of Malaysia. They had not been charged or brought to trial by the end of the year. It appeared that they might be prisoners of conscience.
There were new reports of ill-treatment of criminal suspects during police interrogation. In at least one case the Kuala Lumpur High Court ruled that a statement
MALAYSIA/MALOIVES/MALI
made by a defendant in a kidnapping case after he had been assaulted by the police was inadmissible evidence at his trial.
Ang Soon Kheat, a criminal suspect, died in custody in Pandamaran police station, Selangor state, in August. His wife said that he had complained of police brutality and that she had found bruises on several parts of her husband's body and injuries on his neck and face. The police, however, said that he had died as a result of slipping from a cell door on to which he had climbed while suffering from drug withdrawal symptoms.
In April a directive was issued to police officers instructing them not to use force against suspects detained for investigation. Four police officers were subsequently charged at a magistrate's court in Kajang, Selangor state, with causing injury to a burglary suspect.
At least 54 people were sentenced to death after being convicted of criminal offences - 49 for drugs offences, four for murder and one for a firearms offence. The Supreme Court confirmed the death sentences on 14 people. Their last recourse was to make a final appeal to the Pardons Board of the state where the offence was committed. At least 12 executions were carried out: 11 people were hanged for drugs offences and one for a firearms offence.
Amnesty International called for the four political detainees from Sabah to be brought to trial in accordance with internationally accepted legal standards, or released. It also urged the commutation of all death sentences.
