MYANMAR
(burma)
At least 1,550 opponents of the government, many of them prisoners of conscience, were believed to be held despite the release of almost 1,300 others. Some were detained without trial, others had been sentenced after unfair trials. Gross and persistent human rights violations continued to be reported from all parts of the country, including arbitrary detention of civilians to serve as military porters, torture and extrajudicial executions.
In April the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (slorc) announced that it would release all prisoners detained for political reasons, other than those who posed a threat to national security. This was the first time it had acknowledged holding political prisoners. It also announced that it would hold a National Convention to establish principles for drafting a new constitution. In September the slorc revoked Martial Law Orders 1/89 and 2/89, thereby abolishing military tribunals set up to try martial law offenders. In August Myanmar acceded to the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, which establish minimum humane standards of conduct in situations of armed conflict.
MYANMAR (BURMA)
However, it was still not a party to the main international human rights treaties.
Despite these changes, Myanmar remained under martial law throughout the year. The slorc, chaired by General Than Shwe, refused to convene the People's Assembly (parliament) elected in 1990 and continued to repress peaceful political activity and to restrict freedom of expression and association. The National League for Democracy (nld), which had won the
1990	elections, was one of the seven remaining political parties which had not been banned.
Armed opposition against the government continued in several parts of the country, but violations of basic human rights by the military were not confined to those areas. Armed opposition groups also committed grave hiunan rights abuses, including torture and sununary executions of prisoners.
Thousands of government opponents were believed to be held, many of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International identified 1,550 political prisoners, including many prisoners of conscience, but believed that the actual number was far higher. Almost 1,300 political prisoners were released between April and the end of the year: only 66 of them were previously known to Amnesty International. Among those released were former Prime Minister U Nu and nld leaders U Khin Maung Swe, U Chan Aye and U Soe Thein.
Some of those held throughout 1992 had been detained without charge or trial since 1988; others had been convicted under laws which criminalized peaceful political activity and allowed unfair trials. Among the prisoners were leaders and organizers of the nld and most other opposition parties. Thirty-nine members of parliament-elect were still imprisoned at the end of the year. Buddhist, Christian and Muslim clerics, community leaders, university and high school students, writers, civil servants, doctors, lawyers and workers' leaders were among those imprisoned.
Prisoners of conscience included: nld leader Aung San Suu Kyi, winner of the
1991	Nobel Peace Prize, who had been held under house arrest since 1989; Nai Tun Thein, a member of parliament-elect for the Mon National Democratic Front who had been detained since December
1991 and forced to sign a paper criticizing the Nobel prize award; U Hla Wai, an election candidate of the Democratic Party for a New Society, who was arrested on the eve of the May 1990 elections; and the Venerable U Kaweinda, a Buddhist monk.
Several prisoners of conscience arrested in 1991 were sentenced to prison terms during the year. Tin Moe, a writer and editor of a literary magazine, was sentenced to fom years' imprisonment in June under the Publishing Act. Six university students were sentenced on unknown charges by military tribunals in July to prison terms ranging from six to 20 years. They included Zaw Min of the All-Burma Federation of Student Unions (abfsu), who was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. The students were among about 900 arrested in December 1991 during demonstrations calling for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi (see Amnesty International Report 1992). It was unclear whether the others had been charged, tried or released.
Although military tribunals were abolished in September, hundreds of political prisoners sentenced by them after unfair trials remained imprisoned. They included prisoner of conscience Aung Din, General Secretary of the absfu, who was sentenced in 1989 to four years' imprisonment. To Amnesty International's knowledge, no one had ever been acquitted by a military tribunal.
Civilian coiuts also failed to meet international standards for fair trial, The independence of the civilian judiciary was undermined by intimidation by the military authorities. In January a judge in Pathein was convicted for his role in freeing up to 50 villagers who had been detained in the Ayeyarwady Delta. He was reportedly arrested by military intelligence officers while hearing a case in court and sentenced by a military tribunal the same day to six years' imprisonment. Several lawyers from Pathein were also arrested, including U Htun, U Tin Ngwe and U Tin Oo, apparently for acting on behalf of prisoners. They were reportedly still held at the end of the year, but it was not known whether they had been charged or tried.
Opposition activists and other detainees were routinely tortmed or ill-treated in custody. Methods included sleep, food and water deprivation; the application of electric shocks to fingertips, toes, ear lobes or genitals; beatings with fists, boots or rifle
MYANMAR (BURMA)
butts; and the "motorcycle" - standing with arms outstretched and legs bent for long periods. At least six sections of the security forces were cited by former prisoners as responsible for torture, including the regular army, the police and the military intelligence service.
Himdreds of thousands of people were forcibly conscripted or seized by the military to serve as porters carrying army supplies, or as unpaid labourers building roads and army camps or working on commercial projects. Elderly men and women, schoolchildren and pregnant women were among those conscripted. In one incident in August, 300 porters, including 100 women rounded up from a village in Kayin State, were forcibly detained and sent to army camps in Kawmoora. Many people were seized at random, especially between January and April at the time of a major military offensive at Manerplaw. In previous years porters had come mainly from ethnic minority areas. In 1992 they were taken from almost any area of the country and from every ethnic or religious community, including the majority Buddhist Bamar (Burman), and were abducted from trains, ferries, buses, cinemas and city streets.
According -to witnesses, hundreds of porters and labourers died from neglect and exhaustion. Others were shot or beaten to death by soldiers when they became too weak to carry their loads. Still others were killed for disobeying orders or trying to escape. Women conscripts were raped by soldiers.
On several occasions people who tried to evade conscription were extrajudicially executed. A father of five from Pruso town in Kayah State was reportedly shot dead in February when he tried to hide from approaching soldiers. In Christian areas, church leaders were said to be particularly targeted because they remained in their villages to protect local people when troops approached.
Members of the Muslim minority in Rakhine (Arakan) State, sometimes known as Rohingyas, were subjected to a barrage of human rights violations, leading to the flight of over 260,000 people to Bangladesh by July. Refugees said that the military had driven them out by destroying villages and mosques and arresting community leaders and members of political parties, especially the nld. Witnesses testified that the security forces had forcibly conscripted many
Muslims as porters, and, in some cases, tortured and deliberately killed them. Several refugees described female relatives being raped and then killed.
Some Muslims were killed when trying to resist military demands. For example, a mother of six from Buthidaung township stated that her husband had been killed in January by the army. He was the village headman and had been unable to find any more porters for the army. When his corpse was found, his eyes had been gouged out and his body sliced open.
At least 20 Muslims were reportedly shot dead and as many drowned in February when security forces attacked a group of refugees trying to reach Bangladesh by boat. Some were killed by members of the security forces, others by civilian Rakhines whom the security forces did not attempt to restrain. The authorities denied the killings.
Other Muslims were killed because they were alleged members or supporters of insurgent groups. For example, Mohamed Ilyas, an elderly villager and nld member, was reportedly beaten to death by soldiers in June. However, the level of armed conflict in Rakhine State was minimal.
In other parts of Myanmar, where armed opposition groups did confront the authorities, the population was consistently abused by the military during counter-insurgency operations. Ethnic minority communities were forced to move to "strategic hamlets" under strict curfews and rigid controls. Crops and villages were destroyed and expulsion orders warned that villagers remaining in their homes would be shot on sight. In March residents of 57 villages in Kayah State were ordered to abandon thefr homes and farms. Within three months more than 8,000 people had moved and thousands were confined in poor conditions in camps where deaths from malnutrition were frequent. Others were forced to do construction work for the army, during which many were beaten or shot.
In Kayin State, where the military launched a major offensive against the Manerplaw headquarters of the Karen National Union (knu), whole areas were reportedly declared "free-fire" zones (where soldiers were authorized to shoot people at will). Refugees described dozens of extrajudicial executions of villagers between January and April, when the
MYANMAR (BURMA)/NAMIBIA
offensive was called off
In April the slorc reached an agreement with the Bangladeshi Government to repatriate the 260,000 Muslim refugees from Rakhine State (see Bangladesh entry). The agreement, reportedly at the slorc's insistence, excluded the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr) from the resettlement process. In September over 40 refugees were returned by the Bangladeshi authorities without unhck monitoring. In October, 167 were returned under unhcr monitoring, and in November almost 1,000 were returned: 165 of these were involuntary. In December almost 2,500 others were returned without unhcr monitoring.
Armed opposition groups were also reported to have tortured, ill-treated or summarily executed prisoners. Evidence emerged during the year of executions in previous years by the knu, the Democratic Alliance of Burma and the Kachin Independence Organization. In February the All Burma Students' Democratic Front (absdf-North) executed 15 alleged spies. One of them. Tun Aung Kyaw, was their former Chairman. The 15 were among 80 students detained in the second half of 1991 on suspicion of spying for the slorc. The other 65 prisoners were held in harsh conditions, given inadequate nourishment, fettered and allegedly tortured. Fifty-five escaped in May, three reportedly died in captivity and the situation of the remaining seven was not clear. Amnesty International appealed to the absdf to end incommunicado detention of prisoners and to safeguard them from ill-treatment or execution.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the slorc to take action to stop violations of human rights. It called for the release of prisoners of conscience, for fair trials for political prisoners and an end to arbitrary detention, torture and extrajudicial executions.
In May Amnesty International published Myanmar: Human rights violations against Muslims in the Rakhine (Arakan) State, which documented the pattern of repression by the security forces. In October it published Myanmar: "No law at all" - Human rights violations under military rule. This report detailed gross and persistent violations of human rights in every one of Myanmar's seven political divisions and seven ethnic minority states.
Amnesty International welcomed the
releases of prisoners of conscience between April and October, but expressed its concern about the continuing imprisorunent of hundreds of other prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. In September the organization wrote to over 20 governments worldwide calling on them to press the Myanmar Government to accept unhcr monitoring of any repatriation of refugees from Bangladesh.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Myanmar.
