ANGOLA
Despite further releases of political prisoners under the 1991 Peace Accords, the fate and whereabouts of hundreds of prisoners remained unknown. There were new political arrests and reports of torture and ill-treatment: at least one detainee died in police custody, apparently as a result of torture. Government forces cortunitted scores of extrajudicial executions of suspected political opponents. The death penalty was abolished. The main armed opposition group, the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (unita), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, and armed factions of the Frente da Libertagao do Enclave de Cabinda (flec), Enclave of Cabinda Liberation Front, were also responsible for gross human rights abuses, including executions and other deliberate and arbitrary killings.
The Peace Accords agreed in 1991 by the government and untta were repeatedly undermined by political violence and human rights violations. They had not been fully implemented before national elections were held in September imder United Nations (un) supervision. The elections. won by the Movimento Popular para a Ubertaçâo de Angola (mpla). People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola, led by President José Eduardo dos Santos, were declared by international observers to have been generally free and fair, but Jonas Sav-imbi, unita's leader, rejected the results, alleging they were fraudulent. He withdrew his troops from the new national army and unita forces occupied many towns and villages. Fierce fighting broke out in Luanda and other towns in late October. By the end of the year thousands of people had died: a large proportion were victims of deliberate revenge killings carried out by both sides, un and diplomatic efforts to break the deadlock continued, unsuccessfully, to the end of 1992,
The timetable set out in the Peace Accords for the demobilization of troops, the formation of police monitoring groups and the extension of the central administration was not observed. The implementation of the accords was the responsibility of the Comissâo Conjunta Politico-Militar (ccpm). Joint Political-Military Commission, comprising equal numbers of government and unita representatives and observers from the governments of Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States of America. The ccpm, in which each side had a veto over decisions, failed to investigate violations of human rights, allowing politically motivated killings and other abuses to be committed with impunity. The accords also provided for the government's administrative structures to be extended to unita-controlled areas, but in practice unita retained control over a large part of the country.
Violence continued in Cabinda, an oil-rich Angolan enclave between Zaire and the Congo, where separatist groups fought for independence.
Angola abolished the death penalty in August. No executions had been carried out for over four years. Earlier, in January. Angola acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol, and to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
ANGOLA
Cultural Rights.
Under the Peace Accords, all prisoners detained in the context of the conflict were to be released by August 1991. By the start of 1992 the government had released over 900 prisoners (see Amnesty International Report 1992) and in April it released a further three, unita said that it had released over 3.000 prisoners by February, but that most had chosen to remain in unita-controlled areas. It released more prisoners in March, May and July. However, according to reports, at the end of the year other prisoners were still being held or had been coerced into staying in unita-controlled areas.
In early July, the ccpm ruled that all remaining prisoners should be released by the end of the month. This followed claims by unita that the government had failed to release 400 of its members and by the government that unita was still holding some 4,000 prisoners. However, there were no further releases, and thousands of prisoners remained unaccounted for. They included many hundreds of people, including suspected unffa supporters, who "disappeared" in government custody in the late 1970s. The fate and whereabouts of scores of government soldiers and civilians taken prisoner by unita, as well as unita members detained by the organization for opposing its policies or leadership, also remained unclear.
Prisoners still held by the government at the start of the year included José Alberto Ferreira Pinto "Zeca Siberia", who had been convicted of diamond smuggling and plotting against the government in an unfair trial and sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment in 1984. He was released from prison in August.
There were new political arrests. In June over 40 people, most of them unita supporters, were detained in Luanda during the visit of Pope John-Paul II. They were all subsequently released uncharged. In July Manuel Matias, nine other former unfta soldiers and three civilians were arrested by government soldiers: they were held for over a month and then released uncharged. At least a dozen other unita members were reportedly detained for political reasons during the elections in September. They were subsequently released. In the violence which followed the elections, hundreds of unita members and others suspected of sympathizing with unita were arrested in
Luanda. Over 70 of them were released in December.
Political detainees and criminal suspects were reported to have been beaten or ill-treated in custody as common practice: others were tortured during interrogation. Francisco dos Santos Queirós. who was arrested on suspicion of theft, died in police custody in Luanda in May. An autopsy reportedly revealed that he had been beaten around the head, his genitals had been mutilated and he had been shot. Paulo Godinho and David Pedro Chiovo, two unita supporters who were detained in Luanda shortly before the elections, were also reported to have been badly beaten in police custody. There were further reports of ill-treatment and torture following the violence in Luanda in late October and early November. No further investigation concerning these cases was known to have occurred.
There were new reports of extrajudicial executions both before and after the elections. At least 10 people were extrajudicially executed in Cabinda, where armed flec factions continued to fight for the territory's independence. In early September government troops took violent reprisals against the local population. At least six people, all civilians, were killed. They included a woman who was shot as she swept her doorstep and Joao "Incumbió" Macaia, a civil servant, who was burned to death by soldiers - they placed a tyre round his neck, doused it with petrol and set it alight. The four others were killed later in the month: Joao Maria Taty. an electricity company worker, and his three companions were reported to have been detained by soldiers and then summarily executed by firing-squad. No action was known to have been taken by the authorities to investigate these killings.
angola/argentina
taken no steps to bring those responsible to justice.
unita was also responsible for gross human rights abuses, including executions and other deliberate and arbitrary killings. In March four government air force officers were deliberately killed, two of whom were apparently buried alive. The same month, unita admitted that two of its former leading officials - Pedro "Tito" Chingunji and Fernando Wilson dos Santos - had been executed in the latter half of 1991 together with at least three members of their families (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1991). Defecting untta officials claimed the victims had been executed on the direct orders of unita's leader Jonas Savimbi but unita blamed one of the defectors. Other internal dissidents within the organization continued to be held by untta, including Nelson Malaquias and his daughters, Ger-mana "Tita" and Bela. Bela Malaquias, a journalist, had been working for untia in Luanda but was forced to return to Jamba, untta's headquarters in southeastern Angola, in May. She was not allowed to leave Jamba although it was not clear whether or not she was held in a prison.
Following the election, unita forces were reported to have committed deliberate and arbitrary killings of suspected government supporters in areas which they seized. However, it was difficult to obtain information from these areas.
flec factions also carried out deliberate and arbitrary killings of suspected government supporters. In December, one faction - it was not clear which - ambushed four vehicles carrying oil company employees and killed four of the workers, all apparently targeted because they were Angolans but not from Cabinda.
Amnesty International representatives visited Angola for the first time in March. In May the organization published Angola: An appeal for prompt action to protect human rights, which reported that both sides were responsible for politically motivated killings and other abuses and that these were not being adequately investigated by the mechanisms set up under the Peace Accords. Amnesty International appealed to both sides and the international observers to ensure that the human rights provisions of the Peace Accords were upheld. In August Amnesty International published Angola: Will the new government protect human rights?, which
updated the previous report and outlined a framework of reforms to prevent further human rights violations in Angola. Following the elections Amnesty International urged the parties to the conflict to take action to prevent extrajudicial executions and other deliberate and arbitrary killings and abuses.
