CONGO
A journalist detained for several days appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. Five people killed by soldiers in January appeared to be the victims of extrajudicial executions. Allegations of gross human rights violations, including torture and extrajudicial executions, committed under former governments remained uninvestigated. At least four people remained under sentence of death but there were no reports of executions.
A multi-party political system was established and elections brought a new government and head of state to power, despite a threatened military coup against the transitional government of Prime Min-
ister André Milongo early in the year.
A new Constitution containing a number of himian rights safeguards and institutionalizing a multi-party system was adopted by referendum in March (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Local and municipal elections were held in May.
National Assembly elections in July brought to power the Union panafricaine pour la démocratie sociale (upads), Pan-African Union for Social Democracy, led by Pascal Lissouba, a former Prime Minister and prisoner of conscience. It won a third of the seats in the National Assembly. Pascal Lissouba was subsequently elected President in August. Former President Sassou-Nguesso was defeated in the first round.
On 15 January about 100 soldiers occupied television and radio stations in the capital, Brazzaville, for several hours. They broadcast a communique demanding the dismissal of the newly appointed Secretary of State for Defence, Michel Gangouo. He had announced changes in the army's command structure, which would have had the effect of weakening the influence of officers loyal to the then President, Denis Sassou-Nguesso. On 18 January another group of soldiers prevented Prime Minister Milongo from leaving Brazzaville: two days later soldiers fired on some of his supporters who had gathered outside his residence to prevent the possibility of his being seized by mutinous soldiers. Five people were killed and dozens injured. The mutinous soldiers demanded Prime Minister Milon-go's resignation and imposed a curfew in the capital, but the crisis was defused three days later through the intervention of the Conseil supérieur de la République (csr). High Council of the Republic, the transitional legislative body. This persuaded Prime Minister Milongo to reshuffle the cabinet, effectively removing Michel Gangouo. No subsequent action, however, was taken against the soldiers responsible for the killings on 20 January.
On 21 May Durcil Pambou, a television journalist, was arrested in Brazzaville. He was accused of "inciting civil war" after he read out on a television news program anonymous protests against the csr's request that Prime Minister Milongo reshuffle the cabinet. He was released without charge several days later. He appeared to be a prisoner of conscience arrested for
congo/costa rica
pursuing his professional duties.
The new Constitution prohibits human rights violations including torture. However, the new goverrunent took no steps to establish any inquiry into gross human rights violations which had occurred in previous years or into the killings of demonstrators in January. On the contrary, at his inauguration ceremony in August, President Lissouba announced that he would submit to the National Assembly a general amnesty bill, apparently intended to protect the country's past leaders from prosecution for offences including human rights violations committed while they were in power. However, no such bill was presented to parliament during the year.
Four people convicted of criminal offences in 1989 remained under sentence of death. No new death sentences or executions were reported.
Amnesty International remained concerned by the failure of the authorities to investigate past human rights violations, including torture and extrajudicial executions, and the possible introduction of legislation providing immunity against prosecution for senior government ofiicials and others implicated in human rights violations.
