IRAQ
Thousands of suspected government opponents and their relatives were detained during the year and tens of thousands of others continued to be held. Many of them were prisoners of conscience. Torture continued to be common and widespread. Hundreds of detainees "disappeared" and new information was received about thousands of detainees who "disappeared" in previous years. An unknown number of judicial and extrajudicial executions were carried out. Armed opposition groups committed abuses, including torture and executions.
Economic sanctions against Iraq imposed by a United Nations (un) Security Council cease-fire resolution in April 1991 remained in force. A 1991 agreement imposing an "air exclusion zone" over northern Iraq, forbidding Iraqi fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters from flying north of the 36th parallel, was renewed in June and December, each time for a further six months. In August a similar "air exclusion zone" came into effect in southern Iraq south of the 32nd parallel. Both operations
IRAQ/IRELAND
were enforced by United States (us), British and French forces, and were aimed at protecting Iraq's Kurdish and Arab Shi'a Muslim populations respectively. A un-sponsored Memorandum of Understanding, which expired in June, was renewed in October after its terms were amended,
In May the government declared an amnesty for Iraqi army deserters and defaulters held in Rafha and Artawiyya camps in Saudi Arabia. There was no independent confirmation of government claims in June that some 210 refugees had returned to Iraq to benefit from the amnesty. In September the government declared a general amnesty for army deserters and "misguided military personnel" from several southern provinces. Government claims in September that 3,212 people from the southern provinces had surrendered to the authorities under the amnesties could not be confirmed.
In December Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council issued a decree which forbids the arrest, interrogation and bringing to justice of law enforcement officials who kill or injure criminal suspects, security offenders or army deserters in the course of their duty. It was feared that the decree would give officials a free hand to adopt a " shoot-to-kill" policy against both criminal suspects and political opponents.
Kurdish opposition groups retained control of parts of the northern provinces of Duhok, Arbil, Sulaimaniya and Kirkuk following the withdrawal of Iraqi government forces and the imposition of an economic blockade by the Iraqi Government in October 1991. In January the Iraqi Kurdistan Front (ikf), representing all the main Kurdish opposition groups, suspended negotiations with the government about greater autonomy for Kurds in Iraq. In May elections were held under the auspices of the ikf to elect a 105-member Kurdistan National Assembly for a three-year term, replacing the former (government-created) Legislative Assembly of the Autonomous Region of Kurdistan. The Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (puk) and the Kurdistan Democratic Party (kdp) each received 50 seats, with five seats allocated to two Christian parties. In July a Council of Ministers for Iraqi Kurdistan was formed, which effectively administered ikf-held territory.
In March the ikf established a Special Court of the Revolution, which replaced the Revolutionary Court set up by the ikf in
1991. Both courts applied existing Iraqi legislation, namely the Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, but their proceedings fell far short of international standards and their decisions were not subject to appeal. In November the Kurdistan National Assembly abolished the Special Court and in December a Court of Cassation was set up, to sit in Arbil. In October and November the death penalty was introduced for two offences: premeditated murder of foreigners and using explosives to carry out acts of sabotage against the Kurdish people.
Several thousand Arab Shi'a Muslims were arrested by Iraqi government forces in southern Iraq. Most arrests were said to have begun after the imposition of the "air exclusion zone" in August and to have continued into December. Those detained were largely non-combatant civilians, including whole families, taken from their homes and public places and transferred to unknown destinations. In October random and widespread arrests of unarmed civilians were carried out in al-'Amara by the army and security forces as part of the officially-named "punitive campaign". Most were held at the 4th Army Corps' headquarters in al-'Amara city; many of them were reportedly held for short periods and tortured, and in some cases released only after making cash payments. Others were reported to have "disappeared" and there were fears that they were extrajudicially executed (see below). The government publicly denied reports of a renewed crackdown on the Shi'a Muslim population, but in September President Saddam Hussain declared that attempts by saboteurs and infiltrators to "terrorize civilians and assassinate government officials" had been crushed.
Scores of military personnel, including army officers, were reportedly arrested during the year. At least 47 of them, arrested between May and July, were said to have been involved in military attacks against suspected Shi'a Muslim opponents in the southern marshes (al-Ahwar), Others were arrested after allegedly failing to comply with military orders. The fate and whereabouts of those detained remained unknown; among them were Brigadier Anwar Isma'il Hantush and Major Ghaffuri Ahmad Isma'il.
At least 12 foreign nationals were arrested and accused of illegal entry into Iraq, of
IFWQ
whom 11 remained held at the end of 1992. They included two Britons arrested in April and August and sentenced to 10 and seven years' imprisonment respectively, and three Swedish telephone engineers arrested in September and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment each. The other six still held were two Bangladeshis, one Filipino, one Pakistani and two Romanians, but no further details about their cases were known. All were held in Abu Ghraib Prison near Baghdad. Two US nationals and a Filipino arrested for illegal entry in December 1991 were released in January. They were reportedly ill-treated (see below).
Thousands of government opponents arrested in previous years continued to be held throughout 1992, including prisoners of conscience. Among them were hundreds of Arabs and Kurds detained during the mass uprisings in April 1991, including at least 106 Shi'a Muslim religious scholars and students arrested in al-Najaf (see Amnesty International Report 1992] and at least 76 Kurds arrested in the Arbil region. The Kuwaiti Government said an estimated 870 Kuwaitis taken prisoner after the Iraqi invasion were still held in Iraq; the Iraqi Government continued to deny holding Kuwaiti detainees. Also still held was 'Aziz al-Saj^id Jassem, a Shi'a Muslim from al-Nasirijrya and former editor of the government magazine Al-Ghad. He was arrested in April 1991, apparently for his failure to write articles in support of the government following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. Until January he was believed to be held in Mudiriyyat al-Amn al-Amma (General Security Directorate) in Baghdad, but thereafter his fate and whereabouts remained unknown.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued to be received. Two Shi'a Muslims released in June from al-Radwaniyya garrison, southwest of Baghdad, stated that they had been repeatedly beaten and subjected to electric shocks during their four months' detention. They also stated that a fellow detainee died from severe bums after being tied to a skewer and "roasted" over a flame. David Martin, a us national, and Joseph Ducat, a Filipino, stated upon their release in January that they had been thrown naked into a cell, forced to sleep on a concrete floor while blindfolded, and deprived of food and water for several days. They reported that detainees held with them, including
Egyptians. Syrians and Iranians, had been beaten and subjected to electric shocks, and that they had heard the screams of others being tortured. Several Iraqi merchants and businessmen arrested in July were also reportedly tortured before being executed. In June and September further details were revealed of the torture of us and British military prisoners of war during the Gulf War (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Torture methods reportedly used included severe beatings with truncheons and rubber hoses, electric shocks, prolonged isolation, mock executions, threats of dismemberment, and sexual abuse of a woman us army officer.
New information was received from documents obtained from areas under Kurdish control and other sources about some of the estimated 100,000 Kurds who "disappeared" in Iraqi government custody after being detained in 1988 during the "Anfal operations" (see Amnesty International Report 1992), including details of over 5,000 people who "disappeared" from Kalar in Sulaimaniya province. Further details were also received about 60 Shi'a Muslim Arabs who "disappeared" between 1979 and 1985, although their fate and whereabouts remained unknown.
Scores of executions were carried out during the year, although in many cases it was not possible to determine whether these were judicial or extrajudicial. The death penalty continued to be imposed for criminal offences, including rape and murder, but no overall figures for the year were available. On 26 July at least 42 merchants, traders and businessmen were executed in Baghdad: they had been accused of profiteering. They were among several hundred members of prominent Sunni and Shi'a families who were detained that month in a wave of arrests. The government stated that those executed had been tried and convicted, but reports indicated that several were shot dead upon being apprehended. Among those executed was Salim 'Abd al-Hadi Hamra, former head of the Baghdad Chamber of Commerce. Unconfirmed reports suggested that 25 other merchants and traders may have been executed in September. Also in September Iraqi television broadcast details of the trials of seven Iraqis who were executed that month following their conviction for premeditated murder. In October there were unconfirmed reports of the execution of at least
IRAQ/IRELAND
30 military personnel following an alleged military coup attempt in July.
An unknown number of unarmed civilians were extrajudicially executed in the southern marshes region, where thousands of suspected government opponents and army deserters remained in hiding. In February President Hussain said that Shi'a Muslims who participated in the March 1991 uprising should be machine-gunned for treason. In April the government ordered villagers living in the marshes region to resettle in purpose-built camps outside the area. Between April and August, government forces, including the Republican Guards, launched repeated military attacks on the marshes region using helicopter gunships and fighter aircraft. The extent and persistence of the bombardment of civilian targets, which intensified in July, heightened fears that the government had adopted a policy of deliberately targeting non-combatant civilians. In one incident in May, 13 civilians, among them women and children, were reportedly killed after helicopter gunships attacked a wedding ceremony in the village of al-Agir in al-'Amara province. Scores of others were killed in similar attacks in the province in July and August. No aerial attacks were reported following the imposition of the "air exclusion zone". However, ground attacks intensified and were accompanied by widespread arrests and the torture or execution of detainees. Earlier, hundreds of Shi'a Muslim detainees arrested after the March 1991 uprising were reportedly extrajudicially executed at al-Radwaniyya garrison between March and June.
Information was received about extrajudicial executions perpetrated by government forces in northern Iraq in previous years. Several mass graves were found near Arbil, Sulaimaniya and other areas, each containing the remains of scores of Kurdish civilians and combatants who had "disappeared" in custody. One mass grave outside Arbil contained the remains of 107 Kurdish villagers killed in 1987: they were among a group of some 360 people who had survived chemical weapons attacks and were arrested after seeking medical treatment in Arbil's hospitals. They had been moved to an unknown location and in 1988 were reported to have been killed (see Amnesty International Report 1989). A Kurdish doctor who worked at the deten-
tion centre in Arbil where the victims had been held told Amnesty International that he had been prevented by Iraqi security personnel from providing them with medical treatment, and that they were left to die and then buried. He added that 15 men who survived had been shot dead and then buried with the others.
Human rights abuses were committed by Kurdish opposition groups and the Kurdish authorities in control of northern Iraq, including torture and execution. Several hundred people were held in detention centres and prisons in Arbil, Sulaimaniya, Duhok and other places under the jurisdiction of the ikf, Kurdish political parties and, after July, police and security personnel of the Kurdish Ministry of the Interior. Some were Iraqi Arabs accused of espionage, but the majority were Kurds arrested at various times since the 1991 uprising on charges including murder, robbery and seciu-ity offences. Scores of those detained, including young people, were reported to have been tortured to extract "confessions" which were later used to convict them. Among them were 13 political detainees, four of them women, arrested during a demonstration in Arbil in August and charged with the murder of two members of Pesh Merga (armed Kurdish units). Other detainees were sentenced to death and executed by firing-squad, but it was not known how many prisoners in all were sentenced to death or executed. Scores of people were also reported to have "disappeared" during the year after being picked up by members of armed Kurdish groups or to have been killed for political reasons. However, in most cases there was insufficient information to identify the perpetrators.
An ikf investigation into the killing of some 60 unarmed Iraqi soldiers by Pesh Merga forces in October 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) identified 14 Kurds, most of whom were affiliated to the puk and Kurdistan Socialist Party-Iraq (ksp-i), suspected of having carried out the killings. However, the suspects were released during the year in accordance with an ikf decision not to pursue the investigation.
Amnesty International continued to appeal to the Iraqi Government to halt human rights violations, including politically motivated arrests, unfair trials, "disappearances" and executions, but without
IRAQ/IRELAND
response. In September and November Amnesty International publicly expressed its concern about extrajudicial executions in the southern marshes, and reiterated its call to the un to press ahead and undertake direct monitoring of hiunan rights throughout Iraq.
In May and December Amnesty International delegations visited northern Iraq and held discussions with Kurdish political leaders, officials and members of the judiciary about its concerns regarding human rights abuses perpetrated in territory effectively under the control of the ikf and the Council of Ministers. Amnesty International urged, among other things, that steps be taken to protect detainees from torture and that death sentences be commuted. During the year. Amnesty International obtained further government documents seized by Kurds during the 1991 uprising from security and intelligence offices in northern Iraq. Many of the documents confirmed the pattern of gross human rights violations committed by Iraqi government forces in previous years, including arbitrary arrests, "disappearances" and executions which had been reported by Amnesty International.
In a written statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International drew attention to its grave concerns in Iraq, and in an oral statement urged the Commission to take up the recommendation of the un Special Rapporteur on Iraq that a human rights monitoring operation be established in the country. The Special Rapporteur, who visited Iraq in January, detailed gross and widespread human rights violations in Iraq in his report to the Commission, and stated that "this exceptionally grave situation demands an exceptional response", The Commission adopted a resolution extending the Special Rapporteur's mandate for a further year and requested him "to develop further his recommendation for an exceptional response". In August, in an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International drew attention to continuing human rights violations in Iraq.
In December the un General Assembly adopted a resolution endorsing the un Special Rapporteur's proposal to establish a human rights monitoring operation in Iraq.
