JAPAN
For the third consecutive year there were no executions. However, five death sentences were finalized, bringing the total number of prisoners under final sentence of death to 56. There was concern about the lack of legal protection for refugees and asylum-seekers.
The death penalty was the subject of public debate throughout the year. Among those supporting a growing campaign for abolition were a former Minister of Justice, a former Supreme Court judge, more than 230 members of the Diet (Japan's parliament), and members of the religious community. The Japan Federation of Bar Associations established a working group to study abolition of the death penalty. In August abolitionist groups organized a series of public events to mark 1,000 days
since the last execution in November 1989. This was the first time since the Penal Code was introduced in 1907 that no executions had taken place for such a long period.
At the start of 1992 some 90 prisoners convicted of murder were believed to be under sentence of death. During the year five sentences were finalized, bringing to 56 the number of prisoners under final sentence of death. They included the sentences imposed on Tetsuya Sasaki, Kosaku Nada and Tetsuyuki Morikawa, which were upheld by the Supreme Court. Twenty-six prisoners under sentence of death were reported either to have applied for a retrial or to be preparing to do so. claiming miscarriages of justice. Four prisoners had been held under sentence of death for over 20 years.
Further information was received about Lin Guizhen, an asylum-seeker from the People's Republic of China. She had been forcibly returned from Japan to China in August 1991 before the appeal against the refusal of her asylum request had been heard (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In April the Chinese authorities stated that Lin Guizhen was serving a term of "re-education through labour" without imprisonment, although her family reportedly stated that she had been imprisoned shortly after her return to China.
In October Amnesty International representatives met government officials and others to gather information on the protection of refugees and asylum-seekers and, in particular, to assess the extent to which Japanese law and practice conforms with Japan's international obligations. They found that asylum-seekers face difficulties in obtaining relevant information and exercising their right to apply for asylum; that procedures do not provide for a fair and satisfactory examination of individual claims; and that there is inadequate protection against forcible return for those at risk of serious human rights violations in their own countries.
Amnesty International urged the government to commute all death sentences and abolish the death penalty. In April the organization issued a report, Japan: Debating Abolition of the Death Penalty, which included information about the main arguments put forward by both abolitionists and retentionists in legal, political and academic circles in Japan.
