AUSTRIA
There were new allegations that detainees were ill-treated in police custody, although these were fewer in number than in previous years.
In February the Tyrol Independent Administrative Tribunal concluded that Werner Nosko's constitutionally guaranteed right not to be subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment had been infringed. Press photographer Werner Nosko had been arrested and handcuffed while taking pictures at a demonstration near Innsbruck. The handcuffs were fastened in such a way as to cause bruising and swelling to his left wrist. The tribunal also concluded that since his injiuies must have been visible, the entry on the police arrest card which stated that the detainee had suffered no injiu-ies had been falsely made.
In March Werner Hirtmayr submitted a complaint to the Vienna Independent Administrative Tribunal alleging that he had been ill-treated by two police officers in February when he was arrested outside his home for a speeding offence. Werner Hirtmayr alleged that he was kicked in the right knee by one of the officers, causing him to fall to the ground. He further alleged that both officers continued to kick him as he lay on the ground until he lost consciousness. According to a medical report issued by the hospital where he was
later treated, Werner Hirtmayr had suffered badly torn ligaments to his right knee, abrasions to his buttocks and right hand, bruising to his right calf, and a broken nose. The following day he underwent an operation lasting several hours on his leg. A complaint was lodged against Werner Hirtmayr by the Vienna Public Procurator accusing him of attempting to resist arrest and of causing serious injury to a police officer whom he was alleged to have struck in the face with his elbow and fist.
In June Amnesty International asked the Austrian authorities what efforts had been made by the police authorities, in the light of the decision by the TjtoI Independent Administrative Tribunal, to identify the officer who ill-treated Werner Nosko. The organization also inquired whether disciplinary action had been taken against the officer who had made a false entry on the police arrest card. In December the authorities informed Amnesty International that a judicial inquiry into the allegations of ill-treatment had been carried out by the Innsbruck Public Procurator. The inquiry concluded that there was insufficient evidence to show that the injury sustained by Werner Nosko had been the result of police negligence or had been caused intentionally. A separate inquiry concluded that the false entry on the arrest card was the result of a mistake on the part of the officer concerned.
In November Amnesty International asked the Austrian authorities to inform it about steps taken to investigate Werner HirtmajT's allegations of ill-treatment by the police. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
