LAOS
Three prisoners of conscience detained since 1990 received 14-year prison sentences after an unfair trial. Criminal investigations were reportedly begun against two other prisoners of conscience and three other political detainees who
had been held without trial for over 17 years. Eight possible prisoners of conscience were sentenced to between four and 10 years' imprisonment and three long-term political prisoners received life sentences after an unfair trial.
President Kaysone Phomvihan died in November and Nouhak Phoumsavan was appointed as his successor.
Three prisoners of conscience. Thong-souk Saysangkhi, Latsami Khamphoui and Feng Sakchittaphong, were each sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment on 4 November by a tribimal in Sam Neua, in the northern province of Houa Phanh. They had been arrested in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). They were officially reported to have been charged with "making preparations to stage a rebellion and for conducting propaganda against [the Lao Government], gathering groups of people to create disturbances and carry out slanderous charges against other people, and creating disorder in prison". However, they were believed to have actually been detained for advocating a multiparty political system. Their trial was attended by a few people selected by the authorities and appeared to have been unfair: the prisoners had no access to defence counsel prior to or during the proceedings. They were reportedly sent to Sop Hao Central Prison in Houa Phanh province to serve their sentences and held incommunicado.
The same tribunal sentenced three other political prisoners to life imprisonment on 3 November. Pangtong Chokbengboun, Bounlu Nammathao and Sing Chanthak-oummane were convicted of crimes related to events which took place in 1963 and 1975 while they held minor official
LAOSAATVIA
positions. Before being brought to trial, they had been detained without charge for 17 years at a "re-education" camp in Sop Pan, also in Houa Phanh province. Their trial appeared to have been unfair: they had no access to a defence lawyer.
Five other prisoners, including two prisoners of conscience, all held without charge or trial since 1975, were apparently under police investigation. Thuck Chok-bengboun, a prisoner of conscience and the brother of Pantong Chokbengboun, was questioned about alleged massacres of civilians in the town of Thalet between 1972 and 1975, while he was serving as a middle-ranking government official. He denied involvement in any killings, as did his brother. The other prisoner of conscience, Khamphan Pradith, was released in December.
In March the official Lao National Radio announced that eight "bad elements" had been sentenced to terms of imprisonment by a court in the province of Luang Namtha. They were accused of "setting up an underground unit to collaborate with foreigners to ... undermine and destroy local government, military and social institutions". Mai Thokeo, La Su, and Som La were sentenced to 10, nine and eight years' imprisonment respectively. Amnesty International was concerned that they might be prisoners of conscience. They appeared to have been held in detention without trial since 1988. Thao Puei, Thao Song, and Thao Litho were each sentenced to six years' imprisonment; Thao Gnoi and Thao Khamchan received foiu-year prison sentences.
In December Khamsone Vongnarath, a Lao student, was forcibly taken back to Laos by Lao officials after visiting the Lao Embassy in Moscow. He had been studying in the Ukraine. He was believed to have been suspected of opposing Lao Government policies and to have been detained in Laos after being returned.
In June the Lao authorities forcibly returned an asylum-seeker, Huang Guisheng, to the People's Republic of China (prc), where he was at risk of detention as a prisoner of conscience. Huang Guisheng had sought protection against such return from the Vientiane office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. By the end of the year there was no information about his whereabouts in China,
Amnesty International continued to press for the immediate release of prisoners of conscience and the fair trial or release of other long-term political prisoners. In May Amnesty International wrote to President Kaysone Phomvihan to request information about the exact charges against the eight people sentenced in Luang Namtha and expressed concern about the fairness of their trials. No response had been received by the end of the year.
In December the organization wrote to the new President to urge the release of the prisoners of conscience sentenced in November. Amnesty International pressed the government to make public the exact charges on which other political prisoners had been tried, the evidence against them and to indicate what steps, if any, had been taken to ensure that the trials conformed with international fair trial standards. Also in December Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on behalf of Khamsone Vongnarath after he had been forcibly taken back to Laos: the organization was concerned that he was being held as a prisoner of conscience.
Earlier, in June. Amnesty International made an lu^ent appeal on behalf of asylum-seeker Huang Guisheng, urging the Lao authorities not to forcibly return him to the prc. Subsequently, Amnesty International criticized the Lao authorities' action in returning him to China as a breach of their obligation under international law not to forcibly return anyone to a country where he or she risks serious human rights violations. By the end of the year there was no response from the Lao authorities.
