DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
A detainee was reported to have been tortured. Two political prisoners were held in detention despite judicial orders for their release. Police reportedly killed one person and wounded two others during a demonstration.
Felipe de Jesús Medrano García, a university professor, was allegedly tortured on 16 January at the National Police headquarters after being arrested by members of the Forgery Investigation Department of the National Police. He said he was beaten on the buttocks and lower back with a wooden bat and around the left ear with a piece of rubber. He was subsequently released. According to a medical certificate, Felipe Medrano suffered severe injuries to the buttocks and lower back. In July two police captains were reportedly tried before a police tribunal for their alleged involvement in the torture, but it appeared that no one had been convicted by the end of the year.
In June an investigating judge in Bara-hona recommended that an army and a police officer be tried before a criminal court for the death in custody in February 1991 of Julio Oosé) Samboy (see Amnesty
dominican republic/ecuador
International Report 1992). A 1991 investigation commission, comprising an army general, a police general and a navy admiral, had found that Julio Samboy had died as a result of beatings. It recommended that the two officers be dismissed and that legal proceedings be initiated against them. However, it appeared that neither officer had been brought to trial by the end of 1992.
No judicial proceedings were initiated in the case of Haitian national Joubert Pierre, who died in April 1991 reportedly as a result of beatings by the security forces (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In the case of the killing of Jesús Diplán Martínez after his arrest in 1990 (see Amnesty International Reporís 1991 and 1992), seven members of the security forces were reported to have been tried before a military tribunal in February. In spite of strong evidence indicating their involvement, all were subsequently acquitted.
Two political prisoners were held in detention despite judicial orders for their release. Teudo Mordán Gerónimo was held in the National Penitentiary of La Victoria for over a year. He was arrested in June
1991,	reportedly accused of being a guerrilla and of instructing peasants to overthrow the government. Despite court orders for his release in November 1991 and May
1992,	and a similar order in June by the Attorney General to the Chief of the National Police, the police authorities refused to free him. He was, however, released in July. The police continued to refuse to comply with two 1989 court orders for the release of Luis Lizardo Cabrera, who was arrested in 1989 for alleged involvement in a bombing (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992).
On 20 September the police were reported to have shot dead Rafael Efrain Ortiz, a lawyer who headed the Dominican Committee of Human Rights, and wounded Pedro Juan Reynoso and trade union leader Flavio Sánchez, during a demonstration against the celebrations planned to mark the 500th anniversary of Columbus' arrival in the Americas. Ten policemen were reportedly detained in connection with the incident, pending a police investigation. To Amnesty International's knowledge, no one had been brought to justice for these shootings by the end of the year.
Amnesty International urged the gov-
ernment of President Joaquin Balaguer to initiate investigations into the alleged torture of Felipe Medrano Garcia and the death in custody of Julio Samboy. The organization sought clarification from the government about the continued imprisonment of Luis Lizardo Cabrera and Teudo Mordán Gerónimo and urged that they be released if no legal basis existed for their detention. In September Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior urging that the investigation into the shooting of Rafael Efrain Ortiz, Flavio Sánchez and Pedro Juan Reynoso be thorough and impartial, and that those responsible be brought to justice. No response was received to any of these appeals.
