KUWAIT
Hundreds of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, who had been arrested in 1991 on charges of "col* laboration" with Iraqi forces during the occupation of Kuwait, continued to be held throughout the year. At least 150 of them were brought before the State Security Court between April and December. Following unfair trials, 32 received prison sentences and six were sentenced to death, including one in absentia. Sixty* nine others continued to serve prison sentences imposed after unfair trials in 1991.
KUWAIT
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment. The fate and whereabouts of at least 62 detainees who "disappeared" from custody in 1991 remained unknown.
On 5 October elections were held for the 50-seat National Assembly (parliament), which had been dissolved in 1986 by the Amir, Shaikh Jaber al-Ahmad al-Sabah. At least 30 seats were won by opposition candidates who had run broadly anti-government election campaigns. On 17 October a new ministerial cabinet was announced, which included for the first time six elected members of parliament.
Two journalists were arrested in October and briefly detained on charges of defamation. Muhammad al-Saqr, editor of the daily newspaper al-Qabas, and 'Abd al-Latif al-Du'aij, a journalist, were accused of writing and publishing articles critical of government policies and of the then Minister of Information, Badr Jassem al-Ya'qub. Both men were released on bail pending trial. If imprisoned they would be prisoners of conscience.
Hundreds of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained held following their arrest in 1991 on suspicion of "collaboration" with Iraqi forces during the occupation of Kuwait. Among them were Egyptians, Iraqis, Jordanians, Palestinians, Sudanese and members of Kuwait's "bic/un" community (stateless Arabs), who had been held without trial for over a year.
Between April and December at least 150 of those held were brought before the State Security Court, the majority on charges relating to "collaboration with the enemy". The proceedings at the trials, most of which were held in public, fell short of international standards for fair trial. Some defendants were not permitted to see the evidence against them or to cross-examine prosecution witnesses. Others were convicted on the basis of "confessions" reportedly extracted under torture. Among those convicted were Khaled Salem al-Asfour, a Kuwaiti who was sentenced to life imprisonment, and Bassem Muhammad al-Jame', a Syrian who was sentenced to four years' imprisonment. In all, six people were sentenced to death, including one in absentia; 32 received prison sentences ranging between three years and life; and 20 were acquitted. The trials of the other defendants had not been concluded by December. Defendants were permitted the right of
appeal on points of law only. At least 32 cases were referred to the Court of Cassation, which upheld four of the sentences and had not ruled on the others by the end of the year.
Sixty-nine political prisoners, among them 12 women, continued to serve prison terms imposed by the Martial Law Courts in 1991 after unfair trials on charges of "collaboration" (see Amnesty International Report 1992). All had been denied the right of appeal and remained in Kuwait Central Prison. Among them were two Iraqi sisters, Sabiha and Intisar Rasan Khallati, each sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment, and Malek Sultan Murdhi, a "bidun" sentenced to life imprisonment.
New reports of torture and ill-treatment were received. In June a Sri Lankan national, Colompurage Asoka Pathmakumara, died on the way to al-Farwaniyya Hospital, apparently after being tortured at Jlaib al-Shuyukh police station. He had been arrested in May after being accused of robbery. A death certificate issued by the Ministry of Public Health gave the cause of death as "bruises on the back and foot and fi"actures in the right thigh, internal haemorrhage and shock". His wife pressed the authorities to clarify the circumstances of his death but without success. In another case, Hisham ben Soltana, an airline steward of dual British and Tunisian nationality, was reportedly tortiared in July while held for over two weeks at Messila Civil Defence Centre. After his release he said he had been beaten repeatedly and burned with cigarettes while in custody, and denied access to British consular officials until the moment of his release. In November there were reports that detainees held at Talha deportation centre in al-Farwaniyya, including members of the "bidun" community, had been tortured or ill-treated. Several hundred "bidun" had by then been held there awaiting deportation for over eight months.
Testimonies from former detainees received during the year, many of them supported by medical evidence, provided further evidence of widespread and routine torture during the 1991 martial law period (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Methods of torture commonly alleged were repeated beatings, electric shocks, cigarette bums, suspension by the hands or feet for prolonged periods and mock execution. Among the victims were scores of Iraqi
KUWAIT/KYRGYZSTAN
Kurds who had been accused of "collaboration" with Iraqi occupation forces. One, 'Issam Rustum Mirza, had been held for over two months at al-Salhiyya police station and tortured so badly that he became semi-comatose.
The fate and whereabouts of at least 62 detainees who "disappeared" in custody between late February and June 1991 remained unknown at the end of 1992. It was feared that all or many of them, including Iraqis, Jordanians, Palestinians and others, had died under torture or been extrajudicially executed in 1991. They included Nuri 'Abd al-Karim Layedh Muhammad, an Iraqi driver who "disappeared" in March 1991 with his sons Sabah and 'Abd al-Karim; Haidar 'Enayat Sayyid, an Iraqi Kurd and former Ministry of Education employee who "disappeared" in April 1991; and George Victor Salsa, a Palestinian bank employee who "disappeared" in May 1991. During the year Amnesty International learned that 18 others who had apparently "disappeared" in the same period (see Amnesty International Report 1992) had in fact been expelled from Kuwait in 1991.
Between May and December, six death sentences were passed by the State Security Court, one of them in absentia (see above). All those sentenced were convicted on charges of "collaboration"; among them were Ghaleb Muhammad al-Turki and Muhsin Shawkat Hussain, both Iraqi nationals. No death sentences had been ratified by the end of the year, but one was upheld by the Court of Cassation in December.
In May an Amnesty International observer attended trial proceedings before the State Security Court and discussed the organization's concerns with government officials and members of the judiciary. During the visit Amnesty International again urged the authorities to set up thorough and impartial investigations into cases of "disappearance", torture and extrajudicial execution relating to the 1991 martial law period. The organization also reiterated its call for a judicial review of all sentences imposed after unfair trials by the Martial Law Courts in 1991.
During the year Amnesty International called for impartial and thorough investigations into allegations of torture and for those responsible to be brought to justice. It also sought information about the legal sta-
tus and whereabouts of people arrested in 1992. In November Amnesty International published Kuwait: Cases of "disappearance", incommunicado detention, torture and extrajudicial execution, and publicly urged the government to investigate the 79 cases highlighted in the report.
In January Amnesty International received information it had requested in November 1991 from the Ministry of the Interior about detainees held pending deportation. The same month the Ministry of Justice responded to two communications sent in 1991 about unfair trial proceedings, but failed to address the substance of Amnesty International's concerns. In October the Interior Ministry provided information on the cases of three detainees arrested in July, about whom the organization had sought information. In December the Justice Ministry told Amnesty International that the death of a Sri Lankan detainee in June (see above) was not unlawful and was the result of injuries sustained when he fell from a building while attempting to escape. The Ministry conceded that he had been beaten "lightly" during interrogation to extract a confession, and said that seven policemen had been referred to the Criminal Court on torture charges.
