KYRGYZSTAN
One execution was reported and at least three people were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
Kyrgyzstan's independence, declared in August 1991, was recognized internationally following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Headed by President Askar Akayev, Kyrgyzstan became a member of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in January and the United Nations in March.
In September the Kyrgyzstan Supreme Soviet reduced the number of peacetime
KYRGYZSTANAAOS
offences punishable by death from 18 to six. One execution was reported in 1992 and at least three people were known to be under sentence of death at the end of the year. Figures given to Amnesty International by the Justice Ministry in April indicated that between 1987 and 1990, 31 people had been sentenced to death and all had been executed. Figures for 1991 indicated that 21 people were sentenced to death, of whom at least three had their sentences commuted. Kyrgyzstan was reportedly without facilities for carrying out executions, so people sentenced to death were transported to neighbouring republics of the former Soviet Union for execution by shooting. The Procurator General told Amnesty International in April that current practice was to pass death sentences only for premeditated, aggravated murder.
Amnesty International wrote in March to the Chairman of the State Committee for Defence Affairs recommending that draft legislation on compulsory military service should provide for an alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors. In reply, the State Committee Chairman wrote in April that draft alternative service provisions envisaged "optimum extension of ft'eedom of choice for young people between military and alternative service", and that since 1991 people refusing military service for religious or any other reasons performed "extra-military service" in the national economy. Approval of the draft legislation was still awaited at the end of the year. There were no reports of people imprisoned for refusing conscription on grounds of conscience.
In April Amnesty International representatives visited Kjo^yzstan for the first time. They had meetings with government ministers and senior judiciary officials at which they urged abolition of the death penalty and discussed prospects for constitutional and legislative reform.
