MACAO
The draft of the Basic Law due to come into force when the territory reverts to administration by the People's Republic of China (prc) in 1999 was revised, but continued to lack adequate human rights safeguards. The Drafting Committee rejected a proposal to amend the Basic Law so as to prohibit the future reintroduction of the death penalty.
The Basic Law of the Macao Special Administrative Region will come into force in 1999, when Portuguese administration of the territory ends. The first draft of the Basic Law was published in 1991 by the Basic Law Drafting Committee (bldc), a body comprising representatives from Macao and the prc. A revised draft was published in March 1992. It fails to guarantee that all human rights safeguards currently in force in Macao will be maintained, notably abolition of the death penalty. Publishing the revised draft, a spokesperson for the Committee said that the bldc was not prepared to rule out the possible future reintroduction of the death penalty. The death penalty was last used in
Macao in the 19th centiuy and is banned under the Portuguese Constitution.
The revised draft also lacks safeguards against torture and ill-treatment, guarantees of fair trial, guarantees to protect the exercise of all fundamental human rights, and safeguards against the curtailment of basic rights under a state of emergency.
Amnesty International had expressed concern about the draft Basic Law. and called for guarantees against the future reintroduction of the death penalty, in a report published in November 1991, Macao: Strengthening Human Rights Safeguards - Memorandum from Amnesty International to the Basic Law Drafting Committee. In August the organization renewed its call on the Portuguese Government to formally recognize that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) and other international human rights treaties ratified by Portugal apply to Macao, It also urged the Chinese Government to ensure that these basic standards for human rights protection would continue to apply in Macao after 1999.
In September Portugal declared that the iccpr fully applies in Macao due to its ratification by Portugal. While welcoming this decision. Amnesty International called on the bldc to reconsider its refusal to include provisions to abolish the death penalty in the Basic Law.
