NICARAGUA
At least five former contra rebels were reported to have been unlawfully killed by the police and army, although the circumstances were disputed. Eight members of the military escort of the head of the armed forces were implicated by a criminal court in the killing of a youth in 1990. Several detainees alleged that they had been tortured by the police. Dozens of deliberate and arbitrary killings by armed rebel groups were reported.
Political polarization, violence by armed groups and deteriorating social and economic conditions remained as a legacy of the war which ended in 1990. President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro came under increased pressure from sectors of her ruling coalition party, the Unión Nacional Opositora (uno), National Opposition Union, and from the United States (us) Government to reduce the influence of the opposition Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (fsln), Sandinista National Liberation Front. There was particular pressure to remove prominent Sandinista figures from senior posts in the police [Policía Nacional, National Police) and army [Ejército Popular Sandinista (eps), Sandinista Popular Army). A conflict between the executive and legislature, provoked by confrontation between deputies of uno, fsln and Grupo de Centro (a breakaway uno group), virtually paralysed the National
NICARAGUA
Assembly between September and December.
In the context of grave post-war problems, including demands for land and security by demobilized combatants and soaring levels of poverty and unemployment, there was continued violence by armed groups of former combatants and others, both politically and criminally motivated.
Groups of so-called recontras (former members of the contra or Resistencia Nicaragüense, Nicaraguan Resistance, which had fought the previous fsln government) clashed with troops after carrying out occupations and attacks in the northern and Atlantic Coast regions. Demands for land and credit also motivated continued armed protests by so-called recompas, largely consisting of demobilized members of the much-reduced eps. In March some recontras and recompas joined forces as revueltos and began a series of occupations of towns, road blocks, land take-overs and other protests. The army responded with force to actions by armed groups, with dozens of casualties resulting from the clashes.
The Comisión Internacional de Verificación y Apoyo (ciAV), International Commission of Veriñcation and Support, a body of the Organization of American States set up to monitor contra demobilization, ft'equently acted as mediator in the conflicts. Governmental disarmament brigades collected thousands of weapons from groups which had agreed to disEirm at the beginning of the year, often in exchange for payment, but armed clashes between recontras and the eps escalated at the end of the year.
Deteriorating economic conditions led to strikes and protest action by students, former army officers, transport workers and others. Dozens were injured in violent clashes between police and demonstrators throughout the year.
Legislation was passed introducing reforms to the police, the Attorney General's Office and the Penal Code. The Ley Orgánica de la Policía, Constitutional Police Law, which aims to strengthen civilian control over the police, was passed in September and 13 senior police officials, including the Director of the National Police, were removed. This followed the suspension of us economic aid, partly on the grounds of alleged Sandinista control
of the security forces, and the publication of a report by the Asociación Nicaragüense Pro Derechos Humanos (anpdh), Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights, demanding the removal of 26 senior National Police officials accused of human rights violations against former contras, anpdh staff reportedly received threats from unidentified individuals after publishing the report.
Legislation creating the Procuraduría de Derechos Humanos, Office of the Human Rights Procurator, was passed in September but the office had not been established by the end of the year.
A package of amendments to the Penal Code, mostly regarding sexual offences, was approved by the National Assembly in July and became law in September, The amended Penal Code criminalized as "sodomy" the "induction, promotion and practice in scandalous form" of homosexual sex, punishable by up to three years' imprisonment. Amnesty International was concerned that this could lead to the imprisonment of people solely on the basis of their homosexuality, including the practice of homosexual acts in private between consenting adults. Such prisoners would be prisoners of conscience. An appeal challenging the law as unconstitutional was presented in November to the Supreme Court, which was due to make a ruling in early 1993.
At least five former contras were alleged to have been summarily killed by members of the police and army, although the circumstances remained disputed and unclar-ified, René Espinales Zelaya (knovm as Comandante Franklin II), was reportedly killed in an ambush by soldiers in Jinotega in June. Julio César Ochoa Mendoza (known as Comandante Matizón) was allegedly tortured and killed by troops in July as he was going to meet his mother in Zelaya Central. Other sources, however, claimed that both men had died in armed clashes. A Tripartite Commission consisting of government, ciav and Roman Catholic Church representatives was formed in October to investigate killings of former contras since the end of the war. It had not published any findings by the end of the year.
In July a criminal court judge ruled that there was sufficient evidence to try eight members of the military escort of General Humberto Ortega, head of the armed forces, for the killing of Jean Paul Genie Lacayo, a
NICARAGUA
17-year-old shot dead on the Managua-Masaya highway in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992]. The judge ruled that the eight should be tried before a military court and that General Humberto Ortega and two army captains should be tried for covering up the killing. Amnesty International was concerned that, in view of indications of military obstruction at different stages of the investigation, the military coiurt system did not offer sufficient guarantees of impartiality in this case. An appeal against the decision to transfer the case to military jurisdiction was lodged by Jean Paul Genie's father before the Court of Appeal, which upheld the judge's ruling. A further appeal was presented in November to the Supreme Court.
Exhumations continued at sites believed to contain the remains of victims of human rights abuses by government forces during the war. In April the anpdh began exhuming the remains of seven people believed to have been extrajudicially executed by the army in 1985. However, no official steps were taken to investigate allegations of past abuses, whether by government or contra forces, nor to bring to justice those responsible, who were shielded from prosecution under amnesty l^ws passed in 1991,
Several criminal suspects were reportedly tortured in police custody. Miguel Lugo Reyes, a painter and decorator, was detained by police in February, accused of theft. He was taken to Nandaime police station, where he was reportedly beaten, kicked and denied food and drink. He was then held for three days by police in Granada where, according to fellow detainees, he was severely and repeatedly beaten. He was taken to hospital in Granada where he testified before a judge that he had been beaten by three police officials. A medical examination noted numerous injuries including severe head wounds, two fractured vertebrae and bums and bruises on various parts of the body. He died in hospital in Managua on 6 March. Investigations into his death by the Inspectoría Civil, the police monitoring body of the Interior Ministry, had not resulted in the prosecution of those responsible by the end of the year.
Several demobilized contras also claimed to have been tortured by police. Oscar Pérez Benavides was detained by police in Matagalpa in July. He was reportedly beaten and interrogated about his father, a local union leader. His sister, who
tried to intervene on hearing his screams, was threatened by the police. Oscar Pérez escaped and a medical examination recorded injuries consistent with the ill-treatment he described. The Centro Nicaragüense de Derechos Humanos (cenidh), Nicaraguan Centre for Human Rights, reported the case to the Interior Ministry but investigations were not known to have yielded any results.
Ill-treatment by police was also reported in the context of numerous strikes and demonstrations throughout the year. In January riot police arrested 32 workers of the Empresa Nacional de Buses (enabus), National Bus Company, during a demonstration outside the Transport Ministry, According to investigations by cenidh, 15 showed signs of having been beaten on arrest. The police authorities claimed that several police had also been injured by protesters, cenidh's call for an investigation remained unheeded. Police were also accused of ill-treatment in the context of forcible evictions ft'om occupied property. In January Isidro Gonzalez Cisneros suffered severe cuts and bruises after being beaten with clubs by riot police who broke up a demonstration by residents of the Pedro Joaquin Chamorro settlement in Managua.
Dozens of deliberate and arbitrary killings by recontras were reported, mostly in rural areas in the north. In March fsln activist Victor Manuel Martinez was killed by recontras at his home in Muelle de los Bueyes, Juigalpa, after receiving death threats. Relatives claimed to have been threatened by local police when they reported the killing. Recontras were reported to have killed a family of eight, including three children, in an attack on a hamlet in Rio Blanco in December.
A number of killings of former contras were attributed to recompas and individuals linked to the fsln. Recontra commander Roger Benavides Castellón (Comandante Freddy) was killed in an ambush by recompas in Esteli in January. In November the president of an organization created to demand the return of property confiscated under the Sandinista Government to its former owners, Arges Sequiera Mangas, was killed at his home in León. The previously unknown Fuerzas Punitivas de Izquierda, Punitive Forces of the Left, later claimed responsibility for the killing. Initial investigations identified the killers as three
nicaragua/niger
former army officers. Most other cases of recontra and recompa killings, however, were not thoroughly investigated by the authorities.
Amnesty International representatives visited Nicaragua in May to pursue the organization's concerns about political killings, torture and ill-treatment. The representatives met government officials, including the Attorney General and members of the Inspectoría Civil. In July Amnesty International wrote to the President about the amendments to the Penal Code, urging her not tp ratify any legislation that could lead to the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International also wrote to the goverrunent about its concerns regarding military jurisdiction in the case of Jean Paul Genie and the threats and harassment aimed at human rights workers. No substantive reply was received to any of these concerns.
In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Nicaragua.
