MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
Over 500 political prisoners, including at least 150 prisoners of conscience and pos> sible prisoners of conscience, were serv> ing sentences imposed after unfair trials in 1992 and previous years. Others were held without charge or trial. Three long-term prisoners of conscience were released. New reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees held in pre-trial incommunicado {garde a vue) detention were received. Hundreds of Sahrawis and Moroccans who "disappeared" in previous years were believed to be still held in secret detention centres. Long-term "disappeared" and political prisoners released in 1991 continued to be subject to restrictions on their freedom of movement, association and expression. At least 150 people were under sentence of death, but no executions were reported.
A new Constitution was promulgated in September after receiving an almost unanimous vote in a national referendum which was, however, boycotted by the main opposition parties. The Constitution, which
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
refers to human rights in its preamble, allows the Prime Minister to appoint ministers.
A United Nations-sponsored referendum on the future of the Western Sahara, scheduled for January, had still not taken place by the end of the year.
Demonstrations and violent clashes between students and the police continued in many universities during the first three months of the year, Over 100 students, mostly members of left-wing or Islamic organizations, were arrested during and after the protests. There were further demonstrations in September and October in a number of towns in south Morocco and the Western Sahara in protest against falling living standards and the failiu-e to reach a political settlement of the Western Sahara issue. Scores of people were said to have been wounded by police shooting during protests in Assa, Smara and Laay-oune and over 100 were arrested. Dozens were reportedly held in prolonged incommunicado detention and ill-treated. Some were believed to have been charged with offences such as theft and damaging public property, but they had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
At least 140 people were arrested for allegedly insulting sacred institutions or disturbing public order and sentenced to up to 10 years' imprisonment. They included prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, who continued to be sentenced under broadly worded laws which permit the authorities to imprison people for the peaceful expression of their views. Among them were several trade unionists. One, Noubir Amaoui, Secretary General of the Confédération démocratique du travail (cdt). Democratic Labour Confederation, and a leading member of the main opposition party, the Union socialiste des forces populaires (usfp), Socialist Union of People's Forces, was convicted of defamation under articles of the Press Code commonly used to prosecute journalists. In April he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment by the Court of First Instance in Rabat in connection with an interview he had given to a Spanish newspaper. He was refused bail - which is usually granted, pending appeal, to those convicted under the press laws - and taken to Sale prison. He was later transferred to Kenitra prison where he remained held at the end of the year.
Over 500 political prisoners, including over 150 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, remained in prison at the end of 1992. Most were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials in previous years. Many had been convicted of offences such as conspiracy against the state after signing confessions which they alleged were extracted under torture. Among the prisoners of conscience were eight students, members of a left-wing tendency within the Union nationale des étudiants marocains (unem). National Union of Moroccan Students, who were tried and convicted in 1984, and 15 suspected members of Ila'l-Amam, Forward, who were sentenced between 1984 and 1987. Scores of other suspected members of left-wing or Islamic organizations convicted since 1984 on charges of distributing leaflets or disturbing public order were prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience.
Abdessalem Yassine, leader of the banned Islamic organization, al-'Adl wa'l-Ihsan, Justice and Charity, remained under house arrest without charge or trial at his home in Sale. Only his wife was allowed to see him.
Three long-serving prisoners of conscience - Ahmed Aitbennacer, Ahmed Rakiz and Abdalah Harif - were released on 15 January. They had been arrested in 1974 and 1975 and sentenced to between 30 years' and life imprisonment after an unfair trial of 178 left-wing activists in 1977 (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Legislation promulgated in late 1991 to reform the law on garde à vue detention and improve safeguards for detainees (see Amnesty International Report 1992) failed, in practice, to protect detainees' rights. Although the six-day limit for garde à vue detention (for charges not related to state security) laid down in the law appeared to be respected more than in previous years, political detainees were still held incommunicado for longer than the maximum legal period.
For instance, scores of people of Western Saharan origin arrested during the year for political reasons or after demonstrations were reportedly held in prolonged garde à vue detention. Bella Ma' El Ainain. a bank employee ft-om the Western Sahara, had been arrested in September 1991 after allowing a Swiss journalist to use the bank's fax machine to send an article to
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
Switzerland on the progress of the Western Sahara peace settlement. He was held for nearly four months without charge or trial before being released in January 1992.
Trials of political detainees continued to fall far short of minimum fair trial requirements set by internationally recognized standards and by Moroccan law. The most frequent abuses were the use of police statements allegedly extracted under torture or other coercion to obtain convictions and the refusal of the courts to investigate torture allegations. The coiuls also failed to address breaches of prescribed pre-trial procedures which had the effect of putting the defence at an improper disadvantage relative to the prosecution.
In one case, for example, at the trial of 35 students in April before the Fes Criminal Court, on charges including disturbing public order, the judge refused to order medical examinations, or even treatment, for some of the defendants who bore signs of torture, The defence lawyers withdrew from the case in protest but the trial proceeded: 33 of the students were convicted and sentenced to between two and 12 months' imprisonment. Two were acquitted.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees remained common, particularly during the first 48 hours of incommunicado garde a vue detention. Methods included beatings, especially on the soles of the feet [falaqa], often while suspended in contorted positions; partial suffocation, frequently with rags soaked in salt water or chemicals; and electric shocks.
Many of the students arrested after clashes with the police in late 1991 and early 1992 alleged that they were tortmed or ill-treated in garde a vue detention. For example, a student supporter of al-'Adl wa'I-Ihsan, Justice and Charity, who was arrested in late 1991 after violent clashes between Islamic and left-wing students at Oujda University, alleged that he was stripped naked and tortured with electric shocks and the "aeroplane" method [being tied and suspended in a contorted position, and then beaten). He was sentenced by Oujda Court of Appeal in January to 20 years' imprisormient after being convicted of involvement in homicide, kidnapping and causing explosions.
Hundreds of people of Western Saharan origin and about 100 Moroccans reported to have "disappeared" in custody in previ-
ous years were believed to be still held in secret centres or camps in Morocco. They included Abdelhaq Rouissi, a Moroccan trade union activist and former bank employee, who "disappeared" in 1964. He was reported to have been seen in secret detention, most recently at Ahermoiunou military camp in 1989, the last indication of his whereabouts.
Most of the 260 "disappeared" Sahrawis who were freed from long-term secret detention in 1991 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992) were kept under strict surveillance throughout the year and continued to be subject to restrictions on their freedom of movement, association and expression. None of them had received any official compensation for the long abuse of their rights: some, in fact, were said to have been required to move from their home regions to reside in the south of Morocco. No inquiry was known to have been held into any of the cases of long-term "disappearance", nor were those responsible for the "disappearances" identified or brought to justice.
The 30 surviving prisoners who were released in 1991 from the secret detention centre at Tazmamert (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992) also remained under close surveillance, with their freedom of movement and contact with others severely restricted. They were not given adequate medical care for serious illnesses caused by their prolonged imprisonment. By the end of the year, no inquiry had been initiated into their unlawful detention for up to IB years, the inhuman conditions of detention in Tazmamert or the deaths of 33 of those who had been held there, including those who had died while still in detention long after their sentences had expired. The relatives of those who died had still not been informed of the causes of death nor had they been awarded any official compensation.
One death sentence was commuted. No new death sentences were known to have been imposed. However, about 150 prisoners remained under sentence of death at Kenitra Central Prison: 14 of them were political prisoners, including four possible prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases which occurred in 1991 and 1992 but expressed its concern to the government of King Hassan II about continuing reports of arbitrary detention, torture.
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
unfair trials and the death penalty. It called for a thorough and impartial investigation into all "disappearances", for the immediate release of the remaining "disappeared", and for those responsible for the "disappearances" to be identified and brought to justice.
In October Amnesty International published two reports, Morocco: Continuing Human Rights Violations and Morocco: Tazmamert: Official Silence and Impunity. No response was received from the government to any of the repqrts or communications sent to it during the year, and the organization's requests for access to the country for research continued to be denied.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Morocco and the Western Sahara for United Nations review, under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
