IRAN
Mass arrests, unfair trials and summary executions took place following riots and demonstrations in several towns. Hundreds of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were among those detained during the year. Torture of prisoners continued to be reported. At least 330 people, including dozens of
IF?AN
political prisoners, were executed. Two government opponents were abducted outside Iran and at least four others were killed outside the country in circum> stances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed.
The government of President 'Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani faced renewed opposition from the People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran (pmoi), based in Iraq, which was responsible for a number of bomb attacks, including one on the tomb of the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the founder of the Islamic Republic. The authorities stated that three people were killed during these attacks. No further information was available.
Over 500 people were arrested following demonstrations and violent protests in Shiraz, Arak and Mashhad in April and May. Further mass arrests were carried out in June following violent demonstrations in Bukan, west Azerbaijan, and other protests in Tehran and Tabriz. The protests were apparently sparked by discontent over the government's social and economic policies and incidents such as attempts by municipal authorities to destroy illegally constructed buildings and forcibly evict their inhabitants.
At least eight of those arrested in connection with the demonstrations were executed within days of their arrest after summary trials. Five others were sentenced to death. Unofficial sources claimed the true total was much higher. Others were sentenced to long prison terms and floggings following unfair trials, or were held without charge or trial in circumstances that facilitated torture and ill-treatment.
People detained and held as prisoners of conscience during the year included Naser Arabha, the editor-in-chief of a science magazine, and three of his colleagues. They were arrested in Tehran in April and held incommunicado in Evin prison for printing a cartoon considered to be insulting to the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. In September Naser Arabha became the first journalist to be tried by a jury for violating press laws: he was sentenced to a six-month prison term. One of his colleagues, identified as Karimzadeh, was tried by an Islamic Revolutionary Court and sentenced to one year in jail and a fine of 500,000 rials. At the end of the year the fate of the other two journalists still remained unclear.
Tension between the government and Sunni Muslims belonging to the Naroui tribe in the Baluchistan-Sistan region of southeast Iran resulted in a number of armed clashes and scores of arrests and detentions of Narouis: some of those detained were ill-treated; others were sentenced to death or prison terms after unfair trials. Many of those arrested were reported to be still detained without charge or trial at Zahedan prison at the end of 1992.
Hundreds of government opponents arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, remained in prison, and some former political prisoners were reportedly rearrested in Tehran in May and June. Those held throughout 1992 included at least 50 followers of Dr 'Ali Shari'ati. One of them, Mohammad Baqer Borzoui, had been held at Evin prison since 1982, having apparently been sentenced to a long prison term after an unfair trial in the early 1980s. Dozens of others, known as the "Mohajerin group", had been arrested in 1990 and sentenced to between five and 15 years' imprisonment on arms charges. Their trials too were believed to have been unfair. Three members of this group, 'Ali Reza Hamidabad, Hamid Kord and Gholam Reza Sagvand, were reportedly executed in Dezful prison in September after having spent around two years in the prison. The authorities denied that any followers of Dr Shari'ati had been imprisoned since the Islamic Republic was founded in 1979.
Other political prisoners held in 1992 included alleged members of opposition groups such as Forghan-, the People's Fedaiyan Organization of Iran (Minority); the pmoi; Rah-e Kargar, Sazeman-e Vahdat-e Kommunisti; members of Kurdish organizations such as the Communist Party of Iran (cpi), and the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran (kdpi); and members of ethnic-based groups including Arab and Baluchi organizations. Among them were a number of Kurdish workers who had been arrested in 1990 and 1991 for having taken part in a May Day rally in Sanandaj (Kurdistan) in 1989. They too were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials and were held at Sanandaj prison. They included Zahed Manouchehri, a member of the Tailors' Syndicate who was reportedly released at the end of 1992, and Arasto Shabani, who had reportedly been held in solitary confinement for over a year after his arrest in April 1990. However, Sa'id Sa'idi, a
IRAQ/IRELAND
member of the Metalworkers' Union held since July 1991, was believed to have been released during the first half of 1992.
Mehdi Dibaj, a possible prisoner of conscience held since 1984 who had converted from Islam to Christianity many years previously, was among those who remained in prison throughout 1992. It was not clear whether he had been tried and he has reportedly never been given any reason for his arrest and continued detention.
Some political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were among those released during the year, although many were required to "repent" and sign undertakings that they would not again engage in political activities as a condition of their release. Others were released on temporary leave. Almost all former political prisoners were required to report back to the authorities at regular intervals.
Those freed included nine elderly prisoners of conscience who had been jailed since 1990 because of their membership of the Association for the Defence of Freedom and Sovereignty of the Iranian Nation or for signing an open letter to President Hashemi Rafsanjani calling for reforms (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). They were among 108 prisoners pardoned and released to mark the 13th anniversary of the establishment of the Islamic Republic. Approximately 3,500 prisoners were pardoned or had their sentences reduced on the occasion of religious festivals, including 53 members of the clergy. Those released may have included prisoners of conscience.
Trials before Islamic Revolutionary Courts continued to fall far short of internationally recognized standards for fair trial. Hearings were usually held in camera inside prisons. Proceedings were summary, often lasting only a few minutes, and defendants had no access to legal counsel and no right of appeal. In October 1991 new legislation had been introduced to permit defendants the right to appoint a defence lawyer, but during 1992 no defendants in political trials before Islamic Revolutionary Courts were known to have received legal assistance. Moreover, no provision appeared to have been made to allow those previously without the benefit of legal counsel to seek fair retrial.
Torture of prisoners was reported to remain common throughout the country. The most frequently used methods, accord-
ing to former prisoners, were beatings with cables and rifle butts on the back and the soles of the feet, suspension for long periods in contorted positions and burning with cigarettes. They said torture was used primarily to extract confessions and obtain information about political opposition activities.
At least 330 people were executed, although unconfirmed reports suggested that the actual number of executions may have been considerably higher. The franian press reported over 120 executions of prisoners sentenced for drugs offences.
Two alleged members of Komala, Towfiq Aliasi and Rahman Aliasi, were executed in Sanandaj in June and August 1992 respectively. No information was available as to their trials. Televised "confessions" by Towfiq Aliasi. apparently given under physical or psychological pressure, were reported to have been broadcast on local television in Sanandaj in August. At least 48 Baluchis were executed during the year, many of them hanged in public. The majority were members of the Naroui tribe, although executions of Barahouis (another Baluchi tribe) were also reported. Or 'Ali Mozaffarian, a possible prisoner of conscience and a leading member of the Sunni community in the southern Iranian province of Pars, was executed in Shiraz at the beginning of August. He had been charged with spying for the United States of America and Iraq and also accused of adultery and homosexuality. His video-taped "confessions", apparently obtained as a result of physical or psychological pressure, were broadcast on television in Shiraz. He had been held in Evin prison since his arrest at the end of 1991. On 18 March Bahman Samandari, a businessman and member of a prominent Baha'i family, was summarily executed in secret in Evin prison after he had been summoned there to sign some documents. Two other Baha'is were reported to have been sentenced to death.
Several government opponents were either abducted or killed outside Iran in circumstances suggesting that Iranian officials or people acting on their behalf may have been responsible. In June 'Ali Akbar Ghorbani, also known as Mansour Amini, a pmoi member, was abducted in Istanbul by persons unknown. His mutilated body was discovered several months later in Turkey. Several bomb attacks were carried out on
IRAQ/IRELAND
vehicles belonging to the pmoi at the same time. The Iranian Government denied involvement in his abduction. In December Abbas Gholizadeh, a member of Derafsh-e Kaviani. Flag of Freedom Organization, a monarchist opposition group, was abducted near his home in Istanbul. At the end of the year no news of him was available.
In September Dr Sadegh Sharafkandi, Secretary General of the kdpi, and two other kdpi leaders were among four Iranians who were shot dead in a restaurant in Berlin. Two weeks earlier, Iran's Minister of Intelligence, Hojatoleslam Ali Fallahian, had spoken on television of the government's success in striking at opponents outside the country: "We have been able to deal blows to many of the mini-groups outside the country ... as you know, one of the active mini-groups is the Kurdistan Democratic Party ... we were able to deal vital blows to their cadres last year." In October the German authorities arrested two Lebanese nationals and an Iranian national in connection with the killings, but the Iranian Goverrunent denied any involvement.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of all prisoners of conscience. It appealed throughout the year for an end to executions and expressed grave concern about the continuing use of the death penalty and the large number of executions. It urged the government to introduce appropriate safeguards to ensure political detainees received a fair trial, particularly those facing charges punishable by death. The organization also continued to call for the lifting of the fatwa (religious edict) issued in 1989 against the British novelist, Salman Rushdie (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990).
The government responded to certain inquiries, particularly with regard to the nine prisoners of conscience released in April. However, many of the organization's requests for clarification of reported human rights violations remained unanswered, including requests for information on a number of cases of prisoners of conscience and political prisoners. The authorities denied allegations of involvement in extrajudicial executions and made statements on defendants' access to legal counsel which conflicted with other official statements.
Amnesty International published three reports about its concerns in Iran: in January, Imprisonment, torture and execution
of political opponents-, in July, Unfair trials of political detainees-, and in October, Executions of prisoners continue unabated. In March the Iranian authorities responded to the January report, but no new safeguards for human rights appeared to have been introduced.
In a written statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International described its concerns in Iran, including mass executions, unfair trials, torture and the detention of prisoners of conscience.
