UNITED KINGDOM
The courts continued to review cases of alleged miscarriages of justice in England and Northern Ireland. Allegations of ill-treatment continued. Six people were killed in suspicious circumstances in Northern Ireland by security forces. Evidence of collusion between Loyalist paramilitary organizations and security forces in Northern Ireland was revealed in the courts and media. Armed groups arbitrarily and deliberately killed civil« ians in Northern Ireland and England.
In Northern Ireland, violent conflict intensified as Republican groups and security forces clashed, and both Republican
UNITED KINGDOM
and Loyalist armed groups carried out torture and killings. Republican armed groups, notably the Irish Republican Army (ira), which are predominantly Catholic, seek a British withdrawal from Northern Ireland. This aim is opposed by Loyalist armed groups from the Protestant community, notably the Ulster Volunteer Force (uvf) and the Ulster Defence Association (uda) which acts under the name of the Ulster Freedom Fighters (uff). In August the government outlawed the uda following a wave of sectarian killings.
In June the Court of Appeal quashed the conviction of Judith Ward, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment for a 1974 ira bombing in England on confession and scientific evidence which was later discredited. The court criticized members of the police, the prosecution, and psychiatric and scientific experts for failing to disclose key evidence dicing the original trial.
In July the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal quashed the convictions of three soldiers fi^om the Ulster Defence Regiment (udr), a regiment of the British Army recruited and based in Northern Ireland, and upheld that of a fourth. The "udr 4" had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1986 for the murder of a Catholic man. The Coiut of Appeal concluded that policemen had falsified interview notes and given untruthful testimony at the trial. The three had been convicted solely on the basis of confessions allegedly obtained through ill-treatment and coercion diu-ing incommunicado detention. The court upheld the fourth conviction on the grounds that there was sufficient other evidence of Neil Latimer's guilt.
People continued to be convicted in one-judge, juryless "Diplock Courts" in
Northern Ireland on the basis of disputed and uncorroborated confessions. Courts drew adverse inferences against defendants for having remained silent during police questioning or at trial.
Police officers were committed for trial charged with conspiring to pervert the course of justice in the "Birmingham Six" and "Guildford Four" cases. The May Inquiry issued a second report in December recommending the establishment of an independent body to investigate alleged miscarriages of justice. The report concluded that the "Maguire Seven" had been victims of a serious miscarriage of justice. (See previous Amnesty International Reports).
In May the Director of Public Prosecutions (dpp) stated that insufficient evidence existed to bring prosecutions against any officers from the West Midlands Serious Crimes Squad. The squad had been disbanded in 1989 after allegations that some officers had fabricated evidence or committed perjury in order to obtain convictions. Twelve people investigated by the squad had had convictions for serious offences quashed since 1989.
There were frequent allegations that police and military patrols in Northern Ireland ill-treated people they stopped on the streets, and some allegations of ill-treat-ment at interrogation centres. Six members of the Parachute Regiment of the British Army were charged in connection with violence and assaults in the Tyrone area in April and May.
Allegations of ill-treatment by police in Britain were also made, among others by racial and ethnic minorities and by homosexuals; some victims were awarded civil damages.
Six civilians were killed in disputed circumstances by the security forces in North-em Ireland. Two soldiers were charged with murder after shooting Peter McBride, an unarmed Catholic, shortly after he was stopped and searched on 4 September. An investigation began into the killing on 25 November of Pearse Jordan by officers of the Northern Ireland police force, the Royal Ulster Constabulary (rug). Eye-witnesses stated that Pearse Jordan, an unarmed ira member, was shot dead without warning, after two unmarked police vehicles forced his car off the road.
Disputed killings that occurred in 1990 and 1991 remained unresolved. No trial had begun of security force personnel
UNITED KINGDOM
charged in 1992 with the murders of Kevin McGovem and Fergal Caraher and with the attempted murder of Miceal Caraher. The dpp decided not to prosecute undercover soldiers for the killing of John McNeill, Edward Hale and Peter Thompson, or police officers involved in the killing of Gerard Maginn (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). An inquest held in April into the killing of uvf member Brian Robinson found that undercover soldiers shot him "at close proximity" while he lay on the ground (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
An inquest into the 1982 killings of Ger-vaise McKerr, Eugene Toman and Sean Burns began in May. An Amnesty International delegate attended part of the proceedings. After 18 days of hearings, the inquest was further delayed due to legal challenges concerning the withholding of dociunents from the inquest. The government issued Public Interest Immunity certificates which exempted from disclosure documents relating to the killings (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Brian Nelson, a military intelligence agent who was also chief intelligence officer for the uda, was convicted in January of four conspiracies to murder and 28 other charges. He was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. His duties for the UDa included obtaining information on Republicans and providing it to gunmen. At the same time he provided information about planned killings to army intelligence; it was alleged that 18 people were killed by Loyalists during this time. The government did not announce any investigation into revelations attributed to Brian Nelson about official collusion in the targeting of Republicans for killings.
In contrast, the government pursued with determination a Channel Four/Box Productions team over a television program, shown in November 1991, on alleged collusion. While rejecting calls for an independent inquiry, a barrage of other measures was taken to discredit the allegations and to require Channel Four to reveal its soiuces. It included unprecedented charges of contempt under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, and perjury charges (which were subsequently dropped) against the researcher of the program, Ben Hamilton.
In March the Isle of Man parliament voted to amend the Sexual Offences Bill to legalize homosexual acts in private
between men over the age of 21.
By the end of 1992, Sikh asylum-seeker Karamjit Singh Chahal had spent 28 months in prison without charge or trial, challenging a deportation order issued on "national security" grounds. If deported to India, he feared torture (see Amnesty International Report 1992). A further judicial review of the refusal of his asylum application was pending.
Civilians in Northern Ireland were targeted by violent political organizations for their religion or their real or suspected political views.
During the year Loyalist armed groups claimed responsibility for killing 34 people, including 29 Catholic civilians. Five people, including a 15-year-old youth, were killed when uff/uda gunmen opened fire in a betting shop in a Catholic area of Belfast. A Catholic woman was shot dead by the uff/uda who wrongly claimed that her brother was a member of the legal Republican party, Sinn Fein. Among the victims of uvf shootings were an elderly couple and a Sinn Fein activist. Forty men were hospitalized after being shot in the limbs; others were beaten as punishment.
Twenty-nine people were reportedly killed in Northern Ireland by the ira: nine members of the security forces and 20 civilians. A van carrying Protestant building workers on a government contract was blown up by an ira bomb in January; eight workers were killed and six injured. Armed Republican groups subjected a number of people to punishment beatings and 36 men were shot in the limbs; the ira ordered others to leave Northern Ireland or face torture. Four civilians were killed in ira attacks in England. The Irish People's Liberation Organisation (iplo), an armed Republican group, disbanded in November; it claimed responsibility for five deaths in 1992.
Amnesty International sent a delegate to the appeal hearing of the "udr 4", which began in Belfast in May. Given clear evidence of police misconduct during the interrogation of all four men, and conflicting eye-witness accounts, the organization concluded that Neil Latimer's case should be the subject of further review.
In November Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial of seven men charged in connection with the 1988 "Casement Park" incident in which two armed plainclothes British army corporals,
UNITED KINGDOM
who drove their car into Caoimhin Mac Bradaigh's funeral procession in Belfast, were dragged from the car by a crowd, beaten and later shot by two ira members. Caoimhin Mac Brâdaigh was one of three people killed three days earlier by a Loyalist who attacked the funeral of the "Gibraltar Three" (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Members of the crowd claimed that the sudden intrusion of the soldiers' car into the procession caused panic that another Loyalist attack was about to begin. By the end of 1992, a total of 41 people had been charged in connection with the incident and five people (none of whom was alleged to have shot the soldiers) had been sentenced to life imprisonment for murder. Amnesty International was concerned that in seven previous group trials relating to the Casement Park incident, many convictions had been based on disputed uncorroborated confessions, the drawing of adverse inferences against defendants for remaining silent, controversial video evidence and the disparate application of the "common purpose" principle.
In November Amnesty International produced a report. Fair Trial Concerns in Northern Ireland: the Right of Silence. The organization concluded that the Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988, which allows the drawing of adverse inferences against an accused person for remaining silent in the face of police questioning or at trial, is inconsistent with the guarantees of presumption of innocence and the right not to testify against oneself or confess guilt. Amnesty International urged the government to repeal the Order.
During a visit to Northern Ireland in April, Amnesty International delegates found that the number of allegations of ill-treatment in interrogation centres had decreased significantly since August 1991, after international publicity and protest over reported abuse. The organization remained concerned that safeguards proposed by the government in 1991 had not been fully implemented, including statutory codes governing arrest, detention and questioning of suspects. A Commissioner to monitor procedures in police holding centres was, however, appointed in December. Amnesty International urged the government to reform interrogation and detention procedures.
Amnesty International investigated
cases of alleged ill-treatment in Northern Ireland and Britain, including the forcible strip-searching of 21 Republican women prisoners in their cells at Maghaberry prison in March.
In August Amnesty International submitted written comments to the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Bran-nigan and McBride, which concerned the applicants' detention in Northern Ireland under the Prevention of Terrorism Act. Amnesty International emphasized that fundamental safeguards of prompt access to lawyers and judges are essential to ensure the prevention of ill-treatment, particularly during states of emergency.
Amnesty International observed the trial of Brian Nelson in January and the High Court hearing in the Channel Four case in July. In October the organization wrote to the government expressing concern that it had not taken adequate steps to halt collusion between members of the security forces and Loyalist armed groups in Northern Ireland, to investigate thoroughly and make known the full truth about political killings of suspected government opponents, to bring to justice the perpetrators, or otherwise to deter such killings. The government rejected this: it stated that although measiu'es to prevent the disclosure of classified information had been taken, it would be impossible to prevent collusion or leakage of classified information, given the situation in Northern fre-land.
In February Amnesty International delegates visited the Isle of Man because of concern that existing legislation allowed for the prosecution and imprisonment of adult men for engaging in consensual homosexual acts in private. In March Amnesty International wrote to the Isle of Man Government opposing imprisonment on these grounds,
In July Amnesty International wrote to the government opposing Karamjit Singh Chahal's threatened deportation and expressing concern at his prolonged detention without charge or trial.
Amnesty International appealed for a halt to the deliberate and arbitrary killing, torture, and maiming of civilians by armed groups.
