LIBYA
Five prisoners of conscience remained imprisoned throughout 1992. About 550 suspected government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained apparently without charge or trial. Seventeen political prisoners continued serving sentences imposed after unfair trials, and one remained in prison despite having been tried and acquitted. The fate and whereabouts of 16 Malian nationals, who had allegedly "disappeared" in custody in 1991, remained unclear. Six judicial executions were carried out - the first to be officially announced since 1987. Fourteen Tunisian nationals were forcibly repatriated despite fears that they would be at risk of imprisonment and torture.
In October the Basic People's Congresses approved a new administrative structure for the country, dividing it into 1,500 self-governing units and granting locally elected "Popular Committees" extensive administrative, economic and legal powers.
Five prisoners of conscience, all suspected members of the prohibited Islamic Liberation Party, continued to serve life sentences in Abu Salim Prison in Tripoli (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). Among them was 'Ali Muhammad al-Qajiji, a student arrested in Tripoli in April 1973.
New information was received about at least 549 suspected government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, who had been arrested in previous years and were still held apparently without charge or trial at the end of 1992. Some 469 of them had been arrested between December 1989 and May 1991 during a crackdown on suspected members or sjrmpathizers of banned Islamic groups (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The arrests took place in various towns and cities, particularly in Ajdabiya, Benghazi, Derna and Tripoli, and were mainly carried out by the security forces and members of the Revolutionary Committees (official bodies set up to enforce government policies). All had been held incommunicado since their arrest and their places of detention remained unknown. Among them were Ibrahim Saleh Marseet, an employee of the Agricultmal Bank in Tripoli, who was arrested in January 1989, and Wanis al-Sharef al-Warfali, a legal consultant at the Secretariat of the People's Committee for Economy and Planning, who was arrested in April 1990 in Benghazi.
At least 80 other suspected government opponents arrested between 1974 and 1986 also remained in detention apparently without charge or trial. They had not benefited from the March 1988 amnesty in which 400 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Most were arrested following an armed clash in May 1984 at Bab al-'Aziziya between the security forces and members of the opposition National Front for the Salvation of Libya (nfsl). They included 'Abdul-Mun'im Ibhiri al-Awjali, a professor of Economics at Gar-Yunis University in Benghazi, and Khamis al-Fayturi al-Jumazi,
LIBYA/LITHUANIA
an employee of the Tripoli Postal Service. Both were believed to be held in Abu Salim Prison in Tripoli.
Seventeen government opponents sentenced after unfair trials in 1974 and 1987 remained in Abu Salim Prison serving life sentences. They had been convicted on charges including plotting to overthrow the government and membership of banned opposition groups (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992).
'Abdullah Menina, a political prisoner held since 1984 despite having been tried and acquitted in 1985, remained in detention, possibly in Abu Salim Prison (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
The fate and whereabouts of 16 Malian nationals who allegedly "disappeared" in custody in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) remained unclear. They were among hundreds of Nigerian and Malian workers who were held in custody and ill-treated before being deported. The cases of two nfsl leaders who "disappeared" after allegedly being handed over to the Libyan authorities by the Egyptian security forces in 1990 also remained uru^esolved (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In November, six men were executed by hanging after being convicted of criminal offences including murder and rape. These were the first officially announced executions since 1987.
Fourteen Tunisian nationals were forcibly repatriated by the Libyan authorities during the year. All were suspected members of al-Nadha, a Tunisian opposition group banned in Tunisia. They were reportedly arrested on their arrival in Tunis and held in incommunicado detention for several months. At least two of them were allegedly tortured (see Tunisia entry).
During the year Amnesty International continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience. It expressed concern about the continued imprisonment of hundreds of other political prisoners without trial or after unfair trials. In October Amnesty International published a report, Libya: further information on political detention, which contained new information about political detainees received during the year.
Amnesty International sought clarification ft'om the government about the fate and whereabouts of the two Libyans who
allegedly "disappeared" in 1990 and 1991, but without response. The organization also expressed regret at the executions of six people in November and urged Libyan leader Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi to commute any other pending death sentences. During the year Amnesty International urged the authorities not to forcibly repatriate suspected members of al-Nahda to Tunisia. In Mcirch the organization reiterated its request to Libya's Permanent Representative to the United Nations in Geneva to visit Libya to discuss its concerns with the relevant authorities.
