COSTA RICA
Three long-term political prisoners were released on bail pending trial. Two men were extrajudicially executed and two indigenous women were reportedly raped by the Rural Assistance Guard during an anti-narcotics operation. Other instances of torture and ill>treatment by police were reported.
Livia Cordero Gené, Bolivar Eduardo Díaz Rojas and Domingo Solís Solís were released in July after being detained for 29
months without trial. Charges against them included illegal association, aggravated explosion and aggravated robbery, but there were allegations that they were held on account of their left-wing ideas. In July a court upheld only the charge of illegal association and all three were released on bail. No trial date had been set by the end of 1992. Twelve others who had been arrested with them were released in 1990.
In February Rolando Watson Sáenz and Julio Trejos Obando were beaten, slashed and shot dead by members of a special command of the Guardia de Asistencia Rural (gar). Rural Assistance Guard, during an anti-narcotics operation in an area of Talamanca, Limón province, populated by indigenous people. In the same operation, gar agents also reportedly raped two Guaymi indigenous women, one of them aged 15, and beat a five-year-old girl to force her mother to reveal the location of a marijuana plantation. At least one other person was beaten, and several houses raided or burned. Twelve gar members were arrested and charged with aggravated homicide, aggravated deprivation of liberty, causing concussion, illegal entry, rape and aggravated theft. At the end of 1992 three remained in pre-trial detention.
At least seven transvestites were reportedly arrested by police agents in San José, held for several hours and subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. One of them, Manuel Horacio Guevara Albornoz, was reportedly arrested in April wearing women's clothes. He was taken to the radio patrol unit, where policemen reportedly mocked him and fondled his buttocks. He was rearrested in May, taken to the same radio patrol unit, made to strip and subjected to mockery. Jorge Enrique Vargas González was arrested in May by two policemen, driven to the ruins of a house, and reportedly forced at gunpoint to have oral sex with one of the officers. Investigations into these cases were carried out by the Ministry of the Interior.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the government of President Rafael Calderón Fournier to express concern about the extrajudicial executions, torture and ill-treatment by gar agents and police officers, and to urge it to take measures to investigate such abuses and bring those responsible to justice. The organization also raised its concern about the
costa rica/cote d'ivoire
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of transvestites and asked to be informed about the methods and findings of the investigations into the reported cases.
