SURINAME
An amnesty was granted to members of the military responsible for past violations of human rights and to members of armed opposition groups.
A review of the 1987 Constitution was in progress, In March the National Assembly approved amendments to restrict the role of the army to national defence and to combating "organized subversion". As a consequence, members of the armed forces could no longer stand for public office.
Lieutenant-Colonel Desi Bouterse resigned from his post as Army Commander in November. He had effectively ruled Suriname from 1980 to 1987, when he was defeated in a general election, and had participated in a bloodless coup in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991].
A peace accord was signed in August between the government of President Ronald Venetiaan and armed opposition groups. The main armed opposition group - the Jungle Commando - started operating in 1986 in eastern Suriname with the aim of overthrowing the military government then in power. Later, other armed groups emerged, some allegedly backed by the military. The conflict continued after the return to an elected government in 1988. Several previous attempts to end the armed conflict formally had failed.
A vital element of the August peace accord was the granting of an amnesty to the military and members of opposition groups for past actions. The amnesty cov-
ered human rights violations by the military, including extrajudicial executions, torture and detention without charge or trial, and abuses by opposition groups. There had been no thorough, independent investigation into himian rights violations by the armed forces (see Amnesty International Reports 1983 to 1989 and 1991).
Amnesty International wrote to all members of the National Assembly in June about their review of the Constitution. The organization made a number of recommendations aimed at contributing to respect for fundamental hirnian rights in Suriname. Amnesty International called for the Constitution to guarantee the rights to freedom of expression, conscience and religion. It lu-ged National Assembly members to include safeguards prohibiting extrajudicial executions, torture and ill-treatment. Amnesty International pointed out that amnesties should not affect the investigation of past human rights violations and the bringing to justice of those responsible. The organization also called for the Constitution to incorporate the abolition of the death penalty, which had not been used for over 50 years under ordinary law.
