EL SALVADOR
Extrajudicial executions and "death squad"-style killings continued, despite the end of the civil war. Members of the political opposition were subjected to death threats and armed attacks. The torture of political detainees appeared to cease, but there were many allegations of ill-treatment of criminal suspects and others by police. Further evidence came to light of gross human rights violations by government forces during the civil war, but the failure to bring to justice those responsible for recent and past abuses continued.
On 16 January the government and the armed opposition Frente Farabundo Marti para ¡a Liberación Nacional (fmln), Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, signed a definitive peace accord in Mexico City, following 12 years of armed conflict and 21 months of United Nations (un)-mediated negotiations. The accord set a timetable for a cease-fire, the gradual
demobilization of the fmln and the implementation of numerous military, judicial and other reforms agreed in previous rounds of negotiations (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
On 15 December the armed conflict was formally ended, three months later than originally scheduled because of repeated setbacks in implementing agreements on land tenure, military and police reform and other issues. By the end of the year the fmln had demobilized and reorganized as a political party, but several other aspects of the agreements remained to be implemented.
As a result of the accords, the National Civil Police was set up to replace the three existing police forces, two of which were disbanded in the course of the year. Certain military and paramilitary units were also gradually disbanded. The Ad Hoc Commission, created by the accords, presented confidential recommendations to President Alft'edo Cristiani in September for purging the army, based on its evaluation of the professional and human rights records of military officers. However, the government had not implemented the recommendations by the end of the year, despite commitments to do so.
A National Counsel for the Defence of Human Rights was appointed in February and his office set up in July. Despite broad powers, his office suffered numerous setbacks, including covert threats and inadequate resourcing, and took few effective steps to ensure alleged abuses were clarified. Days after its creation in July, a prominent member of staff was left paralysed after an attack by two unidentified gunmen.
The Truth Commission, mandated under the accords to investigate "exceptionally important acts of violence" committed by government or fmln forces since 1980, began operation in July (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The Commission, made up of three prominent non-Salvadorians assisted by a team of lawyers and human rights experts, took testimony from hundreds of people. It was due to present its findings and recommendations in January 1993.
These efforts to hold accountable those responsible for past abuses were undermined by the Law of National Reconciliation, passed in January, which granted amnesty to those who committed political
EL SALVADOR
or related common crimes and crimes in connection with the armed conflict. The law effectively shielded perpetrators of human rights violations from prosecution, although it excluded those who may eventually be named in the Truth Commission's report. Thirty-six political prisoners were released under the cimnesty in March, but prisoners convicted by a jiiry were excluded under the terms of the law.
Implementation of the Agreement on Hiunan Rights signed in July 1990 by the government and fmln continued to be monitored by the Human Rights Division of the un Observer Mission in El Salvador (onusal - see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). The Division continued to investigate human rights abuses and to make recommendations to both parties for human rights protection. Threats and accusations against onusal were made in the press by clandestine groups allegedly linked to the armed forces.
Despite the advent of peace, there was an apparent increase in the number of violent deaths over 1991. The majority were not effectively investigated by the authorities, making it difficult to ascertain whether the armed forces were directly involved. In a few cases extrajudicial executions were carried out by uniformed members of the armed forces. For example, on 22 October six unidentified armed men in uniforms went to the home of Miguel Angel Alvarado, treasurer of an agricultural co-operative in Zacatecoluca, searching for weapons. When he denied possessing any, they shot him dead. Uniformed members of the Policía Nacional, National Police, had previously searched a nearby co-operative for arms, and armed men in uniform and in plain clothes had been patrolling neighbouring communities. Miguel Angel Alvarado had also reportedly been threatened by landowners during a dispute over ownership of the co-operative. By the end of the year few steps appeared to have been taken to identify those responsible for the killing.
At least 35 killings bore the hallmarks of the so-called "death squads", believed to be intimately linked to the armed forces, which murdered hundreds of suspected government opponents during the civil war. As in previous years, mutilated corpses were found dumped in public places. Other possible "death squad" victims were seen being detained or abducted
by unidentified armed groups. Some victims appeared to have been targeted on suspicion of links to the fmln. On 2 March Nazario de Jesús Gracias, nightwatchman and union activist for the Federation of Independent Salvadorian Trade Unions and Associations (feasies), was hacked to death with a machete at the feasies offices by unknown assailants. Five months earlier he had been detained by the National Police, accused of being an fmln member, and threatened. Preliminary official investigations, described by onusal as "entirely inadequate", yielded no results and the killing had not been clarified at the end of the year.
Many trade union members were attacked and threatened with death by unidentified individuals. The attacks and threats often coincided with public accusations by the authorities that certain unions were fomenting unrest and jeopardizing the peace process by undertaking strike action in protest at the government's economic program. On 17 September, four armed men in plain clothes opened fire on the feasies offices in San Salvador, killing a passer-by. The offices had been under surveillance for several days and had received numerous anonymous death threats by telephone.
Several fmln leaders were wounded in separate attacks by unidentified gunmen. Eight uniformed men, believed to be members of the Belloso battalion, shot at José Mario Moreno Rivera, local fmln leader in Sonsonate, in October. José Moreno, who escaped injury, claimed to have been harassed on several occasions since April by members of the local police and military.
Threats against fmln leaders and others were sometimes broadcast publicly. A communique by the clandestine Brigada Maximiliano Hernández Martínez, Maximiliano Hernández Martinez Brigade, appeared in the press in October threatening to kill 16 named fmln commanders and warning "front organizations, terrorist collaborators and all supporters of the accords".
Reports of the arrest and torture of political detainees decreased sharply following the accords and the disbanding of the security force units notorious for the widespread use of torture in the past. However, cases of torture and ill-treatment of non-political detainees continued to be re-
EL SALVADOR
ported. At least three criminal suspects died from injuries allegedly sustained in the custody of the Municipal Police. Seventeen-year-old Juan Antonio Turcios Mejia was detained with a friend by Municipal Police in Soyapango in June and taken to the Alcaldía Municipal (mayor's office), accused of theft. Juan Antonio Turcios was allegedly beaten on the chest and throat, then kicked repeatedly in the stomach and testicles, causing fatal injiuies. His friend was beaten unconscious when he protested. Local police and officials reportedly threatened Juan Antonio Turcios' father with "disappearance" if he continued to denounce the death of his son.
The police were also accused of ill-treatment in the context of land evictions and political demonstrations. Riot police allegedly beat Elias Romero Villalta, an employee of the Consejo de Comunidades Marginales (ccm), Council for Marginal Communities, during a demonstration in June. A forensic pathologist recorded severe bruising and a large wound on his forehead. The court receiving Elias Romero Villalta's complaint reportedly refused to process it because he could not name the individual riot police officers concerned.
Proceedings continued against several prisoners accused of being members of the fmln who were charged with murder in previous years on the basis of confessions obtained under duress. In March Jorge Miranda was sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment for the 1987 killing of human rights worker Herbert Anaya, despite evidence that the security forces may have carried out the killing (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Adolfo Aguilar Payés, who went on hunger-strike in October to protest at having been held without trial since 1989, was released in December after a jury found him not guilty of the 1989 miuder of two ruling party ofiicials. In both cases the evidence against the defendants appeared to be based almost exclusively on confessions extracted under torture which they had since retracted.
No new cases of "disappearance" by government forces were reported. However, the "disappearance" of hundreds of people in previous years remained unresolved, including previously unreported cases which came to light after the signing of the accords.
Very few official investigations into past abuses made any progress through the
courts. In the only case where senior army officers were held to account, a colonel and lieutenant were sentenced in January to 30 years' imprisonment for the killing of six Jesuits, a cook and her daughter in November 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Amnesty International remained concerned that irregularities and obstacles throughout the proceedings had prevented clarification of the full extent of the involvement of senior officers.
In September the courts authorized the exhumation, under the supervision of international forensic experts, of remains believed to be those of at least 800 victims of an army massacre in El Mozote, Morazan, and neighbouring villages in 1981. By December 143 skeletons, mostly of children, had been exhumed. Preliminary forensic examinations supported claims by a witness that the victims had been herded into a local church building and summarily executed. Government assertions that the victims might have been killed in cross-fire during combat were refuted in the forensic team's report to the Truth Commission.
Several deliberate and arbitrary killings by the fmln were reported. The fmln reportedly admitted killing Carlos Nunez Membreno, a farmer who had deserted from the fmln and had served temporarily with the armed forces, at his home in Guatajiagua, Morazan, on 26 March. Several other army and security force members were killed by unidentified individuals. Some cases, such as the abduction and murder in September of former military intelligence lawyer, José Mauricio Quin-tana Abrego, were alleged to have been the work of members of the army opposed to the military reforms resulting from the peace process.
In March two fmln members accused of killing United States military advisers David Pickett and Ernest Dawson in January 1991 turned themselves over to the Sal-vadorian judicial authorities (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The fmln had previously sought to try the suspects in an fmln tribunal, claiming that a fair trial could not be guaranteed until agreed judicial reforms had been implemented.
Amnesty International repeatedly called on the government to investigate possible extrajudicial executions and death threats and to take effective measures to eradicate abuses. In an oral statement to the un
EL SALVADOR/EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in El Salvador. In June Amnesty International presented documentation on hundreds of cases of killings, "disappearances" and torture since 1980 to the government, fmln and Truth Commission, urging them not to restrict unduly the scope of the commission's investigations and presenting further recommendations for the protection of human rights. Amnesty International also expressed concern that the Law of National Reconciliation could grant immunity from prosecution to human rights violators.
