JORDAN
Most political prisoners, including about 50 prisoners serving sentences imposed after unfair trials and untried detainees, were released in November when over 1,480 prisoners were freed in a royal amnesty. Five prisoners of conscience were convicted and sentenced to prison terms but released after serving their sentence or being pardoned. Hundreds of other security detainees were arrested and held in incommunicado detention: some were tried by the State Security Court with no right of appeal; most were released without charge. There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment but fewer than in previous years. No executions were carried out.
The state of emergency was lifted completely during the year. In March a new Defence Law was passed: although not in force, it can be introduced in the event of "an emergency threatening national security and public safety". It replaced legislation in force since 1939 which had given the authorities sweeping powers of arrest and detention. The new law still provides for the indefinite administrative detention of security suspects, but gives detainees a right of appeal to the High Court of Justice. In April martial law, in force since 1967, was lifted. As a result, the Martial Law Court was abolished and a Law on Lifting Responsibility as a Result of the End of Martial Law came into force. This grants immunity from prosecution to officials who had enforced martial law directives.
Other legislative changes were introduced. In February the 1953 Law on Resistance to Communism, under which prisoners of conscience were held in previ-
ous years, was repealed. In October a new Law on Political Parties was introduced, which recognizes the right to form political parties, although these must be authorized by the Ministry of the Interior. Political parties must be committed, among other things, to "protecting the independence and security of the nation and the preservation of national unity". They may not have any organizational, financial or other links abroad, and the Ministry of the Interior may request the High Court of Justice to dissolve any party.
Parliament resumed debating a new law on the State Security Court in December. The law had been proposed by the government in July 1991 and passed by Parliament but then vetoed by King Hussein bin Talal in November 1991. The King's objections included the introduction of the right of appeal to the Court of Cassation against verdicts of the State Security Court.
Five members of the Islamic Liberation Party in Jordan (lpj) were held as prisoners of conscience. They had been arrested in October and November 1991 for speaking and distributing leaflets against peace negotiations with Israel. The main charge against them was membership of an illegal, violent organization. The State Security Court, however, found that neither the lpj, which advocates the establishment of an Islamic state, nor its members on trial had used or advocated violence. It ruled that the lpj was nevertheless an illegal organization and on those grounds convicted the defendants. In June Muhammad Abu Maidan and Tareq Qubi'ah were each sentenced to one and a half year's imprisonment: the other three received one-year prison sentences. Two of the three, Bakr al-Khawalidah and Muhammad al-Khabbas. were also tried with four others before the Criminal Court of Amman for the same offence of membership of the lpj. They were convicted and sentenced in April to three months' imprisonment, confirmed by the Court of Appeal in May and commuted to a fine. All five prisoners had been released by November after serving their sentences or being pardoned.
The General Intelligence Department (gid) held over 520 security detainees, including some who may have been prisoners of conscience, mostly in incommunicado detention. About 400 were released without charge, trial or judicial review. They included Ramadan al-Battah, a
JORDAN
member oi Fatah, a faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo). He was held in June for over three weeks in the Gid headquarters in Amman with no access to family or lawyers, apparently in connection with Palestinian attacks against Israel. He was then released uncharged. Khaled Ayed Abu Hudayb, a researcher at the Institute for Palestine Studies in Beirut, was arrested on arrival at Amman's main airport in August and held at the gid headquarters, apparently on suspicion of belonging to an illegal organization and of having written an article in an illegal newspaper. He was held in solitary confinement and only allowed access to a lawyer after four weeks. He was eventually released without charge in October.
Other political suspects were tried by the State Security Court, from which there is no right of appeal, contrary to international fair trial standards. They included Leith Shubeilat, a prominent member of Parliament; Ya'qub Qarrash, another member of Parliament; and two shop owners. All four were arrested in August and tried on charges including membership of an illegal, violent organization, Harakat shabab al-nafir al-islami, the Movement of the Youth of the Islamic Call to Arms, and possession of weapons and explosives. One session of the trial was held in camera and several witnesses gave testimony for the prosecution while they were still detained in the custody of the gid. Amnesty International delegates observed sessions of the trial. In November the defendants were sentenced to between 10 and 20 years' imprisonment. However, they were granted a royal pardon and released a few days later.
Over 1,480 prisoners, including about 50 political prisoners and detainees, were released under a royal general amnesty in November. They included 18 convicted members of faysh Muhammad, the Army of (the Prophet) Muhammad, who were tried by the State Security Court in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). A further 100 prisoners were amnestied and released in December. Musa Fadaylat and Maher Abu 'Ayyash, two political prisoners serving life sentences passed by the Martial Law Court, were pardoned and released in March and December respectively.
There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment but on a lesser scale than in previous years. The victims reportedly included both political and criminal sus-
pects who alleged in most cases that they had been tortured or ill-treated while detained incommunicado. Among them were nine suspected members of Hamas (an Islamic Palestinian group). They were arrested between October 1991 and January 1992 on suspicion of possessing weapons. They were allegedly tortured or ill-treated while held at the gid headquarters before being moved to Swaqa prison in March. They were released under the November amnesty. The gid denied that they had been ill-treated. It also informed Amnesty International that it had introduced routine medical examinations for detainees in its custody. In a case relating to forgery of real estate documents, Fawwaz al-Fa'uri was held incommunicado for 12 days in May by the Preventive Security (a special police force), during which he was allegedly deprived of sleep and subjected to beatings, including falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet). He was released in December.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners, the lifting of the state of emergency, other human rights initiatives such as the repeal of legislation which had led to the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, and the reported absence of executions during the year. It remained concerned, however, about the continued use of incommunicado detention, which facilitates torture and ill-treat-ment. and about trials by the State Security Court in the absence of the right of appeal to a higher tribunal. The organization called for the release of prisoners of conscience and a review of the cases of political prisoners held after unfair trials.
In September Amnesty International representatives visiting Jordan were received by King Hussein and Crown Prince Hassan bin Talal, and held discussions with Prime Minister Sharif Zeid Ben Shaker and other cabinet ministers and officials, including some from the gid. Amnesty International welcomed King Hussein's call for an Arab human rights charter and the government's reiterated cjommitment to human rights protection and promotion. While welcoming the progress in human rights reforms, Amnesty International stressed the need to strengthen safeguards for detainees such as guaranteed access to lawyers, the introduction of the right of appeal before the State Security Court, and an end to all executions,
