AFGHANISTAN
Thousands of political prisoners were released in April when a new government, composed of armed Mujahideen groups formerly in opposition, took office. However, the fate of hundreds of political prisoners held in prisons controlled by some Mujahideen groups remained unknown. Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments were introduced such as the severing of hands or feet, flogging and stoning to death. Some extrajudicial executions were reported. Mass graves containing the bodies of thousands of people apparently extrajudicially executed in previous years were discovered. At least 20 people were sentenced to death after apparently unfair trials and at least 12 of them were publicly executed.
United Nations (un) proposals for a transitional government acceptable to all parties in the Afghan conflict were abandoned as armed Mujahideen groups converged on the capital, Kabul, resulting in the resignation of President Najibullah on 16 April. Professor Sibghatollah Mojaddedi, former head of the Afghan Interim Government based in Pakistan, became President of the renamed Islamic State of Afghanistan on 28 April. Under an agreement signed earlier by the Mujahideen groups, this interim government was replaced after two months by another transitional government headed by Burhanuddin Rabbani, leader of the Jamiat-e-lslami, Society of Islam, one of the Mujahideen groups. On 30 December an assembly representing various Mujahideen groups elected Burhanuddin Rabbani as President for a two-year term. However, five of the nine major Mujahideen groups
boycotted the elections.
Both before and after the change of government only part of the country, centred on Kabul, was under government control -the rest was controlled by various Mujahideen groups. In the second half of the year there was fierce fighting between different Mujahideen groups and between the forces of the new government and the Mujahideen Hesb-e-Islami, Party of Islam, led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. At least 2,500 people reportedly died during the fighting in Kabul alone, and thousands of people again sought refuge in Pakistan which in September reportedly denied access to new arrivals. Earlier in the year about one million refugees were reported to have returned to Afghanistan from Pakistan.
In May all laws not in conformity with Islamic precepts were declared void. Islamic courts were set up and reportedly passed at least 20 death sentences. By October at least 12 people had been publicly executed.
Under new government policies, several fundamental freedoms such as the rights to freedom of expression, religion and association were severely curtailed. In May "anti-religious" books were seized and in June non-Islamic parties were banned. Participation in congregational prayers and the adoption of an Islamic dress code for women became mandatory in May.
In late April all prisoners, including between 2,000 and 3,000 political prisoners, hundreds of whom were prisoners of conscience, were released from Pul-e-Charkhi, Kabul's largest prison. Many had been sentenced at unfair trials by special courts or held without charge or trial for up to 10 years. Similar releases reportedly took place in other towns. However, the fate of hundreds of political prisoners reportedly held in Mujahideen prisons in Afghanistan and border areas of Pakistan remained unknown.
Before the change of government, torture was reported to have been practised in several detention centres.
After April several Mujahideen groups reportedly imprisoned political rivals as hostages and there were unconfirmed reports of killings and ill-treatment of prisoners in Mujahideen detention centres. It was not known whether the new government imprisoned political opponents.
Judicial punishments were introduced
AFGHANISTAN
which Amnesty International considers constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and are prohibited by international law. The Deputy Minister of Justice declared in May that people convicted of adultery would be stoned to death and those convicted of theft would have a hand or a foot severed. He said that people convicted of consuming alcohol would be punished with 80 lashes and those who traded in alcohol would receive the death penalty. It was not known if any of these punishments were imposed. However, vigilante groups were reported to have carried out such punishments, apparently believing they were acting according to official policies. By the end of May they had reportedly executed 66 of some 120 people allegedly caught looting in Kabul. Members of Mujahideen groups were also reported to have ill-treated alleged criminals. In April a man caught looting a private house in Kabul was reportedly arrested by Mujahideen, bound and beaten, and then paraded through the streets with a sign around his neck identifying him as a thief.
A general amnesty for former government and ruling party members was declared on 26 April. Although the amnesty was generally respected, several people who should have been protected by it were extrajudicially executed. In late April a man believed to be a member of the former ruling party was summarily executed by a member of the militia. He was seized during a search of a government building in Kabul, tied up, kicked down a flight of stairs, clubbed with a rifle butt and finally shot dead. In May the former Chief Justice, Abdul Karim Shadan, was reportedly abducted, tortured and killed, apparently in reprisal for his activities as a member of the former goverrunent.
After the change of goverrunent in April, mass graves of thousands of people allegedly extrajudicially executed under previous governments were discovered in various locations. The remains of several thousand bodies were reportedly found near Kabul in May and of about 2,000 in Herat in September. However, no official investigation was initiated into the mass killings.
At least 20 people were sentenced to death by Islamic courts after apparently unfair trials on criminal charges. None of those convicted reportedly had the right to appeal to a higher court or to seek clem-
ency, The trials appeared to have been concluded within a few days and to have been held in camera.
By early October, 12 of those sentenced to death by Islamic courts had been publicly hanged. In June four militia members were publicly hanged in Kandahar after they were convicted of breaking into a house, raping a young woman and killing two Mujahideen who tried to arrest them. In September three men in Kabul were publicly hanged for robbery, looting and murder. In Jalalabad a public execution was reportedly carried out in September by the brother of a murder victim. In a public hanging of four men in Kabul on 30 September, guards reportedly pulled at the bodies of the convicts to bring about asphyxiation.
In April Amnesty International appealed to the new government in Kabul and Mujahideen groups in control of other areas of Afghanistan to ensure the safety of all prisoners, both those still detained under orders of the former government and those held by Mujahideen groups. Amnesty International was particularly concerned that during the political upheaval related to the change of government, prisoners held by Mujahideen groups might be tortured or summarily executed.
In May Amnesty International detailed its concerns in a report, Afghanistan: reports of torture, iU-treatment and extrajudicial executions of prisoners, late April -early May 1992. The government of President Mojaddedi responded to Amnesty International by reiterating its commitment to observance of the civil and political rights of all Afghans. It said that the human rights violations reported by Amnesty International were acts of individuals and contrary to government policies.
In September Amnesty International published a report, Afghanistan: New forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment, which expressed concern that the death penalty might be extended to more offences and that forms of punishment might be imposed which Amnesty International considers constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The organization urged the government to halt executions and to ensure that trial procedures, particularly those involving offences punishable by death, strictly conform to international standards for fair trial.
