HONDURAS
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police custody continued; most of the victims were criminal suspects. At least one person was killed in circumstances suggesting he had been extrajudicially executed for political reasons. The judiciary made little progress in investigating human rights violations and no one was brought to justice for past abuses. The government again failed to initiate a full inquiry into "disappearances" in the early 1980s.
A law was promulgated in May creating the Office of the National Commissioner for the Protection of Human Rights, attached to the President's office. The office's functions were to include monitoring respect for human rights and investigating allegations of human rights violations. A commissioner with ministerial status was appointed in November. The law also expanded the mandate of the National Reconciliation Commission which was to work closely with the new ofiice. The National Reconciliation Commission had been set up in 1987 to provide a forum for debate and to make proposals about human rights and other issues, but had eventually ceased to operate. The Commission was reappointed in August 1992.
In spite of assurances by the Office of the Presidency in October 1991 that the National Congress was soon to ratify international treaties related to refugees, torture and the death penalty, no such measures had been taken by the end of 1992.
Violence by armed opposition groups resurfaced in August when the Frente Patriótico Morazanista (fpm), Morazanist Patriotic Front, claimed responsibility for the murder of a man it accused of being a member of the former 3-16 Battalion involved in the murder and "disappearance"
HONDURAS
of grassroots leaders in the early 1980s.
Two leaders of right-wing organizations were killed in July: Rigoberto Borjas of the parallel electricity workers' union, and Cayo Eng Lee of the Frente Unido Universitario Democrático, United Democratic University Front. The government attributed their deaths to inter-organizational disputes but in neither case did investigations lead to the identification of those responsible.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment continued. While most of the victims were criminal suspects, five men and a woman arrested in May in the capital, Tegucigalpa, said they were interrogated about their suspected involvement in an opposition group by members of the Fuerza de Seguridad Pública (fusep), Public Security Force. All but one were released within three days. They said that they had been hooded and subjected to beatings with batons covered in sponge to prevent marks.
Marco Rivera, arrested in July in San Pedro Sula by fuse? agents, claimed that he was beaten and subjected to the "helicopter" technique: his hands and feet were tied behind his back and he was suspended from a beam and spun around until he fell to the ground. Four others accused of robbery were arrested in May in Intibucá by agents of the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (dni), National Investigations Directorate, and illegally held incommunicado for between five and six days. They alleged they had been hooded and beaten and said they had been threatened with death if they complained about their treatment to human rights groups. Three men arrested in Intibucá in December reported similar treatment.
In November, a university student was knocked unconscious in Tegucigalpa after being thrown against a wall and then to the ground by a group of uniformed military personnel, including an officer. She had protested when soldiers tried to seize her cousin without explanation outside his home. The soldiers fled, apparently fearing that the young woman had died. Following national and international press reports about the case, the head of the dni and other army officials reportedly apologized to the two victims and their families and said that they would investigate who was responsible.
At least one person was killed in circumstances suggesting that he had been
extrajudicially executed for political reasons. In July the mutilated body of Juan Humberto Sánchez was found near his home in Colomoncagua. He had been abducted 13 days earlier by a group of armed men wearing camouflage headgear of the type used by the Fuerzas Territoriales, Territorial Forces, which patrol the border with El Salvador. He was abducted only hours after being released from a day in military custody. Army officials accused him of being a member of the armed opposition in El Salvador and threatened him on his release. Investigations were initiated into the killing but no one had been arrested by the end of the year. To Amnesty International's knowledge, no autopsy was carried out.
In March witnesses disarmed a gunman who reportedly threatened to kill Antonio Zelaya Reyes, president of the Olancho branch of the Comité para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos en Honduras (codeh) , Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras. The gunman, alleged to be a dni collaborator, broke into a radio studio where Antonio Zelaya was preparing a human rights program.
There was limited or no progress in the investigation of human rights abuses in previous years. In the case of Riccy Mabel Martinez (see Amnesty International Report 1992), the judge announced in January that forensic examinations by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigations (fbi) showed that pubic hair found in Riccy Mabel Martinez' underwear matched that of Colonel Castillo, who remained in detention on charges of rape and murder. At the same time the judge ordered the release of an army captain detained in connection with the case, for lack of evidence. A low-ranking soldier also accused of participating in the killing remained in prison. In December two army colonels reportedly refused to go to court to give statements on the case. The case had not been concluded by the end of the year.
Investigations into other possible extrajudicial executions were again subject to long delays and irregularities. Not one case being monitored by Amnesty International was fully resolved and none of those responsible was brought to justice. No progress was reported in investigations into the killing of indigenous leader Vicente Matute Cruz (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Dario Urbina, mayor of
HONDUF?AS
Yoro, who had reportedly publicly accused a local cattle farmer and military personnel of masterminding the killing of Vincente Matute, was himself murdered in December, but the full circumstances surrounding his death were unclear. Investigations into the killing of five peasants in Agua Caliente (see Amnesty International Report 1992] were paralysed throughout the year because of the Supreme Court's failure to rule on whether the case should be handled by a military or civilian court. Human rights workers in Honduras alleged that an army colonel accused of participating in the killings who was supposed to be in military detention was in fact carrying out his normal duties.
In the case of Manuel Guerra, assistant secretary of the Central Nacional de Trabajadores de! Campo (cntc), the National Union of Rural Workers, who was killed in December 1991, the court failed to pursue important information indicating police involvement in his death. Officials initially claimed that Manuel Guerra had died in a car accident, but an autopsy established that he had been killed by a single bullet fired at close range. A former police collaborator, who subsequently left the country because of fears for his safety, testified to codeh that his cousin, a dni agent, had admitted being involved in the killing together with three other dni agents. He said his cousin had told him that two dni agents had forced Manuel Guerra to take them in his car, followed by another car carrying two dni agents. One of the men in Guerra's car subsequently fired a shot at him, killing him instantly. The judge, who has the power to initiate his own investigations, refused to accept the former police collaborator's statement, on the grounds that it had not been presented by the prosecuting or defence attorneys. The dni initially denied that the men named in the statement were police agents, but the agents themselves later contradicted these official claims at a press conference. They stated, however, that the agency's records showed that they had not left the police station on the night of the killing.
cntc Secretary General Angel Gutiérrez was arrested in June. He alleged that police used psychological pressure to try to make him confess to killing Manuel Guerra. He later lodged a formal complaint against the police on the grounds of illegal arrest and death threats. Honduran human rights
groups concluded that his arrest was an attempt to divert attention away fi-om possible police involvement by presenting the case as the result of an internal organizational dispute. Angel Gutiérrez was released without charge after several days in police custody.
The government again failed to initiate a full inquiry into "disappearances" in the early 1980s. It also continued to refuse to pay the full damages ordered by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to the families of "disappeared" prisoners Saul Godinez and Manfredo Velásquez. In unprecedented rulings in 1988 and 1989 the court had found the Honduran Government responsible for the two "disappearances" in 1981 and 1982.
Amnesty International issued a report in May, "Disappearances" in Honduras: A Wall of Silence and Indifference, which documented the long campaign of relatives to clarify the fate of those who "disappeared" following arrest in the early 1980s, and the failure of successive governments to fulfil their obligation to carry out effective investigations. The report was sent, together with a letter requesting information about cases and issues included in it, to the president of the official Inter-Institutional Human Rights Commission but no reply was received.
Amnesty International was also still waiting for information the government had said it would provide about cases included in the organization's 1991 memorandum (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The organization continued to press for thorough and impartial investigations into possible extrajudicial executions and allegations of torture and the bringing to justice of those responsible. It also called for an inquiry into the attack on Antonio Zelaya Reyes. In response, a fusep official claimed that investigations into the incident were inconclusive, and the allegations against police "unfounded and irresponsible".
In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Honduras.
