MAURITANIA
About 100 government opponents were detained briefly at the beginning of the year and were possible prisoners of conscience. There were reports of torture, and at least one prisoner died as a result. There were several killings by the security forces which appeared to be extrajudicial executions. The authorities took no action to account for more than 300 prisoners arrested in late 1990 who were believed to have died or been killed in detention.
President Maaouiya Ould Taya was confirmed as head of state following presidential elections in January which were boycotted by one opposition party. Later parliamentary elections were boycotted by almost all opposition parties, notably the Union des forces democratiques (ufd). Union of Democratic Forces.
The border between Mauritania and its
mauritania
southern neighbour Senegal was reopened in May at one place, the Senegal river crossing at Rosso, and in November at other points, allowing some of the Maurita-nians who had been expelled in 1989 and 1990 to return to their country (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). However, in June some retiunees were threatened by soldiers when they reached their villages of origin, prompting them to leave the country again. Several others were killed by security forces while crossing the Senegal river. Many black Mauritanians who had fled or been expelled to Senegal after April 1989 remained in Senegal, either because their identity cards had been destroyed at the time of their expulsion, preventing them from proving their Mauritanian nationality, or because they sought guarantees for their personal safety and compensation for their confiscated property before returning home.
On 26 January the paramilitary National Guard used tear-gas and rubber bullets to disperse a crowd which had gathered to hear the election results at the ufd headquarters in Nouadhibou, Mauritania's second largest town. The crowd retaliated by throwing stones. Three ufd members died as a result of rubber bullet wounds and many others were injured: no investigation was carried out into the deaths.
As many as 100 people arrested around the time of the presidential elections were possible prisoners of conscience. Most were arrested at their homes following the violent dispersal of the crowd at the ufd headquarters. Many were tortured to make them confess to possessing arms and to incriminate and reveal the whereabouts of other ufd activists. None was believed to have been questioned about specific acts of violence, although it was announced that at least 37 faced criminal charges. All were released by 5 February without being formally charged or tried.
In late June, 10 prominent members of the Tuareg ethnic minority including Malamine Ould Bady, a lawyer, were arrested in the capital, Nouakchott. They were apparently suspected of having links with the Front islamique arabe pour la libération de l'Azawad (fiaa), Arab Islamic Front for the Liberation of Azawad, a Malian armed opposition group composed of Tuareg and Moors which had reached a peace agreement with the Malian Govern-
ment. They were detained without charge for a few days, apparently because they were suspected of involvement in attacks across the border into Mali.
In addition to the political detainees arrested in January, criminal suspects were also reported to have been tortured. In March N'diaye Abdou Oumar, known as "Kodda Dianga", was arrested by security forces while trying to cross the Senegal river and died after being beaten with the butt of a rifle. In August, following the murder of an Arab trader, the security forces detained all men aged between 18 and 70 from the village of Sory-Mall6. They were all black Mauritanians from the Halpulaar ethnic group (also known as Fulani). After questioning at the local school, 11 were arrested; some were later released, but at least four were transferred to the nearby town of Aleg, where they were charged with murder and remanded in custody. All four were reported to have been tortured. A fifth, Dia Hamath Atoumane, the 70-year-old brother of the village chief, reportedly died in Sory-Malle on 24 August as a result of being beaten severely during interrogation. His relatives lodged a formal complaint about his death with the Procuracy but received no response.
Several people were killed by the security forces in circumstances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed. There were at least four such killings on the Senegal river, which forms the frontier between Mauritania and Senegal. Two brothers crossing into Mauritania at Boghe were intercepted by police in February while the border remained officially closed. They were reportedly tortured and then thrown into the river. One of them, Oumar Diop, drowned. Later in the year, after the border was opened at Rosso, further killings were reported. For example, two Senegalese were shot dead in June by the National Guard, apparently as they crossed the river some distance from the official crossing point. No official inquiries were held into any of these deaths and no action was apparently taken against those responsible, suggesting that security forces along the border were able to act with impunity.
New information came to light about the gross human rights violations committed between 1989 and 1991 as local newspapers published photographs of execution
mauritania/mauritius
victims. For example, in March three skeletons photographed in a ravine at Sory-Mallé were identified as those of the victims of extrajudicial executions carried out by the National Guard in 1990. Local human rights activists published information about 200 people who had been killed during the expulsions of black Maurita-nians. However, the government took no steps to investigate past extrajudicial executions or to account for political prisoners who had "disappeared" in custody in late 1990 and 1991. Moreover, legal officials reportedly hampered attempts to initiate legal proceedings aimed at clarifying some of these "disappearances".
At least 339 political prisoners who had been among several thousand black Mauri-tanians arrested in late 1990 remained unaccounted for when the government announced the release of all political prisoners in April 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). They are all believed to have died in police or army custody as a result of torture or to have iDeen victims of extrajudicial executions. In early 1992 lawyers resubmitted a formal complaint to the State Prosecutor on behalf of nearly 200 families of the "disappeared", calling for those responsible to be brought to justice. The complaint had been previously rejected in September 1991 by the same official on the grounds that members of the armed forces could only be prosecuted following orders from the armed forces' Chiefs of Staff. However, the lawyers discovered that the Supreme Court had, prior to the 1991 rejection, advised the Minister of Defence that the Chiefs of Staff had no role to play in such prosecutions and that disciplinary proceedings should not be a substitute for criminal proceedings. The lawyers therefore resubmitted the complaint but were told by the President of the Special Court of Justice in October that his court could not examine the case because the court was being reorganized. However, he assured the lawyers that the case would be passed to the Avocat Général and then to an appropriate judicial body. No legal proceedings had begun by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed for information about those arrested following the January elections and urged that any held on account of the peaceful expression of their political views should be released. The organization also called for an inquiry into the death of Dia Hamath Atoumane
and other torture allegations. Throughout the year, Amnesty International also continued to press the authorities to clarify the fate of the more than 300 political prisoners who "disappeared" after their arrest in 1990, but the authorities did not respond to this or other appeals.
