FRANCE
Hundreds of conscientious objectors to the national service laws were considered prisoners of conscience. There were allegations of ill-treatment in police custody.
The alternative civilian service available to recognized conscientious objectors remained twice the length of ordinary military service. Conscientious objectors refusing to conform to the national service laws received sentences of up to 18 months' imprisonment.
All but four of the known imprisoned conscientious objectors were Jehovah's Witnesses. According to unofficial estimates, between 700 and 1,000 Jehovah's Witnesses were imprisoned during the year for refusing military service; they had not applied for conscientious objector status because they also rejected the option of civilian service.
Among them was Jérémy Bemardi who had afready spent over seven months in prison during 1991 under judicial investigation for insubordination. This had resulted from his refusal to put on military uniform after reporting to an army barracks, as ordered, to commence military service. He was released in January, pending trial, but because he remained liable for military service he immediately reported back to barracks where he again refused to put on military uniform. He was detained under investigation on a second charge of insubordination and in February was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment. In June he was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment on the first charge of insubordination, reduced on appeal to 15 months' imprisonment, to run concurrently
FRANCE/GAMBIA
with the sentence imposed in February. He was released in July.
There were allegations of ill-treatment in police custody, often concerning immigrants and French citizens of North African origin.
Jacques Cherigui, of Franco-Algerian parentage, claimed that police officers who arrested him in Argenteuil in June, apparently in the course of a criminal investigation, threw him to the floor, kicked and punched him and subjected him to racial abuse. On his release some 19 hours later he was charged with insulting the police and resisting arrest. A medical certificate issued within hours of his release and subsequent photographs recorded multiple cuts and bruises to his body. He made two criminal complaints of ill-treatment against the police in June but was informed verbally by the prosecutor's office that they had been declared inadmissible; he was not given the reasons for these decisions. In October the criminal court due to hear the charges against him decided to await the report of an internal police inquiry into his allegations of ill-treatment and adjourned the trial until March 1993. Jacques Cherigui also announced his intention of making a civil complaint against the police.
A judicial inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the detention and death in police custody of Aissa Ihich in May 1991, following an asthma attack (see Amnesty International Report 1992), led in February to a charge of involuntary homicide against a forensic doctor attached to Versailles appeal court. Aissa Ihich had allegedly been beaten by police officers on arrest and deprived of medication to alleviate his chronic asthma during his detention. The doctor had issued a medical certificate some 18 hours after the arrest stating that the detainee's state of health was compatible with a 24-hour extension of his preventive detention; he had also recorded injuries caused by blows to his body. He failed to make any reference to the detainee's asthma and gave no instructions to the police regarding his treatment. By the end of the year the judicial inquiry had still not established which police agency had carried out the arrest and alleged ill-treatment of Aissa Ihich.
A judicial inquiry into Lucien Djos-souvi's allegations of ill-treatment by police in 1989 (see Amnesty International
Reports 1990 to 1992) had still not concluded.
Amnesty International considered that the length of the civilian service for conscientious objectors, twice that of military service, was punitive. It therefore considered those imprisoned as a result of rejecting both military and civilian service to be prisoners of conscience and appealed for their release. It sought information from the authorities about the steps taken to investigate allegations of ill-treatment in police custody.
