GUINEA
Dozens of students, an opposition leader and a journalist were detained, some for up to six weeks, and appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Some were tortured or ill-treated. New legislation broadened the application of the death penalty but no death sentences were passed.
In April a law permitting political parties came into effect; at least 40 parties had been set up and legalized by the end of the year. President Lansana Conté, who remained head of state and government during a transitional period until presidential and parliamentary elections, rejected opposition demands for a National Conference to discuss the country's political future. The first round of parliamentary
elections due to take place in December was delayed but President Conté announced it would take place during 1993.
In May a new law increased the number of offences punishable by death to include murder committed during demonstrations or attacks on buildings. It also made organizers of public meetings responsible for the actions of all those attending such meetings and punishable by imprisonment for any violence or damage caused at the time of the meetings. In September the government stipulated that all public meetings and marches must have a five-person organization committee, which would be held responsible for any breaches of public order committed during such events. The goverrunent also assumed the power to ban any meetings deemed likely to threaten public order.
Political violence continued throughout the year resulting in several deaths. In the run-up to the elections scheduled for December, the clashes took on an increasingly ethnic character, with members of the Soussou ethnic group generally supporting the government and sometimes working closely with the security forces during attacks on other ethnic groups.
Between January and April there was violent conflict between students and the security forces in which at least two students died. Dozens of students were arrested and many of them appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Some were ill-treated in custody.
In mid-January a student strike was launched in many parts of the country when the government failed to respond to student demands for better conditions. At first the strikes and protest marches took place without incident, but on 27 January a
GUINE/VGUINEA-BISSAU
special "anti-gang" police unit opened fire on students demonstrating peacefully in the capital, Conakry, injuring at least five. Several students were arrested and held for two days, during which they were beaten. A few days later, the governor of Conakry, who was apparently responsible for the police intervention, was appointed Minister of Higher Education.
In February one student was killed and at least 50 others were arrested and ill-treated during a security raid on a university campus in Conakry. In other incidents one other student died and others were seized by groups of pro-government students working with members of the "anti-gang" police unit. For example, Mamadou Moustapha Diallo, the press officer of the students' coordinating committee, was arrested in April by a group of unidentified people armed with knives and handed to the "anti-gang" police for interrogation. He was tortured by the "anti-gang" police at their office on the university campus while being questioned about political documents found in his possession. He was detained incommunicado in a police infirmary until June, when he was released to receive medical treatment on the understanding that he would return to custody if required.
More than 200 women were arrested during a peaceful demonstration on 27 August to commemorate the 15th anniversary of a protest by market women in 1977. They were released the same day; many bore injuries as a result of ill-treatment by the security forces. Later that day. the security forces reportedly destroyed market stalls and the following day angry demonstrators burned property in protest: two people died, apparently as a result of action by the security forces.
No official investigations were opened into these killings or that of the students in February, with the result that the security forces were not held accountable for their use of lethal force. There was also no further news about two inquiries which the government had said it had established in previous years into the killings of at least five students in late 1990 and at least three demonstrators in October 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). It was unclear whether either of these inquiries had actually taken place.
An opposition leader was detained for a few days in October and appeared to be a
prisoner of conscience. The authorities claimed that Amadou Oury Bah, Secretary General of the Union des forces démocratiques (ufd), Union of Democratic Forces, and founding member of the Organisation guinéene des droits de l'homme (ogdh), Guinean Human Rights Organization, was suspected of involvement in an attempt to assassinate President Conté earlier in October, but the real reason appeared to be his peaceful political activities. He was released following a mass strike organized by government opponents.
One journalist was imprisoned as a prisoner of conscience. Foday Fofanah, a Sierra Leonean national, was arrested in October and tried on charges of libel and working without official accreditation. The libel charge related to a report in which he claimed that hundreds of Liberians opposed to the control of most of Liberia by the National Patriotic Front of Liberia were receiving military training in Guinea. The prosecution pressed for a two-year prison sentence, but on 25 November he was acquitted on both charges and released.
Amnesty International appealed to the goverrunent for the release of prisoners of conscience including Amadou Oury Bah and Foday Fofanah. It also urged the government to establish thorough and impartial investigations into the killings by security forces in 1992 and previous years, but received no response.
