LIBERIA
Wide-ranging human rights violations and abuses were committed by various forces that controlled different parts of the country, including detention without charge or trial, torture and ill-treatment, deliberate and arbitrary killings and executions. It was extremely difficult to monitor the situation owing to restricted access in some areas.
Armed conflict continued throughout 1992, intensifying in the second half of the
year. At the end of 1992, the capital, Monrovia, remained in the hands of the Interim Government of National Unity (ignu), led by Dr Amos Sawyer, and peace-keeping troops of the Economic Community of West African States (ecowas). Most of the rest of Liberia was controlled hy the National Patriotic Reconstruction Assembly Government (nprag), a rival administration set up in 1990 by the rebel force, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (npfl), headed by Charles Taylor.
In April the Interim Government and nprag reached a peace agreement brokered in Geneva by ecowas heads of state. However, the nprag continued to refuse to disarm npfl troops. In May troops of the ecowas Monitoring Group (ecomog) were deployed in npfl-held territory but were withdrawn in September after they were briefly taken hostage by npfl forces. In July and August the nprag lost control of areas between Sierra Leone and Monrovia to the United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ulimo), an armed group mostly comprising supporters of former President Samuel Doe, who was killed in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In October npfl forces attacked Monrovia, targeting ecomog troops and the Armed Forces of Liberia (afl), the national army which had remained encamped in the capital since 1990. The attackers were joined by most members of the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (inpfl), an armed group which had split from the npfl in 1990 and subsequently supported the Interim Government. The inpfl leader. Prince Johnson, deserted by his supporters, sought refuge with ecomog forces. In December the United Nations (un) Secretary-General, at the request of the un Seciuity Council, sent a Special Representative to Liberia. The un also imposed an arms embargo on the country, exempting only the ecomog forces.
After the fighting resumed in August, thousands of displaced people from areas previously controlled by the nprag fled to Monrovia and other parts of the country. Aid agencies were forced to withdraw from nprag-held territory and nearly 100,000 refugees who had fled fighting in Sierra Leone were left in northern Lofa County without relief assistance.
While still formally allied to the Interim Government, the inpfl ill-treated and held two journalists - Isaac Bantu and Dan
LIBERIA
Brown - for three days in harsh conditions in early January. The journalists had expressed concern about the detention of five boys at an inpfl camp near Monrovia. The five, all from an orphanage at the camp, included one 14-year-old. They were said to have confessed to spying for the afl. However, they were later reported to have been released. The orphanage, which had apparently been sited within the camp to deter attack on the inpfl by ecomog forces, was evacuated in October by un aid workers after an npfl attack on the camp. In January the inpfl had executed at least three of their own soldiers at the camp for being in possession of new currency issued by the Interim Government.
In late October civilians in Monrovia were subjected to ill-treatment, harassment and looting by afl and ulimo troops. At least six people were reported to have been simimarily executed by these forces on suspicion of being npfl fighters. On 2 November ecomog forces threatened to shoot on sight any members of these forces who broke a night curfew in Monrovia. On 21 November an afl soldier was publicly executed in the capital by the afl the day after he was convicted of murder and robbery by an afl court-martial.
In nprag-controlled areas, people suspected of opposing the npfl were detained and in some cases tortured or ill-treated. Detailed information was scarce: most of that available concerned foreign nationals although Liberians were believed to be the majority of those held. Father Seraphino Dalpont, an Italian priest, was arrested in April for possessing Interim Government currency and a Roman Catholic newsletter, alleged to be seditious literature. He was released after paying a large fine, but rearrested allegedly on suspicion of espionage. He was held in a police station in Gbarnga, where the nprag had its headquarters, until mid-May, when he was released and deported to Côte d'Ivoire. In October two groups of foreign nationals -one mostly of aid workers, the other of missionaries — were detained for several days accused of spying for the ecomog forces. They were released uncharged.
npfl troops tortured and ill-treated civilians while looting their property and forcing them to work without pay. In April the npfl announced that it was investigating such allegations, but the results of any investigation were not known. In Sept-
ember nearly 600 ecomog soldiers were taken prisoner by npfl forces who severely beat some of them. Later that month Charles Taylor acknowledged that npfl troops were "perpetrating atrocities" and said he would take "drastic military action" against those responsible for assaulting the ecomog troops. However, it was not clear what action, if any, was taken.
npfl forces summarily killed scores, possibly hundreds, of people. In April the nprag authorities charged four senior npfl officers with the murder of seven suspected ulimo supporters in Buchanan. Three were later released and it was not known if the other was tried. In May npfl troops seized six Senegalese members of the ecomog forces in Vahun, near the Sierra Leone border. They took them to Gbamga and reportedly tortured and executed them. In July, when the npfl was being pushed back by ulimo forces, npfl troops reportedly killed and robbed civilians indiscriminately. On 3 July, for example, npfl fighters allegedly killed nine forestry workers at Jenimana. In late August, when ulimo seized npfl-controlled territory, both npfl and ulimo forces were alleged to have killed civilians suspected of supporting the other side in the fighting.
In October, during an attack on Monrovia, npfl forces were reported to have deliberately killed civilians and taken others prisoner' npfl troops reportedly abducted 50 people and killed others when they took control of Louisiana township near the capital. Two Roman Catholic nims, both United States nationals, a Liber-ian man employed by the nuns' convent and two ecomog soldiers were killed in the nuns' car near Barnersville, a suburb of Monrovia, on 20 October, apparently by the npfl. On 23 October six npfl soldiers entered the nuns' convent in the suburb of Gardnersville, killed three other American nuns and a Lebanese businessman, and abducted the businessman's Liberian wife, two other Liberian women with their four children, and four Liberian novices. Those abducted were apparently later released. nprag officials denied that npfl forces were responsible. Up to 300 orphans and a former government official were apparently taken away by npfl forces on about 28 October from an orphanage near Gard-nersville; orphans who escaped reportedly said that the npfl was forcing the boys to
LIBERIAAIBYA
fight for them. In late October the npfl allegedly killed more than 25 people in Maryland County, apparently because they were suspected of supporting utjmo.
The npfl also executed people after summary trials before military coiuls. In February an npfl commander was executed after being convicted by a military court of murdering an inpfl fighter. In August several dissident npfl soldiers were reportedly executed by the npfl for their involvement in an attempted assassination of Charles Taylor in which a bodyguard was killed.
In January Amnesty International appealed to the Interim Government to prevent abuses by inpfl forces. In November Amnesty International published a report, Liberia: Risk of human rights violations as conflict increases, which summarized recent abuses by various parties to the confict. It called on all parties to ensure that their troops respected human rights, were accountable for their actions and observed basic international humanitarian standards. It also appealed to governments around the world to urge that all sides make every effort to prevent further hiunan rights violations.
