MEXICO
The widespread use of torture and ill-treatment by law-enforcement agents continued to be reported and at least one person died as a result of torture. Six prisoners of conscience, members of an indigenous community, were detained. Scores of people were arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by the security forces during land disputes and peaceful demonstrations. Little progress was reported in clarifying the whereabouts of hundreds of people who "disappeared" in previous years. Prison conditions continued to be harsh. At least one person, a member of an indigenous community, was extrajudicially executed.
The government adopted further measures intended to protect human rights. These included a law enacted in June which granted constitutional status and full independence to the National Human Rights Commission, and provided for the creation of similar offices in every state by the end of the year. The National Human Rights Commission continued to receive thousands of complaints of human rights abuses. It issued dozens of recommendations to the relevant authorities, but few of them were fully implemented.
Tortiu-e was frequently used by law-enforcement agents, particularly the state judicial police, throughout the country. Most of the victims were criminal suspects but some - including leaders of indigenous communities and human rights activists -were apparently targeted solely for their peaceful political activities. Torture methods reported included beatings; near-asphyxiation with plastic bags; hanging fi-om the wrists for long periods; forcing
MEXICO
carbonated water with chilli pepper into the nose; burning with cigarettes; and psychological torture. Confessions extracted under duress continued to be admitted as evidence in courts, and scores of people continued to be imprisoned after convictions based solely on statements signed under torture. Official forensic doctors frequently failed to document cases of torture adequately, and medical treatment for detainees who suffered torture was frequently unavailable or inadequate.
Among the scores of cases reported was that of 17-year-old Pablo Molinet Aguilar, who was arrested without warrant in March in Salamanca, Guanajuato, by the state judicial police. While held incommunicado he was allegedly beaten, kicked, threatened with death and forced to sign a blank statement sheet, on the basis of which he was remanded in prison to await trial for murder, Two independent medical examinations confirmed Aat his injuries were consistent with the alleged torture. Despite this and other serious irregularities in the proceedings against him, Pablo Molinet remained in prison at the end of the year.
In April Enrique Ramos Davila, a former policeman, died in custody in Saltillo, Coahuila, on the day of his arrest by the state judicial police. The authorities denied allegations that he had died as a result of torture and claimed that he had died of a heart attack. However, an inquiry by the National Human Rights Commission established that the cause of death was consistent with multiple trauma and asphyxiation. Seven police officers involved were charged with minor offences and taken into custody, but according to reports none had been convicted by the end of the year. Several other officers allegedly responsible remained at large.
In September Morelos Madrigal Lech-ino, a grassroots religious activist, was arrested by members of the Federal District judicial police in Mexico City. He was held incommunicado for two days. He alleged he was beaten, threatened with death and interrogated about his activities. In October Sabas Cruz Soto, a human rights activist, was detained without warrant in Mexico City by members of the Directorate of Protection and Highways police who allegedly beat him with pistol butts, kicks and blows. He was threatened with death for his human rights activities before being
released on the same day.
Torture was also reported in prisons. In June Pablo Santoy and Francisco Pandilla, two inmates of the San Luis Potosí state prison, were accused by the prison authorities of planning an escape and were allegedly beaten, kicked and threatened with "disappearance" by the prison director. They were hung from the wrists overnight and then confined in punishment cells for three days, with no food, water, sanitary facilities or medical care. Following widespread complaints on their behalf, the prison director was removed in August, but to Amnesty International's knowledge, none of those responsible was brought to justice.
Very few of those responsible for torture and other human rights violations were brought to justice. For example, no action was taken by the Republic Attorney General's Office against those responsible for the torture of Amir Aboud Sattar in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992), despite its own recommendation and that of the National Human Rights Commission that action should be taken.
Six prisoners of conscience were detained in January when state judicial police raided the community of La Trinidad Yaveo, Oaxaca. During the raid police officers extrajudicially executed one member of the community (see below). One Zapotee and five Mixe Indian activists were arrested without warrant, beaten, suspended by the wrists for long periods and threatened with death. Odilón Serafín, Abraham Prudencio, Efreín Prudencio, Alberto Hernández and Daniel García were forced to "confess" to a murder they did not commit and were imprisoned. Another activist, Agustín García, was also tortured but was released on the same day. The five were released in June, following national and international criticism of their detention. However, the police officers responsible for the torture and killing remained at large, despite official announcements to the contrary. Another eight Indian activists from the same community, imprisoned since 1990 for a murder they did not commit, were released in April.
Scores of people were arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by security forces in the context of land disputes and during peaceful demonstrations. In October the state judicial police forcibly evicted scores of Tzotzil Indian peasants from the com-
MEXICO
munity of Campo Alegre, Chiapas, and destroyed several houses. Men, women and children were ill-treated during the evictions and many suffered injuries. Fifty-eight people were arrested for a short period, but 20 were held for weeks. Also in October the state judicial police arrested 87 men, women and children when they violently dispersed a peaceful demonstration in Amatán, Chiapas, by Zoque Indian residents protesting against corruption of local officials. Most of those arrested were released on the following day but 27 remained in detention for nearly two weeks before being released uncharged after growing public protests at their detention.
Little progress was reported in investigations into hundreds of "disappearances" of political activists, most of which occurred during the 1970s and early 1980s. For example, the whereabouts of José Ramón García, who "disappeared" in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1992], remained unknown. In January Mario Rojas Alba, a former Congressman, accused several former Morelos state officials of responsibility for José Ramón García's "disappearance". He received anonymous death threats following his statements. He was attacked and seriously injured by unidentified assailants in February, as a consequence of which he and his family fled the country. In January the National Human Rights Commission published a report indicating that several former state officials were probably responsible for José Ramón García's "disappearance", and recommended that they should be brought to justice. At least three former officials were arrested and charged in connection with the case, but a former state police commander allegedly responsible for José Ramón García's "disappearance" remained at large at the end of the year. Those responsible for Francisco Quijano García's "disappearance" and killing in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were also not brought to justice.
Police extrajudicially executed Tomás Diego Garcia, a Mixe Indian, in January when they raided his house in La Trinidad Yaveo and arrested his brother and five other Indian activists involved in a peaceful campaign for their community's land. Those responsible had not been brought to justice by the end of the year. In October José Luis Rodriguez Morán, a teacher and
union leader, was stabbed to death in Mexico City in suspicious circumstances. He had previously received death threats because of his activities on behalf of the Triqui Indians of Oaxaca state. The investigations into his killing continued at the end of the year. Those responsible for the killing of Victor Manuel Oropeza in 1991 remained at large (see Amnesty International Report 1992) and the police officers allegedly responsible for the killings of Hector, Jaime and Erik Quijano Santoyo in January 1990 were not brought to justice (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Prison conditions continued to be harsh, in some cases constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Prisons were severely overcrowded and most had inadequate sanitary facilities. A large number of prisoners awaiting sentence had been held far beyond the constitutional limits for their detention. In July, five people were killed and eight wounded during an armed confrontation between rival gangs in the severely overcrowded state prison of Morelia, eight months after the National Human Rights Commission had recommended an investigation into alleged arms smuggling into the prison. In an effort to reduce prison overcrowding, a number of prisoners, particularly Indians, were granted pardons, were paroled or benefited from early release programs.
Amnesty International repeatedly called for full and impartial investigations into human rights violations in Mexico and urged the authorities to bring all those responsible to justice. In March it published Mexico: Human rights violations against members of the Mixe and Zapotee indigenous community of La Trinidad Yaveo, Oaxaca, and in July it published Mexico: Human rights violations against Ch 'ol and Tzeltal Indian activists. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Mexico.
In oral statements to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February and to the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in July, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about human rights violations against indigenous peoples in Mexico.
Amnesty International representatives
MEXICO/MOLDOVA
visited Mexico in February and August to investigate continuing reports of torture and other human rights violations, particularly against indigenous peoples. As a result of the representatives' findings. Amnesty International concluded that statements obtained under torture and other forms of coercion were still being widely used by the agencies in charge of criminal prosecutions to incriminate suspects. The representatives met the President of the National Human Rights Commission in Mexico in February and again in August to discuss the Commission's work. Amnesty International welcomed the Commission's activities but expressed concern about the frequent failure of the authorities to comply with its recommendations.
