NIGER
More than 200 members of the Tuareg minority ethnic group were arrested and most were still held at the end of the year: some were possible prisoners of conscience. An army captain awaiting trial for killing Tuareg detainees in 1990 was released.
A transitional period in the run-up to a multi-party political system, as agreed by a National Conference in 1991, continued throughout 1992. Amadou Cheiffou remained as Prime Minister and President Ali Saibou continued as head of state but
with reduced responsibilities. A referendum on the Constitution took place in late November and parliamentary and presidential elections were due to be completed in January 1993.
Conflict continued throughout the year between the secmity forces and the Tuareg rebel organization, the Front de libération de l'Air et de l'Azawad (flaa), Liberation Front of Aïr and Azawad. The flaa killed or took prisoner dozens of members of the security forces and civilian officials, as well as killing or injuring people when seizing vehicles. Negotiations continued between the authorities and the flaa, but a truce agreed in May was not effective.
A commission set up by the National Conference to examine past political crimes and human rights violations continued its work (see Amnesty International Report 1992). It undertook preliminary investigations into allegations of offences by officials, including torture, corruption and unfair dismissal. Cases were then passed to the transitional legislative body, the High Council of the Republic, to decide if those implicated should be prosecuted. In September, however, the President of the commission. Maman Abou, a Tuareg, fled the country fearing arrest after a large number of members of the Tuareg community were arrested.
The High Court of Justice, a special court set up by the National Conference to try former government and security officials, heard its first case. In November it sentenced two retired army colonels to 10 years' imprisonment after finding them guilty of killing Vice-President Sani Souna Siddo while he was in detention in 1977 on suspicion of involvement in an attempted coup. The killing was found to be an extrajudicial execution "carried out intentionally, with premeditation and without official orders". Although those convicted and sentenced by the High Court have no right of appeal, the Prime Minister pardoned both men a day later on the grounds of preserving national unity.
In June the former security adviser to the Head of State, Amadou Oumarou, known as "Bonkano" (see Amnesty International Report 1992), was released. The case against him had been passed from the commission to examine past offences to the High Council of the Republic. The Council had rejected it on the grounds that the only evidence against him concerned illegal
236
PAFÍAGUAY/PERU
political opponents under the government of General Alfredo Stroessner. However, in December judicial authorities discovered extensive dip-c docimientation in a police centre on the outskirts of Asunción. The documents, which were impounded by a criminal court judge, were believed to contain information about the fate of dozens of political opponents who "disappeared" or were killed by dip-c agents during the 1970s.
In February Amnesty International submitted a series of recommendations to the Constituent Assembly urging it to incorporate comprehensive human rights safeguards into the new Constitution.
In July Amnesty International wrote to the Interior Minister expressing concern at reports of the ill-treatment of prisoners in Tacumbú prison and urged the government to take all necessary steps to ensure the physical integrity of all prisoners. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
PERU
At least 139 people "disappeared" and at least 65 were extrajudicially executed by the security forces. Widespread torture and ill-treatment were reported. Some 70 people were sentenced by military courts to life imprisonment after unfair trials. Two prisoners of conscience were incarcerated. Thousands of past cases of human rights violations remained unclar-ifíed. The main armed opposition group, the Partido Comunista del Perú (Sendero Luminoso) (pcp), Communist Party of Peru (Shining Path), arbitrarily and deliberately killed targe numbers of civilians.
Internal armed conflict continued to afflict most of the country and large areas
remained emergency zones under military control. Independent human rights defenders stated that they were unable to visit parts of the country for fear of attacks by the security forces or the pc?. An extensive pattern of human rights violations by the government's security forces was reported throughout the year. Widespread atrocities by the pcp were also reported and, on a significantly lesser scale, by a second armed opposition group, the Movimiento Revolucionario Túpac Amaru (mrta), Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement. The pcp carried out deliberate and arbitrary executions of civilians; sabotaged public utilities, co-operatives and rural development projects: detonated powerful car bombs in urban centres; and threatened strike-breakers.
In January and February, in an attempt to strengthen civilian participation in counter-insurgency policies. Congress modified or repealed legislative decrees issued by the executive in 1991. However, on 5 April President Alberto Fujimori, with the full backing of the Armed Forces Joint Command, dissolved Congress, suspended constitutional rule, and set up an emergency government. The President also announced that the judiciary. Public Ministry, Congress and Constitution were to be comprehensively reformed. The judiciary and the Public Ministry were rendered inoperative for four weeks, during which complaints of human rights violations and habeas corpus petitions could not be filed. The dissolution of Congress meant that several commissions investigating human rights violations and political violence were forced to abandon their work.
From April President Fujimori and his Council of Ministers ruled the country by decree law. Decrees issued in April included the dismissal of the Attorney General, 13 Supreme Court judges and over 130 judges and prosecutors, and their replacement with appointees named by the executive.
Decrees issued in May and August widened the definition of "crimes of terrorism", accelerated judicial proceedings in such cases and lengthened prison sentences. The August decree defined the crime of treason and extended military jurisdiction to civilians accused of treason. The measures provided for secret trials, In July a decree penalizing "disappearances" was published, replacing a similar law
issued in 1991 and repealed in May 1992.
In early May at least 39 pcp inmates and two policemen were killed during a pohce operation to regain control of two wings of the Castro Castro Prison in Lima, the capital. The authorities claimed the inmates died as a result of an armed confrontation or were deliberately killed by fellow inmates to prevent them from surrendering. pcp inmates subsequently claimed that at least 10 of the victims were killed after surrendering to the police.
Peter Cárdenas, of the mrta, and Victor Polay, its leader, were arrested in May and June respectively. In September pcp leader Abimael Guzmán and members of the organization's central committee were arrested and charged with treason; scores of other pcp activists were detained in the following months. President Fujimori stated repeatedly that he favoured the death penalty for those convicted of treason.
From mid-September the government refused the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) access to all prisons.
In response to international pressure for a return to democratic rule, elections were held in November for an 80-member legislative Congress charged with reforming the Constitution. The party political alliance Nueva Mayoría-Cambio 90, New Majority-Change 90, backed by President Fujimori, achieved an outright majority. Three major opposition parties refused to participate in the elections.
Of the 178 people known to have "disappeared" after detention by the security forces, 139 remained unaccounted for, 22 were later found dead, 16 had their detention acknowledged or were released, and one said he had escaped. Among the "disappeared" were 10 peasants from the department of Junin, who were detained in February by a civil defence patrol acting with the support of the army. The victims, seven men and three boys from the Paccha community in the province of Huancayo, were reportedly beaten, tied up and taken away by the patrol.
Between April and July Amnesty International documented 23 "disappearances" and three extrajudicial executions in the department of San Martin, most of which were attributed to soldiers stationed at the Mariscal Cáceres military base in Tarapoto city.
Lecturer Hugo Muñoz Sánchez and nine students "disappeared" on 18 July after
peru
reportedly being detained by soldiers on the army-controlled campus of the Enrique Guzmán y Valle Education University on the outskirts of Lima. The authorities claimed to have investigated the case and concluded that the 10 victims had not been detained. However, their whereabouts remained unknown.
In May, five poHce officers were charged with "violating personal ft'eedom and abuse of authority" in connection with the 1991 detention and transfer into army custody of three officials and a peasant ft"om Chuschi, Ayacucho department (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, the authorities failed to initiate proceedings against soldiers alleged to have been responsible for their subsequent "disappearance".
A judge decided in August to close the case against four police officers charged with abuse of authority in connection with the "disappearance" in 1990 of Ernesto Castillo Páez (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). An appeal against the decision remained pending.
Scores of people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by the security forces. On 8 February, five peasants were killed when police opened fire on some 200 unarmed peasants as they marched to a small police station in the district of Chavin, Huari province, Ancash department.
On 17 March, three members of the Alianza Política Izquierda Unida (unir). Political Alliance of the United Left, were reportedly extrajudicially executed by hanging in the presence of witnesses. According to reports, they were detained in the village of Para, Lucanas province, Ayacucho department, by hooded men in civilian clothing acting under the orders of the military stationed at the Chaviñas military base. The victims were apparently accused of "subversion" and ill-treated before being killed.
Between August and October at least 19 university students in the city of Huancayo, Junin department, were found dead in circumstances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed. A further seven students were reported to have "disappeared" during this period. All had allegedly been detained by the security forces in or near the city. In October the Attorney General appointed an ad hoc prosecutor to investigate the "disappear-
237
