GUINEA-BISSAU
One person died in custody after being badly beaten; security officials were arrested in connection with the death. There were several other reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners by members of the police and security forces.
New political parties were legalized in accordance with the May 1991 constitutional amendments introducing a multiparty political system (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In August President Joao Bernardo Vieira empowered a Transitional Multi-Party Commission to propose further legal changes including additional human rights guarantees.
People were able to exercise new freedoms, including the right to strike and
GUINEAÍlSSAU/GUYANA
demonstrate, but not without some problems. Security officials continued to harass suspected opponents of the ruling Partido Africano de Independéncia da Guiñé e Cabo Verde (paigc), African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde. The Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League, a non-governmental organization foimded in 1991, carried out visits to a number of prisons and reported numerous instances of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners: its president received anonymous telephone calls, believed to be from security officials, threatening him with death if the League maintained its activities.
In February nine people, members of two political parties, were severely beaten in police custody, They had been arrested in the streets of Bissau, the capital, while they were announcing a demonstration planned for a few days later in defiance of an Interior Ministry ban on demonstrations during the carnival period. They were beaten while held for about an hour in the prison known as Segunda Esquadra (Second Squadron). Some required medical treatment.
In August police in the town of Bafata who were checking identity cards and tax receipt forms stopped 10 people who failed to produce their documents and severely beat them. In September police in Bissau charged a crowd of Bissau Municipality workers who were planning a strike. They grabbed hold of some of them on an apparently arbitrary basis and beat them repeatedly with truncheons. The police accused the workers of holding an illegal gathering, although the latter said they had followed official procedures. After both incidents victims required medical treatment.
Ussumane Quade, a soldier suspected of
arms trafficking, died in custody two days after his arrest in September. The authorities announced that he had committed suicide but they refused to return Ussumane Quadé's body to his relatives for burial. The Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League made inquiries and subsequently seven police and security officials were detained, apparently in connection with the death. They had not been charged or brought to trial by the end of 1992.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the ill-treatment of prisoners in February and urged the introduction of safeguards against torture and ill-treatment. It repeated its concerns and appeals in November, and called for an inquiry into the death of Ussumane Quade and for anyone responsible to be brought to justice. No response had been received by the end of the year.
