ALGERIA
Thousands of supporters of Islamic opposition groups were arrested, most following mass demonstrations in January and February. Among them were possible prisoners of conscience. Over 10,000 of those arrested were administratively detained without charge or trial in internment camps for several months: conditions in some camps were harsh. Hundreds of other government opponents were sentenced to prison terms after trials before military and civil courts, some of which fell short of international fair trial standards. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the security forces became widespread during the year. Over 100 people, most of them supporters of Islamic groups, were killed by the security forces during clashes and raids: some may have been victims of extrajudicial executions. At least 19 people were sentenced to death, but no executions were carried out.
In January President Chadli Benjedid resigned following major gains by the Front Islamique du Salut (fis). Islamic Salvation Front, in the first round of multi-party elections held in late 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The government cancelled the second round of elections scheduled for January, provoking widespread protests. Mohamed Boudiaf
ALGERIA
returned from 27 years of exile to head a five-man Haut Comité d'Etat, Higher Council of State, which served as a collective presidency. Over 100 civilians and members of the security forces were killed during demonstrations and violent clashes, and there were mass arrests of demonstrators and suspected members of the fis and other Islamic opposition groups.
On 9 February a 12-month state of emergency was declared. This empowered the authorities to place under administrative detention or house arrest anyone whose activities were deemed likely to threaten public order. It also empowered them to ban meetings and demonstrations likely to disturb public order, and suspend or dissolve local assemblies. Under state of emergency regulations, the fis was dissolved by a court ruling in March.
On 29 June President Boudiaf was assassinated by a member of the security forces. Ali Kafi, a member of the Haut Comité d'Etat, replaced him as President. In September the government introduced an anti-terrorist legislative decree which increased the scope of the death penalty. The decree also instituted special courts for "terrorist" crimes, lowered the age of criminal responsibility in such cases to 16, limited the right of appeal and broadened the definition of terrorist acts. The law is retroactive insofar as any case under instruction may be transferred to the special courts and defendants sentenced to increased penalties which did not apply at the time of the offence.
Throughout the year armed Islamist opposition groups and unknown individuals carried out violent attacks on the security forces and public places in which over 200 police and security officers and some civilians were killed.
More than 10,000 people arrested in January and February, including possible prisoners of conscience, were administratively detained without charge or trial. They were initially held in seven internment camps in the desert, between 800 and 3,000 kilometres south of Algiers, including at Reggane and Ain M'Guel near Tamanrasset. Families and lawyers of the detainees were not informed of their whereabouts for up to several weeks. The distant location of the camps and administrative delays in issuing visiting permits made it difficult for families to visit the camps.
The detainees were held under state of
emergency regulations which allow administrative detention without charge or trial for up to 12 months. Groups of detainees were released from internment camps after March, and more than half were released within eight months of being arrested. However, arrests and internments continued and new camps were opened in Tiberghamine, Wad Namous and other locations. Some camps, including those at Reggane and El Homr, were reportedly closed and the inmates transferred to other camps. In August the authorities announced that the internment camps would be closed and that all detainees would be brought to trial or released. However, over 3,000 detainees remained in administrative detention without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Conditions in some camps were harsh. There were reports of overcrowding and lack of hygiene and medical facilities, resulting in a high incidence of illness. At the end of March a 60-year-old detainee was shot dead by security forces in the camp at Reggane: no public investigation into his death was known to have been held.
Torture of detainees, which had been rare since 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989), became widespread during the year. Most reported cases took place in pre-trial incommunicado [garde a vue) detention, which was frequently prolonged beyond the 12-day limit permitted under the anti-terrorist decree. Methods of torture included beatings, often with sticks, wires, belts or broom-handles on all parts of the body; burning with cigarettes; pulling out finger- and toe-nails; insertion of bottles and other objects into the anus; the "chiffon" (cloth), whereby the victim is tied to a bench and partially suffocated with a cloth soaked in dirty water and chemicals; and electric shocks. For example. Nadir Ham-moudi, who was arrested in November and held in garde a vue detention for 25 days, alleged that he was tortured in Bab El Oued Police Station and in an unknown place to which he had been taken while hooded. He said he was beaten, kicked, burned with a cigarette and then tortured by the "chiffon " method by being forced to swallow water and chemicals while police officers sat on his feet and held his nose.
Over 100 protesters and supporters of Islamic opposition groups were killed by the security forces during demonstrations
ALGERIA
and clashes, some in circmnstances suggesting they were victims of extrajudicial executions. According to official sources, between 12 January and 14 March over 70 civilians died as a result of shootings by law enforcement officials. Scores more were killed in April and later in the year in clashes and during raids on houses where armed goverrunent opponents were thought to be hiding. Bystanders and civilians passing through police barricades were also killed and injured in circumstances which violated international standards for the use of firearms by law enforcement officials. In one case, for example, security forces killed an unarmed man in February while searching a building for armed government opponents. According to his family, the man was made to lie face down on the floor by police and was shot dead when he lifted his head abruptly after gunfire was heard. The authorities said internal inquiries by the security forces were held into cases of death by shooting by the security forces, but no result of any investigation was made public.
Hundreds of people were tried by military and civil courts without legal representation in breach of international standards for fair trial. Under the state of emergency, those accused of serious crimes and felonies against state security may be tried before military courts whose procedures lack some of the safeguards provided in civil coiuls. In July Abbas Medani and Ali Belhadj, two leading fis members who were arrested in June 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992), were sentenced by a military court to 12 years' imprisonment after being convicted of offences against state security, undermining the national economy and distributing subversive literature. They were acquitted on charges including kidnapping and torturing members of the security forces. The trial appeared to fall far short of international standards for fair trial. Defence lawryers complained of breaches of procedure in the pre-trial and trial proceedings, and said that they were unable to prepare an adequate defence because they had not been given full access to their clients' case files. The trial proceedings were boycotted by the defendants and their lawyers in protest at the court's failme to meet defence demands and to admit international observers and foreign media.
At least 19 people were sentenced to death for participating in armed attacks against the security forces resulting in fatalities. The cases of four people sentenced to death in 1991 for financial crimes (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were sent back for retrial. Over 100 people remained on death row at the end of the year, but no executions were reported.
At least 10 Tunisian asylum-seekers were expelled to Libya in May, despite the risk that they would be returned to Tunisia where they might face serious human rights violations. Some were returned by the Libyan authorities to Tunisia where they were reported to have been detained and tortured. Diu-ing the year, four Tunisians and one Iraqi were expelled to other third countries. Amnesty International wrote to the Algerian Government reminding it of its obligation under international law not to send asylum-seekers to third countries without ensuring that they would be granted effective protection against refoulement.
New information was received about detainees who were held in camps and allegedly tortured and ill-treated by the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Seguia el-Hamra y Rio de Oro. Popular Front for the Liberation of Seguia el-Hamra and Rio de Oro (Polisario Front), in an area of southern Algeria controlled by the Polisario Front and known as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (sadr). Some detainees were said to have been held incommunicado for several years in the camps, which are located around Tindouf. Those detained were believed to have been imprisoned as a result of political disputes within the Polisario Front: there appeared to be no legal basis for their detentions.
In January Amnesty International wrote to the Algerian Minister of Human Rights urging him to issue the security forces with strict guidelines concerning the use of firearms and providing him with the United Nations (un) Basic Wnciples on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials. The ministry responded by emphasizing that human rights were respected in Algeria and promising to send copies of the un Basic Principles to security authorities. In March and December Amnesty International delegates visited Algeria and met government ministers and other officials to discuss the organization's human rights concerns. In June Amnesty
ALGERIA/ANGOLA
International delegates were refused permission to observe the trial of the fis leaders or to see copies of the trial documents.
In May Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the government expressing its concern about the fatal shooting of unarmed civilians, ill-treatment of detainees, administrative detention without charge or trial, and death sentences. No response had been received by the end of the year.
In November Amnesty International wrote to President Mohammad 'Abdul 'Aziz of the sadr raising its concerns about reported torture in camps holding detainees,
