LUXEMBOURG
A number of prisoners were kept in prolonged isolation.
In February Luxembourg ratified the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
In July one prisoner was ordered to be held in isolation in Schrassig prison for 12 months. During the year a number of other prisoners spent between one and five months in isolation. Solitary confinement is imposed for disciplinary reasons or when prisoners are classed as dangerous. Prisoners placed in isolation spend 23 hours a day in their cells and exercise alone for one hour a day. During the year Amnesty International learned that until 1990 a number of prisoners had been held in isolation for periods of several years. One such prisoner, Jean-Marc Mahy, was held in isolation from April 1987 until March 1990. Amnesty International is concerned that prolonged isolation may have serious effects on the physical and mental health of prisoners and may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed its concern about the use of prolonged isolation by the Schrassig prison authorities to the Minister of Justice. In particular, the organization asked whether it was still possible for prisoners to be placed in solitary confinement for several years.
In his replies the Minister of Justice rejected the term "prolonged isolation". He stated that Luxembourg legislation provided for solitary confinement in order to cut the prisoner off from the rest of the prison population for several months. The Minister informed Amnesty International that the prisoner placed in solitary confinement in July had repeatedly attacked prison guards and that his punishment would be suspended at the end of November, provided there had been no repetition of his previous behaviour. The Minister stated that it was not the current policy of those
LUXEMBOURG/MACAO/MADAGASCAR
responsible for punishing prisoners to impose periods of solitary confinement lasting several years. Amnesty International was still concerned, however, that the imposition of such long periods of isolation remained a possibility in Luxembourg, and that this punishment might be applied again in the future.
In October Amnesty International published a document entitled Luxembourg: Prolonged isolation of detainees in Schras-sig prison.
