BOLIVIA
There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees by the police. Some peasants and indigenous leaders were reported to have been arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by the narcotics police. Two people were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed by police. The trial of a former president for past himian rights violations continued. No official investigations were carried out into alleged torture and extrajudicial executions in previous years.
There were hunger-strikes and long-running work stoppages in the first half of the year to protest against the privatization of the country's mines and the government's announcement that it would use the army to control coca leaf growing areas. Miners, trade unionists and university students were arrested in January and April for short periods, following demonstrations that were violently dispersed by the police. In May the police forcibly dispersed a peaceful demonstration in the capital. La Paz, called to mark the World Week on Forcible Disappearances by mothers and relatives of people who had "disappeared" during past military governments.
Dozens of people were arrested and some allegedly tortured by police in the context of a police offensive against the armed group, Ejército GuerriUero Tupaj Katari (egtk), Tupaj Katari Guerrilla Army. No official investigation was opened into the allegations of torture. The egtk admitted responsibility for several bomb attacks on economic targets around the country, in which three civilians were killed.
Among those arrested on suspicion of supporting the egtk and allegedly tortured
BOLIVIA
were Silvya María Renée De Alarcón and her husband José Raúl García Linera. They were arrested by security agents in La Paz in March, handcuffed, hooded and taken to police installations where they were held incommunicado for 17 days. According to their testimonies, they were kept in separate rooms and forced to stand for several hours in a contorted position known as the "pig", while being beaten on the hips and buttocks. They were both threatened with their partner's torture and José Raúl García Linera was threatened with the rape of his wife and himself. They both stated that a state prosecutor was present during most of the interrogation and torture.
Another couple, Alvaro García Linera and his Mexican wife, Maria Raquel Gutiérrez Aguilar, were arrested in April in La Paz. In her testimony Maria Raquel Gutiérrez Aguilar stated that after her arrest she was taken to Ministry of the Interior premises where for about four days she was kept hooded, handcuffed and, for several hours at a time, made to stand in the "pig" position while being whipped, subjected to electric shocks in the genitals, neck and ears and threatened with her husband's torture. While still in incommunicado detention and the day before she was presented to a judge, Maria Raquel Gutiérrez Aguilar tried to commit suicide. Alvaro García Linera stated that he was kept hooded and handcuffed in Interior Ministry premises, where he was beaten, given electric shocks on the genitals and limbs for several hours at a time, and had nails driven into his toes and finger-nails.
Victor Ortiz, also detained in April in La Paz, testified that he was tortured while kept in incommunicado detention for three days at police installations controlled by the Ministry of the Interior. He was beaten all over his body while in the "pig" position, beaten on the soles of his feet while suspended by his legs and arms, and subjected to electric shocks on his testicles. Victor Ortiz' pregnant wife, four children and father-in-law were held under house arrest by the police in El Alto, a poor area of La Paz, for 14 days.
All those arrested in connection with the activities of the egtk were charged with armed rebellion and terrorism. None had been tried by the end of the year.
Human rights violations against peasants and indigenous leaders committed by members of the Unidad Movi! de Patrulla
Rural (umopar). Mobile Rural Patrol, a specialized narcotics branch of the police force, continued to be reported. In May Emilio Flores Corpa, a young coca leaf grower, was shot dead by members of the umopar during a raid near Eterazama, Gochabamba Department, in circumstances suggesting he had been extrajudicially executed. Another peasant, Mario Ovando García, was reportedly seriously injured during the same raid. Dozens of peasants were arrested and released without charge a few days later. Officials stated that the shootings had taken place during a confrontation with drug-traffickers in the area. Leaders of the Federación Especial de Trabajadores Campesinos del Trópico, Tropical Peasant Workers' Union, denied the official version and alleged that members of umopar had fired at the peasants as they ran off. The leaders demanded an investigation into the killing. By the end of the year, Amnesty International was not aware that any investigation had been initiated.
In June Aniceto Ervin and Adrian Nogales, two indigenous leaders of the Yuracaré ethnic group, were arrested by umopar agents in Beni Department. Both men were taken to the army barracks at Chimoré, Gochabamba Department. The authorities staled that Aniceto Ervin had not been arrested but "invited for a talk" at the barracks, and that Adrian Nogales was being held in incommunicado detention until investigations were completed. Several days later the two men were released and returned to their communities, umopar denied allegations that Adrian Nogales had been ill-treated by having his face drenched in kerosene to force him to confess to alleged links with drug-trafficking.
A man killed by the police in Santa Cruz in August was alleged to have been extrajudicially executed. According to official statements, Juan Carlos Melgar Estertary was killed in an armed confrontation with members of the police. His family publicly challenged the authorities' version after the official forensic certificate stated that the victim had been hit by eight bullets, some of them shot at close range, and that his body showed injuries consistent with torture. The family asked for an investigation into the killing but, as far as Amnesty International was aware, no investigation was opened.
The trial of former President General Luis Garcia Meza and 54 co-defendants.
bouvia/bosnia-herzegovina
known as the Juicio de Responsabilidades (responsibilities trial), continued in the Supreme Court. The charges against the accused include killing and torturing government opponents during the military government between July 1980 and August 1981 (see Amnesty International Reports 1981 to 1983]. The trial was initiated in 1984. Following protracted delays, threats to the prosecution lawyers, the escape of General Garcia Meza and the extradition to the United States of America of his Minister of the Interior. Luis Arce Gómez, the trial reached the stage of evaluation of the evidence (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
The government again failed to investigate allegations that political detainees had been tortured and extrajudicially executed in previous years. Amnesty International urged the government in July to initiate thorough and impartial investigations into all allegations of torture by the police and security forces, including those from 1989 and 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1992). The organization also expressed concern about reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees arrested in 1992 in connection with alleged links to armed groups.
The government told Amnesty International in September that complaints made by the independent Permanent Assembly of Human Rights that political detainees had been tortured were unxeliable, as some of the detainees were also members of the human rights organization. All allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees were denied by the authorities.
In September Amnesty International sent an observer to attend hearings in the trial of former President General Garcia Meza and 54 co-defendants.
In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Bolivia.
