CANADA

Two criminal suspects were allegedly ill« treated during a police raid on their house.
Two men, both Chinese immigrants, alleged they were ill-treated by members of a police Emergency Response Team (ert) in Vancouver, British Columbia (bc), during a raid on their house in February. A videotape showed officers kicking and
canad/vcentral african republic
punching one of the men as he lay on the ground. A police internal inquiry and an investigation by the Regional Crown Counsel considered that the force used against the two occupants was reasonable and none of the officers involved was charged or disciplined for his actions.
Amnesty International wrote to the bc Police Commission in September expressing concern that the degree of force described was considered reasonable when it included kicking a man who was apparently offering no resistance, stating that such action may amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Amnesty International drew attention to international standards on police use of force, including the United Nations (un) Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the un Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms, urging that these be incorporated into police guidelines.
The Police Commission replied stating that the man on the ground had been struck once on each side in order to release his arms for handcuffing and that no further force had been used. The Commission stated that it had reviewed the inquiries into the incident and conciu-red with the finding that the force used was reasonable. Both men, it added, had been advised of their right to request a public inquiry by the police board but had not done so. The Commission also informed Amnesty International that the bc Attorney General had ordered an independent inquiry into municipal policing which would include a review of ert procedures.
Allegations of ill-treatment of Mohawk Indians in 1990 remained unresolved. The Quebec Ministry of Justice replied in May to Amnesty International's call for a thorough and independent inquiry into allegations that several Mohawks had been ill-treated by police during a land dispute in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The Ministry said that four of the six cases named by Amnesty International were being investigated internally by the Quebec Police, but the results were still pending. A fifth case, that of Ronald Cross, was investigated by the police ethics commissioner under new procedures introduced for complaints occurring after 1 September 1990, but a final decision by the police ethics committee was still pending. Amnesty International was unaware of any further developments by the end of 1992.
In July Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Canada in an oral statement to the on Sub-Commission Working Group on Indigenous Populations. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Canada.
