SPAIN
There were allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the security forces. Several inquiries opened into such allegations in previous years remained unresolved. Inquiries continued into killings in disputed circumstances of members of an armed Basque group by security forces. A conscript imprisoned for his conscientious objection to further military service was a prisoner of conscience.
Attacks by the armed Basque group, Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (eta), Basque Homeland and Liberty, on the security forces and civilians continued throughout the year. Twenty-six people, including seven civilians, were killed in the attacks.
People suspected of belonging to an
SPAIN
armed group could still be held incommunicado for up to five days by judicial order - 48 hours longer than the legal limit for other suspects. They also continued to be denied the right to designate lawyers of their own choice.
Allegations of tortiu-e and ill-treatment were made following the arrest of approximately 50 people in a major security forces operation in the Basque province of Viz-caya between January and mid-May. Those arrested were suspected of belonging to or collaborating with the "Bizkaia" commando of eta, which was accused of attacks on security forces and civilians. Thirty-two of them were held in extended incommunicado detention before appearing in the National Court in Madrid. Nearly all of them reportedly complained to the court that they had been hooded, blindfolded and forced to do exercises. Some detainees said they had been beaten and kicked and two alleged that they had been given electric shocks. Most of the women complained that they had been forced to strip and suffered persistent sexual insults and humiliations, Many of the detainees had visible cuts, bruises and other injuries when they appeared in court. Investigations were opened into some of the complaints.
Kepa Urra Guridi, arrested in January on suspicion of belonging to the "Bizkaia" commando, alleged he was beaten, kicked and punched by the Civil Guards on three separate occasions. A coxut doctor told the judicial inquiry that, on the day of Kepa Urra's arrest, he saw him lying unconscious on the floor of his cell, breathing very rapidly, and that he had marks on his face, eyes and wrists and was bleeding at the throat, nose and mouth. He was immediately transferred to hospital. Kepa Urra alleged that officers hit him in hospital and during his subsequent transfer to prison; forensic examinations recorded new injuries after his transfer to hospital. Nine Civil Guard officers were formally accused in connection with his complaint.
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment were also made by non-political suspects. In May eight members of a multinational rugby team were arrested in Benidorm. They alleged that officers of the Municipal Police had carried out a serious and unprovoked assault on them. The police claimed that the players were drunk, violent and had been vandalizing cars. The players
denied the charges and said they had been punched, kicked, hit with truncheons and menaced with firearms by the police. Two of them alleged that they had been beaten with truncheons while they were handcuffed and on the ground. The team's allegations were supported by photographic and medical evidence. An inquiry into their case was opened in court the day of their arrest.
In April, after a two-year judicial investigation, charges of ill-treatment were brought against 16 guards of the Modelo prison in Barcelona (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
In October five Civil Guards were found guilty of torturing Joaquin Olano in 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984). They were sentenced to between two and seven months' imprisonment, plus varying terms of up to seven years' disqualification ft'om holding public office. The court found that the prisoner had been punched, kicked, hit with a telephone directory, hooded, partially asphyxiated with a plastic bag, submerged in water and given electric shocks. Two of the officers had been convicted in 1986 of torturing another prisoner. However, they did not serve their sentences, remained on active service and were pardoned in February 1991.
In September the Ombudsman urged the introduction of temporary, administrative suspension, during judicial inquiries, of officers accused of torture or ill-treatment. During the year officers sentenced on such charges remained on active service pending appeals and in some cases did not serve their sentences even after they had been made final. Some officers convicted of torture and ill-treatment were pardoned. Instances of recidivism occurred.
In July the Minister of the Interior released figures showing an increase in the number of Civil Guards and police accused of ill-treatment. In 1991, 171 judicial proceedings had been opened involving 392 officers accused of ill-treatment, 132 more than the previous year. According to the Ministry, two judicial proceedings, involving a total of seven officers, were also opened into accusations of torture during 1991.
In February Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial of Rafael Navarro Vacas, a police officer charged with the 1990 homicide of an eta member, Mikel Castillo (see Amnesty International Report
SPAIN/SRI LANKA
1992). He was acquitted. The court accepted that there was no forensic evidence to show that Mikel Castilló had been unarmed and also accepted police statements that he had been armed. The prosecution entered an appeal.
In June the National Court in Madrid sentenced two cta members - Germán Rubenach and Juan José Zubieta - to 57 and 23 years' imprisonment respectively for the murder of a Civil Guard and the wounding of another in an exchange of gunfire in the Foz de Lumbier in 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). The judicial inquiry into allegations of unlawful killing by the Civil Guard of two other eta members was still open.
José Antonio Escalada, a conscientious objector to military service, was imprisoned while awaiting trial for desertion. He and fellow conscientious objector Manuel Blázquez Solís had spent three months in pre-trial detention during 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). They had been charged with desertion after leaving the navy at the outbreak of the Gulf conflict. They applied for conscientious objector status on moral and philosophical grounds although the law allows the right to conscientious objection to be exercised only "until the moment of incorporation" into the armed forces. Hours before their release into provisional liberty in 1991 they had confirmed to the military authorities that they refused all further military service. Within a week new arrest warrants were issued against them. Both conscripts lived clandestinely while appeals against the warrants, including appeals to the Constitutional Court, continued. However, in June José Antonio Escalada was arrested during a routine identity check. In July the Constitutional Court ordered that the proceedings against Manuel Blázquez be suspended, pending its final decision on his appeal. José Antonio Escalada's release into provisional liberty in July was apparently a consequence of the court's ruling.
Amnesty International urged that all allegations of torture, ill-treatment and disputed killings be thoroughly and impartially investigated, and those responsible be brought to justice. The organization, emphasizing that individuals should be able to claim conscientious objector status at any time, appealed for the release of José Antonio Escalada and for all criminal pro-
ceedings to be dropped against him and Manuel Blazquez.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Himian Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about torture and ill-treatment and killings by security forces in circumstances which were disputed or inadequately investigated in Spain.
