ROMANIA
Soldiers from a military police unit allegedly tortured and otherwise ill-treated members of the Roma community. There were also allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the police. The authorities failed to clarify a "disappearance" case. There was no apparent progress in the investigation into the killing of two demonstrators in September 1991.
In June a parliamentary commission of inquiry set up to investigate anti-govem-ment protests in September 1991 in Bucharest published its report (see Amnesty International Report 1992). It held the leaders of the Jiu Valley Miners' Free Trade Unions responsible for starting the events which led to violent clashes with the police authorities, during which at least four people died. Three members of the commission, representing the opposition parties, voiced a dissenting opinion.
After a new electoral law was adopted in July, presidential and parliamentary elections were held in September and October. President Ion Iliescu was reelected and the Democratic National Salvation Front formed a minority government.
In July soldiers of a military police unit allegedly tortured and otherwise ill-treated members of the Roma community in Pia^a Rahova, in Bucharest, the capital. Following a dispute between a Rom and a soldier based in Rahova, 40 to 50 soldiers reportedly went to the market in this predominantly Roma subiu'b of Bucharest. They wore black masks and were armed with truncheons, nunchakus (weapons used in martial arts), chair legs and pick-axes and reportedly indiscriminately attacked Roma people. Mircea Gheorghe was allegedly hit
ROMANIA
with a stick on the head which made him lose consciousness. The soldiers continued to beat him despite bleeding from his head. Ion Constantin was hit with a rubber truncheon on the head and the back of the neck. Aniçoara Duman and her child were beaten. According to one report, 13 people were injiued in this apparently unprovoked attack.
There were also allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the police. For example, in May a civilian and two police officers broke into the home of Béla Tankô and allegedly beat him until he fell to the floor unconscious. Also in the house at the time was Filip Pora, whom the police reportedly beat after beating Béla Tankô.
In June Alexandru Tatulea was stopped near a Metro station in Bucharest by a police officer and a soldier. Alexandru Tatulea could not show them his identity card and was reportedly beaten by the poHce officer. When, as a result, Alexandru Tatulea fell to the ground the police officer took out a pistol and pointed it at his temple. Alexandru Tatulea moved his head and the police officer fired at point-blank range; the bullet entered beneath his left eye and exited behind his right ear. He survived the shooting but suffered paralysis of the left side of his face, a permanent disability with grave neurological complications. In October the police officer responsible went, together with four fellow officers, to Alexandru Tatulea's home and threatened him with bodily harm if he did not withdraw all accusations.
The whereabouts of Viorel Horia, a school pupil who was reportedly arrested and tortured following demonstrations in June 1990 in Bucharest, remained unknown (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Natalia Horia, Viorel's mother, reportedly came under pressure from police and other authorities while attempting to gain more information on the "disappearance" of her son. On one occasion, she was told in the Bucharest Policy Dep^ment that Viorel had died on 15 October 1990 in Busteni, but that the body had already been bm-ied. Her request Jo bring in an independent forensic expert to identify Viorel was rejected and this "discovery" was not mentioned again. During a meeting with an official of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in June 1991 it was suggested that she was damaging the international reputation of Romania by maintaining contacts with
international human rights organizations. In the Bucharest Police Department, in February 1992, she was told by the officer who interviewed her that "if Viorel is not abroad and if he is not in a hospital with amnesia then maybe you have conspired in his disappearance".
No charges were brought in connection with the killing of Andrei Frumu§anu and Aurica Cràiniceanu diuring the demonstrations at Plata Victoriei in September 1991. A witness to the shooting of Andrei Frumuçanu reported seeing a military officer standing on the central balcony of the Government Building aiming a handgun at the demonstrators in the square. Andrei Frumu§anu was shot in the chest with a flare rocket and he died as a result of internal injtu-ies. At approximately the same time Aurica Cràiniceanu was also shot in front of the Government Building. She died in the municipal hospital. An investigation into the deaths of Andrei Frumu§anu and Aurica Cràiniceanu was initiated. The Military Prosecutor reportedly told Andrei Frumu§anu's father that the identity of the officer who shot Andrei had been established and that he was of high military rank.
In July Amnesty International reiterated its appeal to the authorities to investigate fully and impartially the "disappearance" of Viorel Horia and to make public its findings. The organization also called on the authorities to ensure that Natalia Horia and others seeking tp clarify the whereabouts of Viorel Horia were protected from harassment and intimidation.
In October Amnesty International called on the government to initiate an independent, impartial inquiry into the alleged torture and ill-treatment of members of the Roma community in Piaja Rahova, to make public its findings and to bring to justice all those found responsible.
Amnesty International also called for full and impartial investigations into the deaths of Andrei Frumu§anu and Aurica Cràiniceanu. It urged the authorities to carry out an investigation into the torture and maiming of Alexandru Tatulea and to protect him from further harassment and intimidation.
In August the General Prosecutor informed Amnesty International that the police continued to investigate the "disappearance" of Viorel Horia. No other replies were received from the authorities.
