ZIMBABWE
Mass graves were uncovered which were believed to contain the remains of victims of extrajudicial executions by the army in the mid-1980s. The government failed to respond to calls for a full and impartial investigation. However, there were official investigations into a number of more recent deaths in custody and alleged extrajudicial executions or "disappearances". One prisoner died in custody during the year in unexplained circiun-stances. At least 12 prisoners were sentenced to death but there were no reported executions.
The country was badly affected by the drought which prevailed across the whole of southern Africa, exacerbating an already precarious economic situation.
In the search for new sources of water to relieve the drought, mass graves were uncovered at various times throughout the year. These were alleged to contain the remains of victims of extrajudicial executions or "disappearances" in the western Matabeleland provinces between 1983 and 1985 (see Amnesty International Reports 1984 to 1986). During those years the army, notably the Fifth Brigade, was deployed against armed insurgents. Some of the sites where remains were uncovered, such as Antelope Mine near Kezi, had been described by eye-witnesses as the scenes of extrajudicial executions.
There were widespread public calls for the government to initiate a thorough and independent investigation into the graves
ZIMBABWE
and the history of army abuses in Mata-beleland. In particular, Zimbabwean human rights organizations called for the publication of the report of an official commission of inquiry into army abuses which was submitted to the government in 1985. However, the government did not publish the commission's report, nor did it initiate further investigations into human rights violations in Matabeleland.
In January and March two officials of the Central Intelligence Organization (ao) were arrested and charged in connection with the "disappearance" in 1990 of Rashiwe Guzha (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, in July Attorney General Patrick Chinamasa ordered that charges against the two should be withdrawn for lack of evidence, along with those against a former ao official arrested in connection with the case in November 1991.
In October the Attorney General announced that he disagreed with an inquest verdict that an army officer. Captain Edwin Nleya, had been murdered (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Captain Nleya's body had been found on a hillside in Hwange in 1989, two months after he had disappeared fi-om his unit. His family and some newspapers alleged that he was murdered because he had inside knowledge of military involvement in wildlife poaching. The Attorney General disputed this, saying the evidence supported the finding of an internal army investigation which concluded that Captain Nleya had committed suicide.
Also in October the Attorney General announced that two ao officials were to be charged with the attempted murder of Patrick Kombayi, a prominent opposition candidate, in the course of the general election campaign in early 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
One prisoner, Miria Chizhengeya, died in police custody in Harare in June in unexplained circxunstances. The authorities investigated a number of earlier cases of deaths in detention, holding inquests into some of them (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Some of the deaths were credibly attributed to natural causes. In one case, that of Clever Magwera, who died in police custody in Kadoma in March 1991, a police officer was charged in connection with his death. In a number of other instances where prisoners had died
violent deaths, including the case of Shep-ard Chisango who died in military custody in June 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992), the authorities failed to provide satisfactory explanations.
At least 12 prisoners were sentenced to death in 1992, including Thembeni Joseph Moyo, who was aged about 17 at the time of liie murder of which he was convicted. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International called on the government to initiate independent inquiries into several deaths in detention and possible extrajudicial executions. In a number of cases the organization received detailed responses from the government. Amnesty International also called on the government to publish the report of the commission of inquiry into the Matabeleland killings and to conduct further investigations into the newly uncovered human remains.
