GAMBIA
Sixteen possible prisoners of conscience were detained for several weeks. Three police ofiicers were tried and two convicted in connection with the death of a detainee in 1991. Five people were sentenced to death; there were no executions.
Presidential and parliamentary elections in April returned President Dawda Jawara to office for a fifth term. The President publicly reiterated his commitment to human rights and democracy. On 11 May he announced an amnesty for most of those who had participated in an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1981. As the last of the prisoners sentenced in connection with the coup attempt had been released in 1991, this opened the way for the return of those who had gone abroad to escape prosecution. However, the amnesty apparently excluded Kukoi Samba Sanyang, the leader of the 1981 coup attempt, for whom a new arrest warrant had recently been issued.
Sixteen suspected government opponents who were detained, some for nearly six weeks, appeared to be prisoners of conscience. On 31 March it was announced
GAMBIA/GEORGIA
that seven people had been arrested in connection with a new plot by Kukoi Samba Sanyang against the government. During April at least nine others were arrested because of their suspected involvement with the banned Movement for Justice in Africa (moja), some of whose members had been implicated in the 1981 coup attempt. All 16 were charged with "managing an unlawful society" (moja) and were released on bail on 11 May at the time of the presidential amnesty. They appeared in court on 26 May and were discharged, apparently for lack of evidence. Before the court hearing, one prisoner publicly alleged that he had been tortured in detention; it was not clear whether the authorities carried out any investigation into his allegation. In November President Jawara lifted the ban on moja, allowing it to function openly.
Two police officers were found guilty of ill-treating a prisoner who died in custody. They and another police officer were brought to trial before the Supreme Court in October 1991. They were charged with assault and murder in connection with the death in custody in August 1991 of Mamadu Jarju, a criminal suspect (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In February the court ruled that Mamadu Jarju had died as a result of torture and convicted two of the three police officers of "assault occasioning grievous bodily harm". Both were sentenced to three years' imprisonment, The third officer was acquitted. Following the judgment, the Director of Public Prosecutions filed an appeal against the acquittal of one officer and the court's failure to convict the other two of murder, a more serious offence punishable by a mandatory death sentence. In December the Appeal Court ruled that the two officers should have been convicted of murder and sentenced them to death. The acquittal of the third officer was confirmed.
The first death sentences since 1987 were imposed. Two men were sentenced to death by the Supreme Court in January and a third man was sentenced to death in March. All three had been convicted of murder. Their appeals had not been heard by the end of the year. On 31 December the two death sentences passed in January were commuted to life imprisonment. One execution only is known to have been carried out since Dawda Jawara became President in 1970.
During the year Amnesty International appealed to President Jawara to commute all death sentences.
