LEBANON
Over 150 people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested by government forces. Most of them were released by December, as were several detainees arrested in previous years. Allegations of torture and ill-treatment con* tinned to be received. Scores of people were abducted during the year and the fate of thousands who were abducted in previous years remained unknown. There were numerous killings, apparently for political reasons, but there was insufficient information to attribute responsibility for these abuses. One death sentence was commuted.
Following widespread protests about the economy in May, a new government was formed under Prime Minister Rashid al-Solh. Elections for the National Assembly, held between August and October, were boycotted by Christian political parties and others. The Christian parties, including the Phalange Party, the Lebanese Forces, the National Liberal Party and supporters of General Michel 'Aoun, later formed the Lebanese Opposition Front; which called for the elections to be declared null and void pending the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon. At the end of October, a new government was formed imder Prime Minister Rafiq al-Hariri.
The Lebanese army continued to gain control of areas previously controlled by armed militias and place them under government jiuisdiction. However, some groups, such as Amal and HizbuUah, retained control of parts of south Lebanon. The South Lebanon Army (sla) retained control over the Jezzine region, and Israeli forces with the sla maintained control of the so-called "security zone" along the Lebanese/Israeli border. Syrian forces withdrew from Beirut airport in April but remained deployed throughout most of the country.
The government announced on several
!
LEBANON
occasions releases of detainees under the 1991 general amnesty, which covered both criminal and political offences. The total number of detainees released was not known. In March the government published official statistics on people killed, wounded or "missing" between 1975 and 1990. Of 17,415 persons listed as "missing", 13,968 were Lebanese nationals said to have been abducted by various armed groups. Their fate remained unknown.
Over 150 people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested by government forces. Among them were three supporters of former President Amin Gemayel, who were arrested in March. Two were soon released uncharged but the third, Ghassan al-Gemayel, was still held apparently without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Between July and November the military authorities arrested over 120 supporters of General Michel 'Aoun, whose forces were driven from East Beirut by Syrian forces and Lebanese army units in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). The majority were believed to have been held in the Ministry of Defence building in Beirut. Some were allegedly tortured (see below). Most were released uncharged, but at least 22 were charged by the end of the year, of whom 11 were still detained. The charges included distribution of leaflets and acts of sabotage.
In October, 27 members of the Lebanese Forces were arrested by Lebanese army persormel in East Beirut. Seven were later released and the 20 others had their cases referred to the military prosecutor; they were accused of state security offences. Among those arrested were Joseph Maroun, Kivork Anshahalian and Tony Romanos.
It was not possible to confirm the continued detention of over 370 people arrested by the Lebanese army during 1991, the majority of whom were Palestinians arrested in Sidon in July following clashes with Palestine Liberation Organization (PLo) forces in the area (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Reports of the torture and ill-treatment of detainees were received during the year. Three brothers arrested in June in connection with a murder were reportedly tortured in Rumieh Prison in Beirut. One of them, 'Adel Hawila, allegedly suffered spinal injuries as a result and was denied medical treatment. Reports were received of the torture of supporters of General 'Aoun arrested in July, August and November. A former detainee who was held for two days told Amnesty International that he and others were handcuffed and severely beaten during interrogation by military police, and that he witnessed some detainees having their heads immersed in water and being subjected to electric shocks.
In November the death sentence passed on Sam'an Habib al-Ahmar, a Lebanese national accused of committing murder in 1972, was commuted to life imprisonment by the Beirut Criminal Court in accordance with the provisions of the 1991 general amnesty.
The sla held a number of prisoners throughout the year, some of whom may have been hostages. At any one time there were some 200 prisoners detained without charge or trial in the Khiam detention centre, which is run by the Sla. Most were suspected of belonging to armed groups engaged in conflict with Israel and the sla. Many were believed to have been tortured during interrogation. Visits by families and the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) were not allowed.
Over 60 members of the Fatah Revolutionary Council, a Palestinian group headed by Abu Nidal, were reportedly detained by Fatah (the main faction of the PLo), in a refugee camp near Sidon. Some were later released, while at least two were said to be awaiting trial by a plo court and may have faced the death penalty.
Heiru^ich Strubig and Thomas Kempt-ner, two German nationals released in June after having been held captive since 1989, stated that they had been ill-treated, including by being handcuffed almost
LEBANONAESOTHO
continuously. A group calling itself the "Organization of Strugglers for Freedom" said it was responsible for their abduction.
During the year scores of people were victims of apparently politically motivated abductions, following which their fate and whereabouts remained unknown. They included four Christians who were abducted in Tibnin in south Lebanon in August. One of the four, Nasri al-Khoury, a lawyer, was released in November; the body of Maroun 'Atmeh was found shortly afterwards and the two others were still missing by the end of the year. Butros Khawand, a member of the Political Bureau of the Phalange Party, was abducted outside his home in East Beirut in mid-September. It was not possible to obtain further information on the fate of thousands of people, including Lebanese, Palestinians, Syrians and other nationals, who had been taken prisoner by armed groups in Lebanon since 1975.
Scores of people were deliberately killed, apparently for political reasons, outside the immediate context of armed conflict. However, there was insufficient information to attribute responsibility for these abuses. Among the victims were Mustafa Juha, a Lebanese journalist killed in January; Anwar Madhi, a senior Fatah commander in Lebanon killed in June; and Walid Khaled, official spokesperson of the Fatah Revolutionary Council killed in July.
Amnesty International sought information from the government about the arrest of political suspects and called for investigations into allegations of torture. It also sought information about individuals whose fate and whereabouts after they were detained or abducted in previous years remained unknown. In October the Minister of the Interior informed Amnesty International that the authorities had found no evidence to support the torture allegations of three brothers arrested in June (see above). In September the organization appealed to President Hrawi to ensure that Palestinians held by the plo in Lebanon received a fair trial by an independent tribunal established by law and to prevent any executions. Amnesty International also appealed to plo leader Yasser 'Arafat to commute any death sentences.
In May, Amnesty International published a report. Israel/South Lebanon: The Khiam detainees; torture and ill-treatment (see Israel and the Occupied Territories entry), calling on the SLA to release any
detainees being held as hostages, to end all forms of torture and ill-treatment and to allow detainees medical attention and visits by the ickc and families . The sla denied that torture took place and said that visits by the icrc would be allowed only if Israeli and sla personnel missing in Lebanon were granted such visits.
