LESOTHO
Twenty-three political prisoners held after unfair trials in 1986 were released. The government stated publicly that it would investigate allegations of torture and extrajudicial executions, but had not apparently done so by the end of the year.
Lesotho became a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in September and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights in February.
The military government had been due to hand over power to an elected civilian administration during 1992. The new Constitution was to include a Bill of Rights enforceable by the courts. However, elections scheduled for November were postponed until January 1993. In July 1992, after protracted negotiations with the government, King Moshoeshoe II, who had been ousted in 1990 and replaced by his son, returned to the country but was not allowed to reclaim his throne.
It was established that riots in May 1991 were not, as reported in the Amnesty International Report 1992, provoked by the actions of Asian shopkeepers. The shopkeepers who beat to death an African woman suspected of theft were themselves Afi-icans of local origin.
During the course of the year 23 people
LESOTHOAIBERIA
imprisoned at the time of the military coup in 1986 were released from custody, the last of them in October, just before the High Court was due to hear an application challenging the legality of their imprisonment (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The 23 were members of the army loyal to the ousted government of Chief Leabua Jonathan. They had been tried in 1986 by a military tribunal, some of whose members had taken part in a gun battle against the accused, which sentenced them to long terms of imprisonment. The 23 had been denied the right to lawyers of their choice or defence witnesses and had had no right of appeal to an independent tribunal.
Amnesty International published a report in June, Lesotho: Torture, political killings and abuses against trade unionists, which documented human rights violations since 1986 and urged the introduction of a number of safeguards for human rights. The government stated publicly that it would investigate the cases mentioned in the report, but had not initiated an independent and impartial investigation by the end of the year.
