SRI LANKA
"Disappearances" and extrajudicial executions continued to be committed by government forces in the northeast, but at a lower rate than in the previous two years. In the south, human rights lawyers, trade unionists and others continued to be subject to intimidation, including death threats. Torture and ill-treatment of political and criminal prisoners appeared to be routine. Some 4,456 detainees were released, but at least 4,823 others continued to be detained without charge or trial under Emergency Regulations and the Prevention of Terrorism Act (pta). Official investigations continued into a few cases of "disappearance" but no action was taken by the government to clarify the fate of tens of thousands who "disappeared" in the period up to January 1991. The secessionist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (ltte) committed gross abuses of human rights.
Armed conflict between government forces and the ltte continued in the northeast with heavy casualties reported on both sides. Control of much of the northeast remained uncertain: the government retained control of towns and most main roads, but fighting continued intermittently
SRI LANKA
in rural areas. The Jaffna peninsula largely remained in ltte hands, but government forces took over part of the peninsula and access was closed. Heightened tensions between the Tamil, Muslim and Sinhalese communities in the east were manifest in a series of communal attacks and counterattacks.
The government of President Rana-singhe Premadasa took steps to implement some of the Amnesty International recommendations for human rights safeguards which it had accepted in December 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, crucial procedural safeguards for the protection of prisoners had not been implemented by the end of the year and the state of emergency remained in force island-wide.
The mandate of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into the Involuntary Removal of Persons was extended for one year, enabling it to investigate "disappearances" occiurring from 11 January 1991 to 11 January 1993, and regional officers were appointed to transmit complaints of "disappearances" to the Commission. The Human Rights Task Force, established in 1991 to maintain a register of detainees and monitor their rights, opened several regional offices and established a 24-hour information service in the capital, Colombo. The United Nations (un) Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances visited Sri Lanka for the second time in October at the government's invitation.
Draft legislation to amend the fundamental rights chapter of the Constitution, to create a new Human Rights Commission and to provide temporary death certificates to relatives of the "disappeared" as a basis for compensation payments, continued to be discussed. However, none of these proposals had been approved or implemented by the end of the year.
The ltte committed numerous gross abuses of human rights, including the deliberate killing of hundreds of non-combatant Muslim and Sinhalese civilians, the arbitrary killing of civilians in bomb attacks on buses and trains, the torture and killing of prisoners, and abductions for ransom. The lite executed several prisoners accused of being informers.
Extrajudicial executions were committed in the northeast by military and ancillary forces, police and home guards.
At Mandur, Batticaloa District, in April, a family of seven were among eight people killed by soldiers and members of the Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization (telo), which operates alongside the army in the east. This followed the killing by the ltte of two telo members. The day after 10 senior army and navy officers had been killed by the ltte on Kayts island in August, soldiers from Poonani camp killed 39 Tamil men, women and children at Mailanthanai, Batticaloa District, over 180 miles away, apparently in reprisal. At least 16 soldiers were remanded in custody following an identity parade, but they had not been charged by the end of the year. Following the extrajudicial execution of some 10 Tamil civilians by government soldiers at Velaveli, Batticaloa District, in October, the government said it would mount an inquiry, but no findings had been published by the end of the year.
In April, following an attack by the ltte on Alanchipotana, a Muslim village in Polonnaruwa District, during which 54 Muslims were shot and stabbed to death, Muslim home guards retaliated by attacking Tamil villages, killing more than 80 Tamils. Police personnel did not attempt to prevent the reprisal attack. A committee of inquiry recommended a review of the home guard system - which had not been completed by the end of the year - and three home guards were charged with murder.
An inquiry into the reprisal killings of 67 civilians in June 1991 in Kokkadich-cholai (see Amnesty International Report 1992) found that the deaths had not resulted from cross-fire, as the military claimed, but from "deliberate retaliatory action" by the army. Twenty military personnel were tried by a military tribunal. None was found guilty of murder. The lieutenant in charge was convicted of failing to control his troops and disposing of bodies illegally at the site of the massacre; he was dismissed from the army. The 19 other military personnel were acquitted.
Scores of "disappearances" in military custody were reported from Batticaloa District, and three in Amparai District from the custody of the Special Task Force (stf), a police commando unit. After 25 young men had been detained by the army in the Kiran area, Batticaloa District, in January and February, 11 were released and the military denied that it had detained the
SRI LANKA
remaining 14. Two of the 14 were later found to be in detention and two more were released, but 10 boys and young men - including 12-year-old Manikkam Siven-thiran - were not accounted for.
"Disappearances" were also reported following detention by Muslim home guards in Batticaloa District. Home guards detained 13 Tamil men, women and children near Thiyavaddavan in April. One boy escaped: the other 12 prisoners "disappeared".
In the south, several imprisoned ¡anatha Vimukthi Peramuna (jvp). People's Liberation Front, suspects were said by the police to have been shot dead during escape attempts or to have committed suicide. Emergency Regulations do not require that full, independent investigations be held into deaths in custody.
In the south, himian rights lawyers, witnesses to human rights violations, journalists and trade unionists received death threats which they believed were made by government forces. Some lawyers refused to accept cases against security force personnel for fear of retaliatory action. Journalists critical of goverrunent policy were intimidated and attacked, including Yoonus, a newspaper cartoonist, who was physically injured and repeatedly threatened by people he identified as associates of a senior government minister.
Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees appeared to be routine in military, stf and police custody in both the northeast and the south. Members of telo and the People's Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (plote), both ancillary forces operating alongside the army, were also said to have tortured prisoners in the east. In Badulla and Nuwara Eliya Districts, torture of Tamil prisoners of Indian origin was reported in both military and police custody. Methods of torture included electric shocks; pouring petrol into prisoners' nostrils and then placing a plastic bag over their heads; suspending prisoners by their thumbs and beating them; beating with barbed wire; repeatedly submerging prisoners' heads in water while they were suspended by their ankles; and rape of women. Criminal suspects were also tortured: for example, a gem miner suspected of theft was beaten on the soles of his feet, suspended by his thumbs and beaten with clubs by Lunugala police in September.
Prisoners were subjected to other forms
of ill-treatment. For example, prisoners, including a 73-year-old man apparently detained in place of his son, were held in chains at Pioneer Road police camp in Batticaloa. Severe overcrowding was reported from the sixth floor of Police Headquarters in Colombo, where political detainees had been held for more than a year in the custody of the Crime Detection Bureau.
According to official figures, 4,456 people detained in the south in connection with the activities of the fvp since their arrest in 1989 or 1990 had been released by the end of September. However, over 4,800 suspected insurgents remained in detention without charge or trial, including some who had been held for over three years. Emergency Regulations empower the authorities to hold suspects indefinitely under administrative orders; the pta permits up to 18 months' administrative detention. In at least 120 cases, the Supreme Court awarded compensation to detainees who had been illegally detained.
According to official figures, in October 4,823 political detainees were being held under Emergency Regulations or the pta; 1,523 in detention camps, 1,113 in prisons, 569 in police custody and 1,618 in rehabilitation camps, to which detainees deemed to have had minor connection with insurgent activity were referred. The number of prisoners held in army camps was not revealed. Of those held in prisons, 826 were said to be held in connection with the conflict in the northeast and 287 in connection with the southern jvp insurgency of 1988 to 1990. The majority of prisoners in detention and rehabilitation camps were Sinhalese.
In the south, hundreds of Tamil people were periodically rounded up in Colombo and screened for connections with the ltte. These arrests were made by the police and by members of the Eelam People's Democratic Party (epdp), an ancillary group which sometimes detained prisoners itself instead of handing them over to police custody. The epdp has no known legal power to arrest and detain prisoners but has not been prevented from doing so by the authorities. Following the assassination by an ltte suicide bomber of the Commander of the Navy in Colombo in November, over 3,000 Tamils were rounded up for questioning and hundreds were kept in detention. In Badulla and Nuwara Eliya Districts, dozens of Tamils of Indian origin
SRI LANKA
were detained without trial on account of their alleged connections with the ltte. Hundreds of Sinhalese people suspected of connections with the jvp were also arrested and detained in the south.
The Commission of Inquiry into Involuntary Removals had completed hearings into six individual cases of "disappearance" in the two years of its existence; no decision was announced as to whether security forces personnel believed responsible for some of these "disappearances" would be prosecuted. Trials of several security forces personnel accused of human rights violations continued, but most had not reached any conclusion by the end of the year.
The ltte also committed gross abuses of human rights. Among the thousands of prisoners believed to be held by the ltte were police and military personnel, Tamils perceived as opponents by the ltte, and Tamils and Muslims who were held as hostages for ransom. Some prisoners were reportedly tortured by the ltte, which only rarely disclosed information about the whereabouts or fate of its political prisoners to their relatives. Those held for ransom included an 84-year-old Tamil man who was abducted by the ltte in September, apparently because he had relatives living abroad who were presumed to be wealthy. In March, 12 of the 32 Muslim businessmen who had been held in Jaffna since 1990 were released, but the fate of the others was not known.
Executions of alleged informers by the ltte continued to be reported. Prisoners sentenced to death in Jaffna were said to have been paraded in public before their execution. One witness described public executions of alleged informers carried out by the ltte near Vavuniya,
Hundreds of non-combatant civilians in the east, particularly Muslims, were killed by ltte forces. For example, in September, 22 people, most of them Muslims, were killed when a bomb exploded in a crowded market place at Sainthamaruthu. In October over 200 Muslim villagers were killed in an early morning attack on four adjacent villages in Polonnaruwa District. Sinhalese civilians were also killed in ltte attacks in the east, such as at Kohongaswewa in Weli Oya, where 15 civilians were killed in October.
Muslims in the east continued to receive death threats from the ltte, apparently in
an effort to force them to evacuate their homes. Residents of Kattankudi, Batticaloa District, received such threats in November, for example.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government that the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into the June 1991 extrajudicial executions at Kokka-dichcholai would not subject the military suspects to cross-examination, and subsequently expressed concern that the suspects were to be tried by a military tribunal and not a civilian court. The government responded by sending Amnesty International a copy of the Commission's interim report. It also said it intended to establish a Human Rights Commission. The trial proceeded before a military tribunal (see above).
In April Amnesty International asked the government whether inquiries had been held following the discovery of 72 bodies on Mandaitivu island, Jaffeia District. The victims were believed to have been prisoners, killed in the custody of the armed forces. The government later told Amnesty International that it had not been possible to investigate these deaths because of the security situation in the area.
In June Amnesty International published Sri Lanka: Deliberate killings of Muslim and Tamil villagers in Polonnaruwa, and asked the government for comments. The government sent Amnesty International a summary of the findings of the inquiry team it had appointed.
Amnesty International appealed to the ltte to halt the killing of civilians. It also repeated its earlier appeals for prisoners to be protected against ill-treatment and hostages to be released.
In October, two Amnesty International representatives visited Sri Lanka to discuss with government officials, local human rights activists and others the implementation of the organization's recommendations for human rights safeguards and the current human rights situation in the northeast and south.
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Hmnan Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Sri Lanka.
