KAZAKHSTAN
One prisoner of conscience was detained on a charge of insulting the President. At least six people were sentenced to death and at least six executions were carried out.
Kazakhstan's independence, declared in December 1991, was recognized internationally following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Headed by President Nur-sultan Nazarbayev, Kazakhstan became a member of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in January and the United Nations in March.
Karishal Asanov, a writer and academic, was held in pre-trial detention from August to November after being charged under Article 170-3 of the criminal code with "infringement upon the honour and dignity of the President". The charge related to the publication in the opposition newspaper Khak, published in Moscow, of an article entitled "Don't believe the President's smile". He was released conditionally in November on the first day of his trial, which ended in his acquittal in December.
Reports indicated that at least six people were sentenced to death in 1992 and six executions were carried out; the true figxu'e was believed to be much higher. Execution is by shooting. Although Kazakhstan retains the death penalty for 18 peacetime offences, statistics shown to Amnesty International by Justice Ministry officials in April indicated that between 1987 and 1991 the death penalty was applied for only four offences: premeditated, aggravated murder; rape; threatening the life of a police officer; and banditry. Between 1987 and 1990 a total of 165 people received death sentences, but at least 41 of them benefited from commutation or pardon. In 1991, 67 death sentences were passed, at least 26 of which were subsequently commuted.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Karishal Asanov and expressed concern that legislation to protect the honour and dignity of the President and People's Deputies appeared to place unwarranted restrictions on freedom of expression.
In April Amnesty International representatives visited Kazakhstan for the first time. They had meetings with the Vice-President and other government officials at which they urged the abolition of the death penalty and discussed prospects for constitutional, legislative and penal reform.
