CAMEROON
Hundreds of government opponents were detained as prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. Most were held without charge or trial after a state of emergency was imposed in one province in October. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees; one detainee died from his injuries. Prison conditions were harsh and at least 17 prisoners under sentence of death were reported to have died from malnutrition and medical neglect. At least 130 other prisoners were reportedly under sentence of death but no new death sentences or executions were reported.
President Paul Biya was re-elected in October, narrowly defeating his main rival, John Fru Ndi of the Social Democratic Front (sdf), whose party had boycotted in March the first multi-party legislative elections since 1964. Amid reports of widespread electoral fraud, the sdf declared that it would not accept the results. Following rioting in Bamenda, the provincial capital, in which at least three people died, the goverrunent imposed a state of emergency in North-West Province on 27 October. Hundreds of people, most of them sdf supporters, were then detained without charge or trial in Bamenda and other towns. Under heavy international pressure, the government lifted the state of emergency in late December and released over 170 detainees and 150 people restricted to John Fru Ndi's compound (see below).
In February President Biya inaugurated a human rights monitoring body, the Comité national des droits de l'homme et des libertés (cndhl), the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms. Set up by decree in November 1990, its members - representatives of governmental and non-governmental bodies - were appointed by President Biya, to whom the Commission reports. On at least two occasions the work of the Commission was blocked. In early May the head of the Commission was refused access to a political detainee (see below), was himself briefly detained and had documents confiscated. In November it visited detainees in Bamenda held by the Brigade Mixte Mobile (bmm), the security police, and found evidence of systematic torture. It was refused permission to visit detainees restricted under house arrest. Its reports, which condemned what it had
CAMEROON
found but made no concrete recommendations, were not published but were leaked to the national press. The Commission undertook other investigations but did not make its reports public.
There were intercommunal disturbances in several parts of the country which resulted in deaths. Two died in the capital, Yaoundé. in January. The same month intercommunal fighting in Kousséri in the far north of the country left as many as 300 dead, including six executed extrajudicially by the armed forces. Further fighting in the north in November left about 10 dead. Intercommunal disturbances in Meiganga in April also resulted in killings.
Critics and opponents of the government were detained and tortured or ill-treated. Those detained included four members of the banned Comité d'action populaire pour ¡a liberté et la démocratie (cap Liberté), Popular Action Committee for Liberty and Democracy, who were arrested in the first weeks of 1992. All were prisoners of conscience. Jean-Michel Nintcheu was arrested on 3 January at his printing works in Douala, which police reportedly ransacked. He went on hunger-strike after being denied hospital treatment for injuries allegedly caused by police beatings, particularly on the soles of his feet. All four detainees were released uncharged by March, but Jean-Michel Nintcheu and another of them, Gabriel Wato, who had also been beaten in police custody, were again briefly detained several times in the following months. On 20 July both men and one of the others detained in January were charged with incitement to revolt and criticizing the government in the name of a banned organization. The case had not been heard by the end of the year.
At least three of some 40 people arrested in Bamenda on 11 February were prisoners of conscience. The arrests followed a peaceful demonstration, one of several held in western Cameroon before the elections calling for greater autonomy for the English-speaking region. Three leading members of the Cameroon Anglophone Movement were charged with organizing an unauthorized public meeting and released on bail in March. Two of them, Dr Zama Kimbi Ndefru and Blaise Berinyuy, were beaten and trampled on at the gendarmerie headquarters in Bamenda at the time of their arrest. All 40 detainees were reportedly held in cramped and filthy cells
and were given insufficient food and water. When Dr Ndefru requested medical attention he was beaten again and drenched with cold water. He needed hospital treatment on his release. Most of the other detainees were released without charge after short periods. Dr Ndefru was detained again on 13 November under the state of emergency (see below) and was held until the end of the year.
Student leader and prisoner of conscience Senfo Tonkam was released in April after serving a five-month prison term for carrying false identity papers. He appeared to have been prosecuted because of an open letter he had sent to President Biya (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
The authorities misused administrative detention powers aimed at preventing "banditry" to imprison their opponents. In May at least 16 sdf members were detained without charge in Nkambe, North-West Province, on the basis of administrative detention orders. They were accused of holding illegal political rallies and inciting violence - but not of "banditry". It was not known whether they had been released by the end of the year. In October the Minister of Territorial Administration (Interior) claimed publicly that administrative detention was needed to maintain public order.
Following the imposition of the state of emergency, hundreds of people, mostly sdf supporters, were detained or restricted without charge or trial both in North-West Province and in other parts of the country where no emergency was in force. The authorities said that only about 50 people had been arrested and accused opposition leaders of inciting violence. Those detained included Nyo Wakai, a former President of the Supreme Court, who was beaten after his arrest. Victorin François Hameni Bieleu, the sdf campaign manager and leader of another opposition party, was detained on 3 November after visiting 50 opposition supporters detained without charge in Nkongsamba, Coastal Province, for a month from 28 October.
On 25 October the Bamenda compound of John Fru Ndi was surrounded by armed gendarmes and police. He and about 150 supporters were restricted there, effectively detained without charge or trial. Several became ill after initially being denied food and medical care, and owing to lack of adequate shelter and clothing.
CAMEROON
Detainees in North-West Province were held under the provisions of the state of emergency which permitted the Minister of Territorial Administration to impose administrative detention without charge or trial for up to four months and Provincial Governors and Senior Divisional Officers to authorize such detentions for up to 15 and seven days respectively. On 23 December the High Court in Bamenda ordered the release of over 170 detainees held under state of emergency provisions by the security police in Bamenda. The government challenged this decision, saying the court did not have the powers to release administrative detainees. The Bamenda detainees were transferred to Yaoundé and were released on 31 December after their cases were reviewed by the State Security Court. It appeared that some other detainees held under the emergency provisions had not been released by the end of the year. Following mass demonstrations in Bamenda by SDF supporters and under increasing international pressure, the state of emergency was lifted and John Fru Ndi and his supporters were released from house arrest.
In Douala, outside the area under the state of emergency, about 50 opposition supporters were detained for 24 hours following a demonstration on 26 October, Some were reported to have been severely beaten, including Sdf member Moukouri Manga Bell. At the end of the year, at least 13 people were reportedly still detained incommunicado at the palace of the traditional ruler of Rey Bouba, Northern Province. They were among about 70 opposition supporters illegally detained before and after the presidential elections, apparently with the knowledge of the local government authorities.
There were also reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees by gendarmes and police before the elections. Supporters of opposition parties, including the Union nationale pour la démocratie et le progrès. National Union for Democracy and Progress, were among over 50 people detained without charge following election disturbances on 1 March in Balikumbat, North-West Province, They were said to have been badly beaten following their arrest and held in harsh conditions at the gendarmerie in Bamenda. Some appeared to be prisoners of conscience. More than 30 were believed still held at the end of the year.
On 6 May some 50 students at the University of Yaoundé were briefly detained and reportedly tortured and ill-treated by soldiers. They were publicly stripped, beaten with rifle butts and had their heads shaved with broken bottles. One student leader was reportedly stripped in public before being led to the local gendarmerie where the head of the cndhl was denied access to her. The students were commemorating the deaths of two students in disturbances in May 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). There had also been arrests of students in March and April after violent protests over the authorities' failure to pay study grants.
In response to the refusal of some communities to pay taxes, in continuance of the 1991 civil disobedience campaign, the gendarmerie launched a series of mass operations in opposition strongholds, during which they committed systematic violations of human rights. For example, for six days from 29 May, gendarmes reportedly made repeated assaults on the town of Bali in North-West Province, raping women and looting and destroying property after the local population protested against extortion by gendarmes at road-blocks.
At Ndu, North-West Province, on 6 June, gendarmes fired into a crowd which had attacked them after they arrested suspected tax-defaulters. At least four civilians were shot. Three days later gendarmes ransacked Ndu on the pretext of recovering unpaid taxes, assaulting anyone who resisted, Some women were reportedly raped. They arrested up to 100 people, including children, reportedly kicking and beating them with gun butts. Many of the detainees were sdf supporters. Most were released the same day after further beatings and ill-treatment, including sexual humiliation. However, Mary Biena Kimbi, an sdf member, and six men were detained for several weeks under administrative detention orders for political reasons.
Detainees held under the state of emergency were beaten at the gendarmerie headquarters and by the security police in Bamenda. One detainee died as a result of torture. Ghandi Che Ngwa, an accountant detained on 9 November, was suspended by his arms and legs from a metal bar and beaten severely by security police. Four days later he was transferred to the military hospital: his body was bruised and swollen
cameroon/canada
and some of his toe-nails were missing. He died a week later. Other detainees transferred to the military hospital included a 17-year-old youth detained on 8 November, who had also been suspended from a bar and beaten. An officer was reported to have subsequently jumped on his stomach and kicked him while he was lying on the ground. He received no medical treatment at the military hospital and required major surgery after being transferred to a civilian hospital on 20 November. At Kumba, South-West Province, dozens of opposition supporters were allegedly tortured at the palace of a traditional ruler after the presidential elections, reportedly with the knowledge of gendarmes guarding the building.
At least six people killed by security forces during intercommunal fighting appeared to have been extrajudicially executed. In January, during clashes in Kousséri in northern Cameroon, the armed forces were reported to have detained six people allegedly involved in the fighting and executed them without any form of trial.
Prison conditions generally remained harsh, particularly at Tcholliré prison camp in Northern Province. Inmates there were held naked in overcrowded cells, without being allowed out for exercise, and were given inadequate food and water. No medical care was available and any medicines prisoners managed to obtain were confiscated by prison guards. Prisoners who complained about conditions were beaten and held in dark punishment cells for up to seven days. In May a delegation ft-om the cndhl visited the prison and reported that 40 prisoners under sentence of death had died there, apparently from malnutrition and medical neglect, since May 1990, including 17 between January and May 1992. It reported that over 130 death row prisoners were held in chains day and night and no medical care was available: prisoners either recovered without treatment or died. The Commission found approximately 30 prisoners in critical condition.
At leasi 130 prisoners were believed to be on death row but no further death sentences were known to have been imposed during 1992, nor executions carried out: the last was in 1987, On 28 December the government announced that it had commuted the death sentences on some
categories of prisoners convicted of aggravated theft, but provided no details of the prisoners concerned
Amnesty International appealed to the government to release all prisoners of conscience and to either try other political detainees fairly and promptly, or release them. It called on the authorities to take urgent action to safeguard detainees against torture and ill-treatment, and for independent investigations into all allegations of torture and unlawful killings. However, no action was known to have been taken by the government to safeguard prisoners or to bring those responsible to justice. Amnesty International also criticized the authorities' misuse of their administrative detention powers to detain political opponents.
In April Amnesty International called for immediate steps to be taken to prevent further deaths at Tcholliré prison camp, It also called for an independent judicial inquiry into the deaths and for those responsible to be brought to justice. In response, the head of the prison service publicly denied that there were food shortages at Tcholliré prison. The Minister for Territorial Administration stated that six prisoners only had died there, in a recent dysentery epidemic.
