PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Dozens of suspected supporters of the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (bra), a secessionist group in Bougainville, were killed in extrajudicial executions by gov< emment forces; at least three others reportedly "disappeared". Torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported throughout the country. Serious human rights abuses, including the killing of prisoners, were reportedly committed by bra members.
General elections were held in June and Paias Wingti, head of the People's Democratic Movement, was elected Prime Minister in July. He vowed to revive the nation's economy, to tackle official corruption and to resolve the political status of Bougainville island, where an interim government, backed by the bra, had declared independence in May 1990.
Armed conflict continued on Bougainville between the Papua New Guinea Defence Forces (pngdf) and the bra. There were persistent reports of pngdf patrol boats shelling coastal towns and villages in the central and southern regions of Bougainville, causing residents to flee
their homes. In October the government announced a military offensive to recapture central Bougainville and pngdf patrol boats shelled the island's capital, Arawa. Government soldiers were also reported to have burned houses and destroyed livestock belonging to suspected bra supporters. In March and September the pngdf carried out commando raids into the neighbouring Solomon Islands, ostensibly to prevent Solomon Islanders from supplying fuel and ammunition to bra members. Following protests by the Solomon Islands, the png authorities acknowledged the raids but claimed they were unauthorized by the central government.
Despite an agreement signed in 1991 to restore essential services to Bougainville, delivery of food and medicine to the central part of the island continued to be obstructed by the pngdf. In February bra members impounded, then burned a ship carrying medical supplies to Bougainville, leading the government to intensify its blockade.
Dozens of people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by government troops in Bougainville. Among the victims were at least three people reportedly killed when pngdf troops strafed boats delivering goods to the island.
In May pngdf troops reportedly entered Okogupa village in Aita and fired indiscriminately, killing an estimated 17 residents, possibly many more. Among those reported killed were village chief Silas Ausie, his wife and five children; and a man named Kapuitoi and his family. Witnesses said the killings occurred while villagers were sleeping after anniversary celebrations marking the 1990 declaration of Bougainville's independence.
Two people were killed and a three-year-old girl wounded when pngdf troops raided the Solomon Islands on 12 September. Those killed were Peter Kamaraia, a shopkeeper, and his sister. Jacinta Popo. Another man, Francis Beiaruru, was abducted after the killings and detained for several days during which he said he was questioned and accused of selling arms to the bra, which he denied. The png Government condemned the raid, which it said was unauthorized. In October the government officially apologized for the troops' actions and said those responsible would be suspended and faced disciplinary action.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA/PARAGUAY
At least three people reportedly "disappeared" in military custody. Michael Vinias, Kevin Tabu and Richard Kikira were reportedly arrested on 29 August while travelling from the Solomon Islands to the Tubiana mission station in Bougainville with a boat-load of food and fuel. Military officials denied that the three had been detained by pngdf soldiers on Torauto Island. There were unconfirmed reports that Michael Vinias and Kevin Tabu were subsequently killed and that Richard Kikira was taken to Buka Island and detained fhere.
Torture and ill-treatment by the security forces continued to be reported in Bougainville and throughout Papua New Guinea. In the Wakunai district of Bougainville, villagers were reportedly subjected to threats and beatings during May anniversary celebrations of Bougainville's 1990 declaration of independence, and two men were said to have had their fingers chopped off by soldiers. On mainland Papua New Guinea, police and military violence appeared to have increased during the election campaign. In July residents of Pempemeri and Gramaugle villages in Goroko province were reportedly threatened and beaten by soldiers after failed electoral candidates from the region had allegedly incited "tribal war". Up to 22 villagers were reportedly arrested and held incommunicado for four days, during which they said they were beaten, before being released without charge. The detainees subsequently filed a complaint with the police authorities but there were no reports of any official investigations being held by the end of the year.
Serious human rights abuses by the bra were reported throughout the year. Civilians in various parts of the island reported being beaten and raped by bra members, and others said they had been subjected to death threats and verbally abused. At least seven people taken prisoner by the bra were reported to have been summarily executed. Anthony Anugu and six others were allegedly shot dead in April. The seven were apparently accused of betraying the bra because they had sought to negotiate a separate constitution for south Bougainville with the png authorities.
In October Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government about human rights violations committed by the armed forces in Bougainville. It
lurged the government to initiate thorough and impartial investigations into human rights violations in- Bougainville, and to bring suspected perpetrators to justice. Amnesty International also called on the government to ratify international human rights treaties and to permit international humanitarian and legal organizations to monitor human rights in Bougainville.
