UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Thirty-one prisoners were executed, more than in any one year since executions were resumed in 1977. More than 2,600 prisoners were under sentence of death in 34 states. Four states carried out their first executions in a quarter-century or more. Ail 33 conscientious objectors to the Gulf conflict adopted as prisoners of conscience were released after serving their sentences. There were reports of torture, ill-treatment and excessive force by police or prison officials. New appeals were lodged in the cases of several pris-oners who alleged that their prosecutions were racially or politically motivated. Thousands of Haitian asylum-seekers were forcibly returned to Haiti without a hearing.
In November Bill Clinton, a Democrat, was elected to succeed Republican George Bush as President of the United States of America (usa) in January 1993.
The USA ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in June. However, it entered a large number of reservations in which it did not accept all of the terms in several non-derogable articles, including Article 6 on the right to life, and Article 7 prohibiting torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Thirty-one prisoners were executed, bringing the number of executions since 1977 to 188. Arizona, California, Delaware and Wyoming carried out their first executions in 25 years or more (the first for 46 years in the case of Delaware). Texas had the largest number of executions; others were carried out in Alabama, Arkansas,
Florida, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Utah and Virginia.
In February in Texas Johnny Garrett became the fifth juvenile offender to be executed in the usa since the death penalty was reinstated, in violation of international standards which prohibit the execution of people aged under 18 at the time of the crime.
Johnny Garrett was convicted of raping and murdering an elderly nun in 1981 when he was aged 17. He had been sexually and physically abused as a child and had sustained severe head injuries resulting in brain damage. He was described by a psychiatrist as "one of the most psychiatrically impaired inmates" she had ever examined and by a psychologist as having "one of the most virulent histories of abuse and neglect .., encountered in over 28 years of practice". The Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles denied clemency despite appeals from the convent of the murdered nun and religious leaders.
At least six other prisoners suffering from mental illness, brain damage or mental retardation were executed, in violation of United Nations (un) guidelines.
They included Ricky Rector, who was executed in Arkansas in January despite being severely brain damaged from shooting himself in the head after killing a police officer (the crime for which he was later sentenced to death) and subsequently undergoing a frontal lobotomy. The Supreme Court denied a petition for federal review of his mental competence to be executed.
Witnesses reported hearing loud moans from the chamber where Ricky Rector was executed by lethal injection, as technicians searched for nearly an hour to find a suitable vein in which to insert the needle.
Many of the executed prisoners had received inadequate legal representation at their trials, with court-appointed lawyers failing, for example, to present crucial mitigating evidence to the sentencing hearing, including a history of mental illness or abuse.
Roger Coleman was executed in Virginia in May for the rape and murder of his sister-in-law in 1982. The execution went ahead despite doubts which had been raised about his guilt. He had been represented at trial by lawyers who had never handled a murder or rape case before and who failed to investigate many points of
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
evidence. His appeal lawyers inadvertently filed an appeal to the state court one day too late, resulting in its dismissal on procedural grounds. The us Supreme Court dismissed his appeal in June 1991.
All 33 conscientious objectors adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience for refusing to participate in the Gulf conflict had completed their sentences and been released by the end of the year.
There were allegations of torture, ill-treatment or excessive force, including lethal force, by police or prison officials across the country.
In April, four officers of the Los Angeles Police Department (lapd) charged under California law in connection with the beating of a black motorist in March 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992] were acquitted in a controversial jury decision which led to serious rioting in Los Angeles. The officers were later indicted on federal civil rights charges arising from the beating, trial of which was pending at the end of the year.
In July an inquiry into the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department (lasd) conducted by Judge Kolts (the Kolts inquiry) found a serious problem of excessive force, including physical brutality and unjustified shootings of unarmed suspects by patrol officers as well as ill-treatment of jail inmates. The inquiry found that the lack of discipline in many cases and inadequacies in the investigation of complaints suggested that the department was "tolerant" of excessive force. It made a number of recommendations for improving the complaints and disciplinary process. The lasd accepted only some of the recommendations.
Trial in a civil rights action against Sheriffs deputies from the Lynwood police station, Los Angeles, was still pending at the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In July a juvenile court quashed the confession of a 13-year-old murder defendant who alleged he was subjected to electric shocks while being interrogated by Chicago detectives in September 1991. One of a group of teenagers arrested after a shooting, he was reportedly interrogated over a 24-hour period without a responsible adult present, contrary to state law and police guidelines relating to minors.
In March the Chicago police department concluded hearings into allegations that
three officers had tortured a murder suspect in 1982, but no result had been given by the end of the year. The department's Office of Professional Standards had recommended dismissal of the officers in 1991 after reinvestigating the allegations (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In April Vaughn Dortch, an inmate of Pelican Bay Prison, California, suffered severe burns which required skin grafts after four guards and a prison medical officer allegedly forced him into a bath of scalding water while he was handcuffed, shackled and gagged. Several months earlier, lawyers had filed a civil rights action on behalf of Pelican Bay prisoners alleging a pattern of cruel treatment, including practices such as chaining mentally disturbed inmates to showers and toilets, shackling inmates for prolonged periods and the use of excessive force, including beatings. The outcome of this action and a criminal investigation into the April incident was pending at the end of the year.
David Carriger, an inmate of the Northwest Correctional Center, Vermont, was found dead in his cell in July after he had been involved in an altercation with guards. A prisoner alleged that he had been choked and beaten by guards and left unattended and shackled for an hour, despite being injured and apparently unconscious. Prison and civil liberties groups questioned the independence of an internal prison inquiry into the incident which found that no excessive force had been used; they claimed to have received numerous reports of beatings, medical neglect and other abuses at the prison and called for a full investigation into all these complaints. No further action had been taken by the end of the year.
There were complaints of ill-treatment of inmates at the Maximum Control Complex (mcc) of Westville Prison, Indiana, which opened in 1991 to house prisoners with serious disciplinary problems. Complaints included the lack of social contact between inmates, inadequate exercise, plus alleged beatings and inappropriate use of restraints.
In September and October three Native American inmates of the Young Adult Correctional Facility in Utah were confined to their cells for 24 hours a day and threatened with transfer to a maximum security prison when they refused for religious reasons to comply with an order to cut their
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
hair. Amnesty International expressed the view that placing them in lockdown imder the circumstances could amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading pimishment.
A federal investigation into allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners at Montana State Penitentiary following a riot in September 1991 ended in October, when the us Justice Department reported that no criminal civil rights charges would be brought as it had foimd no evidence that guards had engaged in malicious or unjustified acts. A National Institution of Corrections inquiry had earlier reported serious abuses by guards following the riot.
The outcome of an administrative inquiry into complaints of ill-treatment of prisoners at two Coimecticut prisons in January and April 1991 was still pending at the end of the year.
An order issued by President Bush in May allowed the us authorities to forcibly return to Haiti all Haitian asylum-seekers intercepted in international waters by the us Coast Guard, without giving any of them an opportunity to apply for asylum or attempting to examine the merits of their claims. By the end of the year, more than 25,000 Haitians had been returned to Haiti under this order. Since late 1991 Haitians intercepted at sea had been brought to the us naval base at Guantanamo, Cuba, where they were "screened" to determine whether they were at risk if returned to Haiti. At the end of the year, the legality of the executive order was being considered by the us Supreme Court.
In November, new arguments were presented in the case of Leonard Peltier, a leader of the American Indian Movement convicted of murder in 1977 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Fifty-five members of the Canadian Parliament supported his appeal, contending that Leonard Peltier had been wrongfully extradited from Canada on false affidavits in 1976.
In June Amnesty International published a report, usa: Torture, ill-treatment and excessive force by police in Los Angeles. California. The report suggested that members of the lapd and lasd regularly resorted lo excessive force, particularly in black and latino neighbourhoods. It documented more than 30 cases involving physical brutality, unjustified shootings and the use of police dogs to inflict unwarranted injuries on suspects. The report acknowledged that some steps had been taken to
address the problem of excessive force, including implementation of some recommendations made by an independent commission on the lapd in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Amnesty International's recommendations included incorporating un guidelines on the use of force and firearms into police codes of practice, a review of the use of canine units and an independent oversight of complaints against both departments.
In July Amnesty International wrote to the lapd asking to be informed of the outcome of an inquiry into the fatal police shooting of an unarmed black truck driver, John Daniels Jr. on 1 July. No response had been received by the end of the year.
In October Amnesty International wrote to the lasd and the Los Angeles Board of Supervisors, reiterating its concerns in light of the findings of the Kolts inquiry and mging full implementation of its recommendations.
During the year. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities about allegations of ill-treatment in prisons, including the burning of Vaughn Dortch and conditions in Pelican Bay State Prison: the death of David Carriger and the alleged ill-treatment and medical neglect of other inmates at the Northwest Correctional Center, Vermont; conditions at the mcc, Westville, Indiana: alleged abuses of inmates of Montana State Penitentiary and two Connecticut prisons in 1991 and the punishment of Native American prisoners who refused to cut their hair on religious grounds at the Young Adult Correctional Facility in Utah. Amnesty International also wrote to the federal authorities about the isolation of inmates in the maximum security K-Unit of Marion Prison: and it urged a review of a Washington State prison policy of intimate body searches of women prisoners by male guards. Amnesty International received replies from the prison authorities in Vermont, Indiana and Washington, denying ill-treatment or excessive force in the cases cited. The Warden of Pelican Bay Prison replied that a medical assistant involved in the bathing of Vaughn Dortch had been dismissed and that the other allegations were being investigated by the federal courts. Replies were also received from the Bureau of Prisons about K-Unit of Marion Prison, and from state and federal officials about Montana State Penitentiary.
Amnesty International wrote to the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA/URUGUAY
Attorney General of Mississippi in November, urging that a full, independent inquiry be held into the death of a black youth, Andre Lamond Jones, found hanged in August in a Mississippi jail. Although his death had been ruled a suicide, no inquest was held and family and community members expressed concern about the circumstances. The Attorney General replied that extensive inquiries had been conducted into the case but gave no further information. Amnesty International continued to seek information on the case.
In oral statements to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August and its Working Group on Indigenous Populations in July, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in the usa. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in the usa. In November Amnesty International published a report, f/S/i; Human rights and American Indians. Cases described in the report included prisoners under sentence of death; allegations of ill-treatment; fair trial concerns in the case of Leonard Peltier and concerns surrounding the unsolved murder of an Indian lawyer, Julian Pierce, in North Carolina in 1988.
