TADZHIKISTAN
Unarmed civilians and Commonwealth of Independent States (cis) military personnel were reportedly deliberately killed by members of the security forces and armed groups subordinate to the government. A political prisoner was denied adequate access to defence counsel.
Tadzhikistan's independence, declared in September 1991, was recognized internationally following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Tadzhikistan became a member of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe in January and the United Nations in March.
In May. following protests in the capital, Dushanbe. President Rakhmon Nabiyev included opposition politicians in a coalition goverrunent. In September President Nabiyev was forced to resign and parliamentary speaker Akbarsho Iskandarov became acting Head of State. He was
TADZHIKISTAN/TAIWAN
replaced in November, with Imamali Rakhmanov becoming parliamentary speaker and Head of State.
In separate incidents in May, during armed conflict between supporters. and opponents of President Nabiyev, nine reportedly unarmed demonstrators and two members of the as armed forces were said to have been deliberately shot dead in Dushanbe by members of the security forces loyal to the President, cis armed forces were at that time maintaining a declared position of neutrality.
Armed conflict continued for the rest of the year, principally in the Kulyab and Kiugan-Tyube regions of southern Tadzhikistan. Armed groups were divided along both political and clan lines. Officials estimated that up to 20,000 people were killed and more than 420,000 people fled their homes in the conflict zones. There were reports of deliberate killings of unarmed civilians by the rival armed groups. In December, following the fall of Dushanbe to forces loyal to the administration of Imamali Rakhmanov, there were reports of the extrajudicial execution in the city of dozens of unarmed civilians suspected of supporting the opposition. Forces subordinate to the Ministry of Internal Affairs reportedly targeted for summary execution people from the Pamir and Garm regions of eastern Tadzhikistan as well as independent joiunalists.
Political prisoner Maksud Ikramov, a former mayor of Dushanbe who was identified with the opposition to President Nabiyev, was denied adequate access to defence counsel in the weeks immediately following his detention in March on corruption charges. Maksud Ikramov was released in October and the charges against him were dropped.
The death penalty remained in force for 18 peacetime offences. No death sentences were known to have been passed. Figures made available to Amnesty International during the year by the as Statistical Committee indicated that six death sentences had been passed in 1990 in Tadzhikistan and six in 1991. There had been one execution in 1990 and none in 1991. Execution is by shooting.
In June Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the reportedly deliberate killing by members of the security forces of unarmed demonstrators and as military personnel
in May, and welcomed the establishment of an official commission to investigate these and other killings in Dushanbe. In December Amnesty International expressed concern about the reported extrajudicial executions of people from the Pamir and Garm regions and independent journalists. The organization called on the government to undertake a full and impartial investigation, and to take all measures necessary to ensure that forces under government control were aware of and conformed to international standards on the use of force. Amnesty International raised with the authorities the issue of Maksud Ikramov's access to defence counsel, and continued to press for the abolition of the death penalty.
