UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Ten Indian nationals sentenced to six-year prison terms for allegedly insulting Islam were prisoners of conscience. Two Iraqi nationals who were detained without charge or trial for several months also appeared to be prisoners of conscience. One prisoner was sentenced to the amputation of his hand and two others to floggings. At least six people were sentenced to death but no executions were reported.
Ten Indian nationals were arrested in June for their involvement in a play staged at the Indian Association in Sharjah in May. The play was considered to be insulting to Islam and the prophets Mohammad and Jesus. In October, eight actors, a video photographer and the President of the Indian Association were convicted of blasphemy by a Sharjah court and each sentenced to six-year prison terms followed by deportation.
At least two Iraqi nationals were detained wit^iout charge or trial during the year, apparently for political reasons in connection with the 1991 Gulf War. They were arrested on separate occasions when they tried to renew their residence permits. One was held from October 1991 to the end of February 1992, and the other was arrested in January 1992 and held in
incommunicado detention for at least three months.
A Syrian national was convicted of theft and sentenced to the amputation of his hand by an Abu Dhabi court in July. In August a Ras al-Khaimah court sentenced a Pakistani man to a flogging of 60 lashes and four months' imprisonment and a "woman, whose identity was not revealed, to 90 lashes and 18 months' imprisonment: both had been convicted of adultery.
In September the federal government introduced the death penalty for drug-trafficking. In October a Sharjah coiul sentenced three Pakistani nationals to death under the new law. Three people convicted of rape were sentenced to death: two in July and one in November. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International appealed to the Minister of Justice for the release of the 10 prisoners of conscience. It urged the government of President Shaikh Zayed bin Sultan A1 Nahayan to commute all death sentences and not to widen the use of the death penalty. The organization called for punishments such as flogging and amputation to be replaced ^Jy an alternative form of punishment which does not amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Amnesty International received a detailed response from the President expressing confidence in the death penalty's deterrent effect on serious crimes and questioning the effectiveness of alternative forms of punishment. He also gave assurances as to the fairness of appeals procedures in capital cases under United Arab Emirates law.
