PAKISTAN
Scores of prisoners of conscience were held for their political activities or religious beliefis. Thousands of opposition party activists were arrested, many of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. Some were detained briefly, others repeatedly arrested on apparently false criminal charges. Many detainees were subjected to torture or ill-treatment. At least 15 detainees died in custody, allegedly as a result of torture. The secur-ity forces reportedly committed at least 20 extrajudicial executions. Over 130 death sentences were reported, most of them imposed by special courts which failed to meet international standards for fair trial. Nineteen executions were reported.
Political and criminal violence continued throughout the year, particularly in Sindh Province. The government of Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif blamed the opposition Pakistan People's Party (ppp) for much of the violence, a charge which the ppp denied, ppp supporters and members of other opposition parties were systematically harassed through mass police roundups and detentions.
During an "anti-crime operation" which began in late May in Sindh, the army reportedly committed numerous human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions. An ordinance issued in July by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan granted immunity from prosecution to members of the army for all acts undertaken "in good faith" during law and order operations. Hundreds of activists of the Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (mqm), Mohajir National Movement, were arrested from June onwards, after the
army uncovered 23 cells in Karachi in which the mqm had allegedly tortiued its opponents.
A bill providing for a mandatory death penalty for blasphemy against the Prophet Mohammed was adopted by the Senate in July. The National Assembly delayed its assent for more than the stipulated 90 days, causing the bill to lapse. It was unclear whether courts were legally bound to impose death sentences for blasphemy. A government order issued in October that personal identity cards should indicate an individual's religious affiliation led members of religious minorities to fear harassment.
The trials on charges of corruption of former ppp Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto continued. Her husband, Asif Ali Zardari, was acquitted in a murder case, but he remained in judicial custody on other charges.
Scores of prisoners of conscience were held on account of their non-violent political activities or their religious beliefs. Tahir Iqbal, a Christian held since December 1990 on apparently false charges of having used blasphemous language (see Amnesty International Report 1992], died in a Lahore prison in July in unclear circumstances. A court-ordered post-mortem had not been carried out by the end of the year. Another Christian, Gul Masih, was sentenced to death for blasphemy in November. He had been imprisoned in Sargoda, Punjab Province, since December 1991, The conviction was apparently secured solely on the basis of the complainant's testimony. Gul Masih's appeal before the Lahore High Court was pending at the end of the year.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community continued to be imprisoned solely for the peaceful exercise of their religious faith. In November, 10 Ahmadis of Chak village in Faisalabad district were sentenced to three-year prison sentences for having distributed invitations to a prayer meeting; one of them, Mohammed Ali, was given an additional three-year prison sentence for having made a call to prayer. Ahmadis were increasingly tried on blasphemy charges, both individually and in groups, but none of the cases had iDeen completed by the end of 1992. In March, 20 members of the Ahmadiyya community in Kotri were arrested during the Friday prayer and charged with blasphemy and with propagating their
PAKISTAN
faith. They were released on bail after two weeks.
Two journalists - Mohammed Ishaq Tunio of The Nation and Shafi Bejoro of Aftab - were briefly detained and reportedly tortured by police in April because they intended to publish information on alleged vote rigging in a by-election.
G.M. Syed, the ailing 89-year-old leader of the Jeay Sindh Mahaz Qsm), Long Live Sindh Front, was held under house arrest from January under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance, after a speech in which he expressed'his hope for an independent Sindh. Arrest warrants were later issued against eight other jsm activists, but their trial on sedition charges had not taken place by the end of the year.
Thousands of opposition party activists were detained during the year, many of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. About 1,000 ppp members were rounded up in late May in Sindh Province before a rally to protest against alleged vote rigging. In November thousands were detained before and during a ppp protest march on Islamabad. Among those arrested were 12 members of the non-governmental Human Rights Commission of Pakistan monitoring the demonstration. They were released after 30 hours, following appeals by foreign journalists and diplomats.
During the army operation in Sindh which began in late May, relatives and friends of mqm activists were reportedly arrested in place of suspects. In October the Chief Justice of Sindh ordered the release of the 70-year-old father of an mqm leader and reprimanded the police for arresting "relatives and friends of the nominated accused though no such law exists which justifies this action".
Most opposition supporters were released after a few days or weeks, but the practice of repeatedly bringing apparently false criminal charges against some opposition leaders persisted (see Amnesty International Report 1992). For example, member of parliament and former ppp provincial minister Pir Mazhar-ul-Haq had been detained on seven successive criminal charges in 1990: he was cleared of all but one charge for lack of evidence and was held under two preventive detention orders. In 1991,10 further criminal charges were brought against him, five of which were dropped during that year. In January 1992, three co-defendants withdrew state-
ments implicating Pir Mazhar-ul-Haq, and declared that these had been obtained "under duress, coercion and torture". Two further criminal charges were lodged against him in May and August; a detention order under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance was revoked in August. Pir Mazhar-uI-Haq was held on kidnapping charges from April to June and again for several days in September.
Many political prisoners were held in unacknowledged detention. Some were moved from one police station to another to make it difficult for their families to find them. In some cases police defied court orders aimed at tracing people held in unacknowledged detention.
Torture, including rape, and various forms of ill-treatment were frequently inflicted on political and criminal detainees to extract confessions, and in some cases to obtain information about suspected government opponents. For example, when Mushtaq Saigol, an mqm activist, and his sons were arrested in October, his wife was hit with rifle butts and threatened that her sons would be shot if she did not reveal the whereabouts of a particular mqm leader. During mass arrests of ppp demonstrators in November, several people were beaten by police and some were tortured in police custody. Salman Taseer, ppp Information Secretary, was allegedly hung upside-down for four hours and beaten in Dharampura police station in Lahore. Several journalists covering the demonstration, including Mariana Baber of The News, were severely beaten by police in Islamabad.
Although press reports of incidents of torture sometimes referred to "investigations", Amnesty International knew of no cases in which police or security force personnel were convicted of inflicting torture.
At least 15 detainees were reported to have died in custody as a result of torture. Mohammed Yusuf Jakhrani, President of the National Democratic Party, died in June in Pano Aqil cantonment near Kandhkot in Sindh Province after six days in detention. The police said that his death was due to heart failure, but his body bore extensive skin abrasions and burn injuries on the genitals. Ahmad Abdul Sajid, elder brother of mqm activist Ahmad Abdul Majid, was arrested on 15 October by police and paramilitary Rangers searching for his brother. On 5 November his family found his
PAKISTAN
body in a charity trust in Karachi. It bore muhiple injuries apparently inflicted by torture in custody.
Flogging continued to be imposed by the courts as a penalty for rape and drugs offences. In July a sentence of Five years' imprisonment and 20 lashes, imposed on four men by a Special Coiurt for Speedy Trial in Peshawar, was confirmed. There were new reports of the use of fetters on prisoners and detainees in police custody, in violation of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
The security forces were reported to have committed at least 20 extrajudicial executions during the year. In February up to 12 people may have been killed when security forces opened fire on members of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front who were marching peacefully to the cease-fire line between Pakistan and India. At least two were reportedly shot in the head.
During the "anti-crime operation" in Sindh Province, nine people were extrajudicially executed by an army patrol at Jamshoro, Initially, the -army claimed the victims were "saboteurs" trained in India, but the local press presented contrary evidence. The army then admitted that they were tenant farmers caught up in a land dispute between local landlords. Several senior army commanders were removed from their posts and in October a major was sentenced to death and 13 others were sentenced to life imprisonment by a court-martial in connection with the incident.
At least 130 prisoners were sentenced to death, mostly for murder. Many were sentenced by Special Courts for Suppression of Terrorist Activities and by Special Courts for Speedy Trial.
At least 19 prisoners were executed, two in April and 17 in November. These were the first judicial executions reported since 1988, apart from one execution in a tribal area with a separate judicial system (see Amnesty International Report 1992). All but one of those executed, including a 17-year-old youth, had been sentenced by Special Courts for Speedy Trial, whose procedures fall short of international standards for fair trial. Six other convicted prisoners due to be executed were reportedly reprieved when relatives of the murder victims accepted compensation and, as permitted under Islamic law, granted pardon.
One of the men executed in April, Mehdi Khan, had been sentenced to death in 1988 by a military court which also failed to satisfy international standards for fair trial,
The Lahore High Court in January removed the President's power to commute death sentences under Article 45 of the Constitution, on the grounds that it contradicted Islamic legal provisions under which only the legal heirs of the victims of murder can pardon the murderer. Hearing appeals against the Lahore High Court's decision, the Supreme Court in July declared that it was beyond the powers of the Lahore High Court to decide on constitutional matters. The Supreme Court several times adjourned hearings on the propriety of public hangings, pending an assessment by the Council of Islamic Ideology.
In February Amnesty International called for a full inquiry into the killings of protesters at the Indian border and in May expressed concern about the reported detention and torture of an Indian diplomat, In June Amnesty International published a report, Pakistan: Arrests of political opponents in Sindh Province, August 1990 - early 1992, which documented systematic harassment of supporters of opposition parties since the dismissal of the ppp government in 1990. Amnesty International called on the government to respect the rule of law and to take action to stop the repression of nonviolent political activity. It also urged the government to ensure that the anti-crime campaign in Sindh Province would not be used to permit human rights violations. In July Amnesty International urged the government to institute an independent and impartial inquiry into the ill-treatment of journalists in April. It wrote to the government in August expressing its concern about the ordinance granting immunity from prosecution to members of the army.
In April, following two executions, Amnesty International appealed to the government to stop further executions, and in November expressed great concern about the large number of executions in Punjab,
