RWANDA
Several journalists and others were imprisoned as prisoners of conscience: most had been released by the end of the year. Dozens of other political prisoners arrested in the previous two years were also released. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. Extrajudicial executions by members of the security forces and armed groups of
civilians who supported them continued to be reported. Dozens of cases of "disappearance" from previous years remained unresolved.
In April, after mass opposition demonstrations, Dismas Nsengiyaremye, the leader of the opposition Mouvement démocratique républicain, Republican Democratic Movement, was appointed as Prime Minister by President Juvénal Hab-yarimana. The new Prime Minister established a transitional government of national unity, comprising members of Rwanda's five main political parties. Stanislas Mbonampeka, a lawyer who had received death threats in early 1991 when he represented political prisoners, became the new Minister of Justice, but resigned in November in protest at what he said was lack of co-operation by members of the security forces with his ministry. The President's Mouvement républicain national pour la démocratie et le développement (mrnd). Republican National Movement for Democracy and Development, retained control of other key ministries.
Armed conflict continued in the north between government troops, drawn predominantly from the majority Hutu population, and the Front patriotique rwandais (fpr), Rwandese Patriotic Front, an armed opposition group dominated by members of the Tutsi minority. A number of bomb explosions in the capital, Kigali, and other parts of the country killed several dozen people and injured many others, but it was not clear who was responsible. Nearly 30 civilians were killed and others injured by mutinous soldiers in the northwestern towns of Gisenyi and Ruhengeri; it was not clear whether any action was taken against the soldiers by the authorities. A new cease-fire between government and fpr forces was agreed in July but the state of siege declared in 1990 remained in force. Following the cease-fire, the government handed back 23 captured rebels to the fpr and the fpr released 11 captured government soldiers. In August a peace accord was agreed which provided for further negotiations leading to the formation of an all-party interim government in which the fpr would be represented. It provided also for the integration of fpr fighters into the national army, for the country's judicial and governmental institutions to be overhauled, and for the creation of a watchdog body to monitor human rights violations.
RWANDA
An agreement between the government and the fpr over the composition of an interim goverrmient and legislative body was concluded in December, but it was rejected by the mrnd.
In February the government announced an amnesty for all those accused of political offences, which led to the release of 20 political prisoners and dozens of untried detainees. In September the government said that it would allow an international commission of inquiry to investigate human rights violations which occurred after an fpr attack in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991]-, this was due to take place in January 1993. The violations were believed to have included the extrajudicial execution of more than 1,000 Tutsi by government forces and armed civilians supporting them. The government also announced that there had been judicial investigations into mass killings committed since October 1990 by members of the security forces and groups of armed Hutu civilians.
Several journalists arrested after the military authorities issued a communique criticizing Rwanda's press in December 1991 were still held at the beginning of 1992. Most were released untried, but Jean-Pierre Mugabe, editor-in-chief of Le Tribun du peuple newspaper, was sentenced in February to four years' imprisonment by the High Court in Kigali. A prisoner of conscience, he was found guilty of publishing articles and cartoons which insulted the head of state. He was provisionally released in April pending an appeal hearing which had not taken place by the end of the year.
Two other independent newspaper journalists, André Kameya, editor-in-chief of Rwanda Rushya, and Théoneste Muberant-wari, editor-in-chief of Nyabarongo, were arrested in February and accused of defaming the head of state. They also were provisionally released in April and had not been tried by the end of the year. Several journalists, one of whom remained in custody untried at the end of the year, were detained between September and November on charges of insulting the head of state. Janvier Africa of Umurava newspaper was arrested in September after he wrote an article which claimed that death squads were responsible for assassinations. He was still held at the end of 1992. Two of his colleagues were detained for five days in
October. Hassan Ngeze, editor of Kangura newspaper, was detained in November in connection with an article he published in mid-1992 accusing the Burundi authorities of perpetrating human rights violations against the Hutu in Burundi. He was released in November after reportedly being charged with insulting a foreign head of state. Another journalist and former prisoner of conscience, Vincent Rwabukwisi. editor of Kanguka newspaper, was due to be tried on state security charges (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, the charges against him were apparently dropped as a result of the February amnesty.
Fidèle Kanyabugoyi, a Ministry of Public Works employee and member of a human rights group known as kanyarwanda, was arrested in March. He had signed a statement on behalf of kanyarwanda protesting against killings of Tutsi in Kanzenze district, south of Kigali, and had been compiling information about killings of members of the Bagogwe, a Tutsi clan, in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). A prisoner of conscience, he was charged with endangering the security of the state but was provisionally released in early April with restrictions placed on his movements. He was again interrogated in August but had not been tried by the end of the year. In August his wife and several other people were injured when his home was attacked by a group of armed men, one of whom was in military uniform.
At least two detainees who appeared to be prisoners of conscience were among nine Tutsi still held at the beginning of the year, apparently without charge or trial. They had been arrested in October 1991 in Kanzenze district by order of local officials, and were reportedly severely beaten at the time of their arrest. The authorities stated in December 1991 that Gisagara and Mushimire had been arrested for defaming the head of state. At the end of 1992 it was unclear whether they were still held.
There were new arrests of Tutsi suspected of supporting the fpr. They included Shabani Gasigwa and Evariste Sissi, a well-known businessman, who were arrested with six others during June: all eight were held without charge or trial for about three weeks during which they were beaten in a gendarmerie interrogation centre in Kigali. Evariste Sissi had previously been detained uncharged from October
rwanda/st christopher and nevis
1990 to early 1991. Shabani Gasigwa alleged that he had been beaten in detention to force him to make a false statement implicating Evariste Sissi. A third man, Ali Hitimana, reportedly needed intensive hospital treatment as a result of injuries sustained during interrogation,
At least 20 political prisoners who were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were released in the February amnesty together with untried political detainees. The 20 included Donatien Ruge-ma and Charles Mukuralinda, who had been tortured under interrogation in 1990 and sentenced to death in early 1991.
There were new reports of extrajudicial executions by the seciuity forces and armed groups of civilians who supported them. The latter reportedly included supporters of the mrnd and a Hutu-based political party, the Coalition pour la défense de la République, Coalition for the Defence of the Republic. The victims were virtually all Tutsi who belonged to political parties which advocated negotiations between the government and the fpr. At least 150 Tutsi were reported to have been killed and many others injured by pro-government groups of armed Hutu in early March in Kanzenze district and surrounding areas. Among those killed was Antonia Locatelli, an Italian missionary, who was shot dead by a soldier on 9 March at Nyamata Roman Catholic church while trying to protect some Tutsi villagers. The authorities acknowledged that the missionary had been killed by a soldier but said she had been killed by mistake during a search for armed men and apparently took no action against the perpetrator. Nor was any official inquiry initiated into the other killings, although dozens of Hutu suspected of attacks on Tutsi were arrested.
The authorities failed to clarify the fate of dozens of people who "disappeared" from custody in previous years. They included eight Tutsi arrested in Kanzenze district in October 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
The fpr was also reportedly responsible for gross human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians, particularly civilians displaced by the fighting. In February fpr fighters reportedly killed an 87-year-old French nun and some eight other civilians during an attack on a Roman Catholic convent and a health
centre in Rushaki district. The fpr also shelled camps of displaced civilians.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners. It continued to press for information about the fate of prisoners who "disappeared" between 1990 and 1992, for impartial investigations into alleged extrajudicial executions and other human rights violations and for the introduction of safeguards to prevent their recurrence. It welcomed the government's decision to set up an international commission of inquiry to investigate the violations.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Rwanda: Persecution of Tutsi minority and repression of government critics, 1990 to 1992, and appealed to the new government of national unity to end the widespread persecution of the Tutsi. It welcomed the releases of political prisoners in February, but was concerned that those responsible for human rights violations continued to be able to act with impunity. Amnesty International urged the new government to take positive steps to prevent further human rights violations.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about human rights violations during internal armed conflict in Rwanda.
