TUNISIA
Over 3,000 political prisoners, most of them suspected members of the prohibited Islamic al-Nahda organization, were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials in 1992 and previous years. Some were possible prisoners of conscience. Many had been held in illegally prolonged incommunicado detention before trial. Several government critics were prisoners of conscience; four were released before the end of the year. Reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees in police and national guard stations were widespread. One detainee was reported to have died in custody.
The Law on Associations was amended by the National Assembly in March in such a way that, among other things, individuals occupying positions of responsibility in political parties may not at the same time belong to organizations or associations considered to have a "general" nature. This led in May to the dissolution of the Ugue tunisienne des droits de I'bomme (ltdh), Tunisian Human Rights League, for failing to amend its rules in accordance with the change in the law. The League had been critical of the government's hiunan rights record.
TUNISIA
In May President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali announced that he had asked the commission of inquiry into prolonged incommunicado detention and torture to report on the implementation of its earlier recommendations (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In response, the commission published a report in July: this stated that directives drawing attention to Tunisian law and international standards had been posted in every police station and that 116 police officers had been implicated in incidents of torture or ill-treatment. Amnesty International asked for further information, including the dates and details of alleged offences, but none was received.
Hundreds of suspected supporters of al-Nahda and dozens of members of the unauthorized Parti communiste des ouvriers de Tunisie (pcot), Tunisian Communist Workers' Party, and other left-wing groups were arrested and held incommunicado in pre-trial {garde à vue) detention. Many were held for longer than the 10-day limit allowed by Tunisian law, Some were released uncharged, but hundreds, including possible prisoners of conscience, were sentenced to terms of imprisonment after unfair trials. For example, Abderrazak Hamzaoui, a student at Tunis University and a suspected sympathizer of al-Nahda, was arrested in September. He was held incommunicado for several weeks in Kasserine Police Station and inside the Ministry of the Interior, where he was allegedly ill-treated, and in Bouchoucha Police Station. Twelve Tunisian nationals who were arrested in Libya in January and returned to Tunisia in March were held in incommunicado detention for up to three months. Two of them, including Habib Khmila, were said to have been held in the Ministry of the Interior and tortured there.
The trials of almost all political prisoners fell far short of internationally recognized standards for fair trial. In many cases, defence lawyers complained that defendants had been held beyond the legal limit and tortured. Their pleas were ignored by the courts which failed to order appropriate investigations and readily accepted contested confessions as evidence of guilt. Several convictions were seciued solely on the basis of procès-verbaux (police statements) allegedly extracted under torture during pre-trial detention and later retracted by defendants.
For example, Touhami Ben Boubacr Ben
Zeid, a pcot sympathizer arrested in February, was convicted of belonging to an unauthorized organization and distributing leaflets by the Court of First Instance in Grombalia, despite complaints by his lawyer that he had been held incommunicado in garde a vue detention beyond the 10-day limit and tortured. A prisoner of conscience, he was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment. The sentence was upheld by the Appeal Court in June. He was released in October, on expiry of his sentence.
A total of 279 alleged members of al-Nahda, including 56 in absentia, were defendants in two political trials which began in July and ended in August. Both trials took place before military courts and were unfair. The defendants, who had been arrested between October 1990 and September 1991, were accused of plotting to overthrow the government and other offences. They were divided, apparently without reason, into two groups and tried separately in the military camps of Bouchoucha and Bab Saadoun. Charges were imprecise and only a few, of the defendants were charged with specific acts. Weapons, including guns and home-made hand grenades, were displayed outside the courtrooms but none of the defendants was confronted with a specific weapon. Almost all the defendants had been held incommunicado for weeks or months after their arrest and alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated to force them to sign police statements in which they confessed to or implicated others in offences. These statements, which most of the accused retracted in court, formed the basis of the prosecution case. At least four of those arrested and questioned in connection with the alleged plot had died in 1991 in circumstances that suggested that torture had caused or hastened death. Some defendants still bore marks, which they said had been caused by torture, a year after their interrogation. Arrest dates for most of the defendants had been systematically falsified by police in an attempt to conceal illegally prolonged garde a vue detention. Many of the accused had had no access to a lav^er diaring up to 18 months' pre-trial detention. Lawyers did not receive relevant documents or their clients' files until a few days before the trial, and evidence which could have been favoiu'able to the accused was withheld by the prosecution.
TUNISIA
The verdicts were given in August: 45 defendants, including 24 in absentia, were sentenced to life imprisonment; 220, including 32 in absentia, received prison sentences of between one and 24 years; and 10 ^ere acquitted. The charges against four defendants were withdrawn. The sentences were upheld by the Court of Cassation in September.
One prisoner of conscience was held throughout the year, but several others were released. Moncef Ben Salem, a university professor, continued to serve a sentence imposed in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). However. Mohamed Nouri, a lawyer sentenced in February 1991 for a newspaper article criticizing military courts, was released in March, seven months after completion of his sentence, He was the only political prisoner among 1,055 prisoners who were freed in an amnesty that month. Hamadi Jebali, who had received a one-year sentence in 1991 in connection with the same newspaper article, completed that sentence but received a further 16-year prison term in August after being convicted with others on charges including plotting to overthrow the government. Moncef Triki, a prisoner of conscience sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment in 1991, was released in October 1992, Beshir Essid (see Amnesty International Report 1992), who was serving a four-year sentence imposed in 1990 after he was convicted of defaming the President and other offences, was freed in a presidential amnesty in December,
There were numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees suspected of supporting al-Nahda and illegal left-wing parties in police stations and national guard centres throughout the country, as well as in the cells at the Ministry of the Interior. Torture methods used included beatings, especially on the soles of the feet; suspension by the ankles or in contorted positions, usually accompanied by beatings; electric shocks; and insertion of bottles into the anus. Sexual abuse by male guards was alleged by several women detainees, and psychological torture and the threat of sexual abuse to both men and women were also reported.
Noureddine Mabrouk, a teacher, was arrested in February in Bizerta and held in garde a vue detention for over six weeks. He was taken to Bouchoucha Police Station and the Ministry of the Interior and tor-
tured by being beaten and suspended in contorted positions. He was tried in April and sentenced to a prison term of one year and 16 days for membership of an illegal organization and attending illegal meetings. The sentence was confirmed on appeal.
One detainee died in custody in circumstances where torture may have hastened death. Mouldi Ben Amor was arrested in December 1991 and held in prolonged incommunicado detention in Tunis. In January the authorities informed his family that he had died and allowed them to receive the body for burial. However, no medical certificate stating the cause of his death was provided, no inquest was held and the family were not allowed to examine the body.
The families of five supporters of al-Nahda who died in custody in 1991, reportedly after torture, were granted compensation by the government. However, no results of any inquiries into their deaths were made public. Amnesty International urged the reopening of inquiries into the deaths in custody in October 1991 of Faisal Barakat and Rachid Chammakhi. Eyewitnesses had reported that both detainees had been tortured in Nabeul Police Station before their deaths. An expert medical opinion was commissioned by Amnesty International in February on the official autopsy report on Faisal Barakat, said by the Tunisian authorities to have died in a road accident. This indicated that his death most probably had been related to an injury caused by the insertion of a foreign object into the anus and through the wall of the bowel. In response to this finding, the government stated in October that it would reopen the investigation into his death, but it was not known with what result by the end of the year. The government also stated that, at the request of President Ben Ali, the authorities were considering appointing an Ombudsman to monitor police registers and detention centres.
Amnesty International continued to express concern to the government about the prolonged incommunicado detention and alleged torture of suspected Islamic activists and other political detainees. The organization criticized the failure of the goverrunent to open investigations into the death in custody of Mouldi Ben Amor and to reopen the inquiry into the death of
TUNISIA/TURKEY
Rachid Chammakhi. In March Amnesty International published a report, Tunisia: Prolonged Incommunicado Detention and Torture, and publicly urged the government to act immediately to end human rights violations. In October Amnesty International published a further report, Tunisia: Heavy Sentences after Unfair Trials, detailing the gross deficiencies of the trials of alleged al-Nadha members in July and August. Amnesty International urged the government to ensure that they were either retried in accordance with international fair trial standards, or released.
In late June an Amnesty International delegation visited Tunisia and discussed human rights with President Ben Ali and members of the government. The President assured Amnesty International of his own commitment to human rights and that alleged human rights violations would be investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice. Amnesty International also expressed concern that the amendments made to the Law on Associations were a violation of the right of freedom of association guaranteed in international human rights treaties to which Tunisia is a party, It also discussed recent difficulties experienced by the Amnesty International Tunisian Section. The President said that the section could import and distribute Amnesty International publications in Tunisia in accordance with the formalities required by Tunisian law.
In July and August Amnesty International observers attended the two mass trials before military courts of suspected members of a!-Nadba.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about prolonged incommunicado detention and torture in Tunisia. In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Tunisia for un review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
