TAIWAN
Ten prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience were released following amendment of the Criminal Code. At least 16 people were sentenced to death and five executions were known to have been carried out.
Article 100 of the Criminal Code, which covers offences against the internal seciu--ity of the state, was amended in May with the effect that it may now be used to punish only those who engage in violent activities. Twelve political prisoners, including seven prisoners of conscience, were released as a result and over 240 other pending cases were dropped.
The National Security Law was also amended in July to provide that only those citizens who have resorted to violence against the state or travelled illegally to the People's Republic of China, may in future
taiwan/tanzania
be refused entry into Taiwan. Subsequently, 277 government critics resident abroad had restrictions on their retmn to Taiwan lifted. In July provisions banning the advocacy of communism or division of the national territory were removed from the Law on Organization of Civil Groups and the Law on Assembly and Demonstrations. Before the revision, it was an offence for any political organization to advocate the establishment of a Taiwanese state officially separate from China.
In February a regulation was introduced to punish prosecutors responsible for unlawful detentions. In April the Judicial Yuan (Council) and the Ministry of Justice ordered all judges and prosecutors to resign from their posts in political parties to safeguard judicial independence.
The Taiwan Garrison Command was formally disbanded in August; from its formation in 1958 until the lifting of martial law in 1987 it had been responsible for the arrest, interrogation and torture of hundreds of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience; for conducting prosecutions in many cases; and for carrying out executions.
Four prisoners of conscience were released in May following the amendment of Article 100 of the Criminal Code provisions on internal security: they were Huang Hua, Kuo Pei-hung, Lee Ying-yuan and Wang Kang-lu. Six possible prisoners of conscience were also released following the amendment: Chiang Kai-shih, Chou Wu-chien and Hsu Lung-chun in May; Chen Cheng-ran, Lin Yin-fu, Wang Hsiu-hui in July. All had been arrested for supporting the formation of an independent Taiwanese state; three had also been convicted of illegally entering Taiwan in violation of a ban on their return (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
At least one political trial appeared to fall short of international fair trial standards. Chang Tsan-hung, who was accused of sedition and attempted murder, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in June, reduced to five years under a 1988 Clemency Statute. The sole evidence against him was the "confession" of an alleged accomplice who had been interrogated under duress by the military authorities in 1977. In September the Supreme Court upheld Chang Tsan-hung's appeal on the grounds that there was no evidence to convict him and returned the case to the High Court for
retrial. There were reports that Chang Tsan-hung did not receive adequate medical care in prison. The Taiwan High Court released him on bail in October, citing medical reasons.
The death penalty continued to be applied for a wide range of criminal offences. At least 16 death sentences were imposed, five of which were known to have been carried out. Amnesty International was concerned about ethical issues raised by the use of organs from executed prisoners for transplant operations, including the risk that the need for such organs might affect the timing of executions and that death row prisoners might become an accepted source of organs, which would impede reform or abolition of the death penalty laws. In June the legislative Yuan (Council) amended the law on corruption to remove the death penalty. In July it also amended the law prohibiting the use, manufacture and distribution of drugs and the law prohibiting smuggling to make the death penalty a discretionary rather than mandatory punishment.
In April Amnesty Interoational wrote to Vice-Premier Shih Chi-yang urging him to ensiu-e that the planned revision of Article 100 of the Criminal Code guaranteed freedom of expression and association. In June it wrote to the Minister of Justice expressing concern about the fairness of Chang Tsan-hung's trial and about his health. The authorities responded in August that Chang Tsan-hung's trial had complied with due process of law and that his applications for medical bail had been reviewed by a court. In October Amnesty International wrote to the authorities seeking clarification of the revisions of the laws under which prisoners of conscience had been detained and of the amended laws restricting the use of the death penalty. No response had been received by the end of the year.
