VENEZUELA
Scores of people, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested during periods of suspended guarantees which followed coup attempts in February and November. The frequent use of torture by the security forces, sometimes leading to the death of the detainee, continued to be reported. Prison conditions remained extremely harsh. At least one person "disappeared". Dozens of people were extrajudicially executed by members of the armed forces.
On 4 February a faction of the army unsuccessfully attempted to overthrow the government of President Carlos Andrés Pérez. The coup leaders were arrested and at the end of the year 68 military officers allegedly involved in the coup attempt remained in prison. On 27 November a second coup attempt was foiled. Dozens of people were killed during fighting and at
VENEZUELA
least 200 members of the armed forces and some civilians were arrested. On both occasions the government immediately suspended a series of constitutional guarantees for several weeks, including the right not to be arrested or imprisoned without warrant unless caught in flagrante delicto. In November it also imposed a curfew for five days.
There were widespread anti-government protests in March and April prompted by harsh economic conditions and dozens of demonstrations by students and others during the year. At least 15 people were killed by the security forces during the suppression of the protests.
During the periods of suspended guarantees the security forces carried out raids in several cities and detained hundreds of people for short periods, including prisoners of conscience. Those detained included student leaders, members of political parties and community activists.
Following the 27 November coup attempt, at least 200 members of the armed forces and some civilians, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested. They were charged with participating in a military rebellion and summarily tried by military courts in December. Most of the defendants were denied access to an independent lawyer.
During the periods of full guarantees, the police carried out scores of arbitrary arrests, particularly in the barrios (poor urban neighbourhoods). For example, in May the military intelligence agency Dirección de Inteligencia Militar (dim) and the police intelligence agency Dirección de ¡os Servicios de Inteligencia y Prevención (disip) arrested without warrant at least 27 student and political activists, among them former political prisoner Eder Puerta Aponte. Most were released hours later, but at least three were detained for more than two weeks without charge. Hundreds of other people were denied their right to a fair trial by being administratively detained under the Ley de Vagos y Maleantes, Law of Vagrants and Crooks, which permits administrative detention for periods of up to five years without judicial appeal or review. Most of those detained under this law are subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading conditions in establishments which lack adequate sanitary facilities and detainees are frequently victims of torture and ill-treatment by prison wardens.
Torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported, usually during incommunicado detention, which is forbidden by the Constitution even when guarantees are suspended. Torture methods included beatings, near-asphyxiation with plastic bags, electric shocks and mock executions. Official forensic doctors often deliberately failed to document cases of torture adequately. Medical treatment for detainees who suffered torture was frequently unavailable or inadequate.
Among the dozens of cases of torture reported were those of 14 people, most of them students, arrested without warrant by the Policía Metropolitana, Metropolitan Police, when they raided a university campus in Caracas to disperse a demonstration in January. While in police headquarters the detainees were reportedly beaten, given electric shocks and threatened with death. One was released the same day but 13 were detained without charge in prison for almost two weeks. Those responsible for their alleged torture were not brought to justice. In February, 22 people, many of them students, were arrested without warrant in the town of Valencia, Carabobo, by the state police. The detainees, who were later charged with military rebellion, were held incommunicado for eight days, during which they were reportedly tortured with electric shocks, death threats and beatings. One of the detainees, Carmen Alicia Gómez Potella, who was four months pregnant at the time, had a threatened miscarriage as a result. Thirteen were released uncharged after one month and the rest two weeks later. None of those responsible for their alleged torture had been brought to justice by the end of the year.
In another case, José Blondell was arrested in March by members of the Policía Técnica judicial (ptj), criminal investigations police, in Caracas, and interrogated about an alleged murder. He alleged that he was repeatedly beaten with metal bars and nearly asphyxiated with a plastic bag. He was released uncharged after one week. He lodged formal complaints with the Attorney General's Office, but to Amnesty International's knowledge those responsible remained at large by the end of the year.
Several detainees died as a result of injuries sustained during torture. For example, in late May Rommer Figueroa Lizardi died reportedly as a consequence of
VENEZUELA
beatings and kicks by members of the Guardia Nacional, National Guard, who had arrested him earlier that day diuring a demonstration in Ciudad Guayana, Bolivar.
Prison conditions continued to be extremely harsh, in many cases amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Serious overcrowding, lack of security for prison inmates, the arbitrary use of punishment cells and poor sanitary conditions prompted protests in several prisons. In March at least seven prisoners were reportedly arbitrarily killed in the state prison of Valencia, Carabobo, known as Máxima de Tocuyito, when prison guards quelled protests about overcrowding and ill-treatment.
At least one person "disappeared" from custody. Hemelson Vertiz was arrested on 22 June by three uniformed men who identified themselves as members of the dim in his home in Maracaibo, Zulia. His whereabouts remained unknown at the end of the year.
Dozens of people were extrajudicially executed by members of the armed forces. On 4 February three soldiers and four students suspected of having joined the rebel forces in the coup attempt were shot at close range in Valencia after they had been detained by members of the security forces. Those responsible remained at large at the end of the year. Other possible extrajudicial executions reported during 1992 included the killings of Naser Palmar and Pedro José Paz, two Wayúu Indians. They were killed by members of the presidential guard on 12 October and at least five other Wayúu were shot and wounded when their truck crashed near an official celebration attended by President Carlos Andrés Pérez in Paraguaipoa, Zulia state. Initial reports claiming that the Indians had made an attempt on the life of the President were later officially denied. Those responsible for the killings had not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
On 27 November at least 63 inmates of the Retén de Catia prison in Caracas were killed by members of the Metropolitan Police and the National Guard who raided the severely overcrowded prison to quell a reported escape attempt. According to reports, the security forces arbitrarily shot at the prisoners, many of whom were reportedly victims of extrajudicial executions. Forensic examinations reported that many victims had been shot in the back.
Those responsible had not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
At least 15 people were killed and dozens wounded during the suppression of anti-government protests by the security forces. On 10 March four people, three of whom were less than 15 years old, were killed in Caracas, reportedly as a result of excessive use of force, when the police fired at them with live ammunition. On 8 April three people died in Maracay when members of the state police of Aragua arbitrarily opened fire on protesters during a peaceful demonstration.
There were reports of dozens of killings by members of the security forces in the course of criminal investigations, particularly in the barrios, in circumstances suggesting that the killings were arbitrary and deliberate. Gabriel Antonio Martin Salaver-ria was shot at point-blank range by members of the Metropolitan Police. The police claimed that they shot him during an exchange of gunfire, but this was denied by several eye-witnesses, who also alleged that the police failed to provide emergency care for the wounded man who died hours later on 28 January.
Very few of those responsible for torture and other human rights violations were brought to justice, despite scores of complaints filed with the relevant authorities. For example, those responsible for the torture of Yorfán José Escobar Berrios and for the killing of Raúl Contreras in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992], remained at large.
In May a military court absolved and released the 15 members of a military patrol accused of the massacre of 14 fishermen in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1992]. An appeal against the decision was lodged by the victims' lawyers in July and the proceedings, which suffered a series of delays and contradictory rulings, were still continuing at the end of the year.
Judicial investigations into past human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions by members of the security forces and deaths in custody, continued to make little or no progress in the majority of cases. More than 200 cases of death and serious injury caused by members of the security forces reported in 1989 remained unresolved in the comts. During 1992 investigations into unmarked graves in Caracas were halted. Sixty-five bodies of people reportedly killed by the police and
venezueuvviet nam
army during widespread disturbances in 1989, which had been recovered in 1991, remained unidentified (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In February Amnesty International wrote to President Carlos Andrés Pérez calling for the adoption of effective measures to prevent human rights violations during the period of suspended guarantees which followed the coup attempt. In December the organization wrote to the President to express its concern about human rights violations reported after the 27 November coup attempt including the killings of prisoners in Caracas. The organization called on the government to adopt effective measures to bring those responsible to justice and to prevent further abuses.
In July Amnesty International published Venezuela: Torture and other human rights violationSy which described the findings of an Amnesty International delegation which visited the country in May. The organization expressed its concern about extrajudicial executions reported in the wake of the coup attempt, continuing reports of torture and arbitrary killings by members of the security forces, and the failure of the courts to properly investigate complaints of human rights violations. Amnesty International repeatedly called on the government to bring those responsible to justice.
