ZAMBIA
A number of foreign nationals, including refugees and asylum-seekers, were detained without charge or trial during the year. There were continuing reports of ill-treatment of prisoners. Several hundred prisoners remained under sentence of death, but none was executed and the government announced a review of the death penalty.
A newly elected goverrunent headed by President Frederick Chiluba had taken office in November 1991, after the first multi-party elections in nearly two decades. The new government pledged to protect human rights. However, in August the Minister of Home Affairs stated publicly that the police and paramilitary Anti-Robbery Squads were authorized to "shoot to kill" armed robbers. The new government had been widely expected to abolish these paramilitary squads, which have been responsible for many killings, some of which may have been extrajudicial executions. Other government officials distanced themselves from the Minister's statement and the Attorney General stated that police were only allowed to use lethal force if criminals posed an immediate threat to life.
The year saw strikes and demonstrations by trade unionists and students protesting at government economic policies. In April and May police used tear-gas to disperse peaceful demonstrations by miners' wives and children. In October police shot dead a student demonstrator in Lusaka, the capital. Hundreds of students were arrested in protests throughout the year and charged with public order offences.
ZAMBIA/ZIMBABWE
A number of asylum-seekers or recognized refugees were detained without charge or trial during 1992. In January some were arrested in the comrse of a round-up of more than 1,000 illegal immigrants. Ugandan asylum-seeker David Musinguzi was twice detained and threatened with deportation to Uganda where he appeared to be in danger of arrest for political reasons. He remained in detention at the end of the year.
A South African national, Katiza Cebekhulu, remained in detention throughout the year. He was one of the accused in a kidnapping and assault trial in South Africa involving Winnie Mandela. He had been smuggled into Zambia in February 1991 to prevent him from testifying in court. In May 1991 he was detained after giving a newspaper interview (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992). In April 1992 the chief immigration officer told a Lusaka newspaper that he had asked the Ministry of Home Affairs to release Katiza Cebekhulu since he was not an illegal immigrant. The legal basis for his continuing detention was unclear.
Another South African, Sipho Mbeje, was released from custody and deported in January. He had been abducted and assaulted by security officials of the African National Congress of South Africa (anc) in 1989, then sentenced to two years' imprisonment on the basis of a conviction which was apparently unsafe. Sipho Mbeje appeared to have been imprisoned because of collusion between anc and Zambian officials after he had resigned from the anc over policy differences.
There were continuing reports of ill-treatment of prisoners. In February Mu-sonda Mofya, a criminal suspect, filed a claim for damages against the police for torture which was alleged to have taken place in October 1991. Reports indicated that sfreet children arrested for petty crime were often badly beaten by police or paramilitaries.
More than 200 prisoners remained under sentence of death, but no executions were reported. The government announced that it was undertaking a research project to solicit public opinion on whether the death penalty should be abolished.
Amnesty International sought information about the legal basis for the detentions of refugees and asylum-seekers and appealed to the government not to return
David Musinguzi to Uganda against his will. The organization called for all death sentences to be commuted.
