CAMBODIA
At least seven political prisoners remained held without charge or trial at the end of 1992, although hundreds of others were released. Prisoners were tortured and ill-treated, and some were reportedly executed extrajudicially. Members of legal opposition parties were killed in what appeared to be extrajudicial executions. Forces of the Partie of Democratic Kampuchea (pdk or Khmer Rouge) killed at least 39 Vietnamese civilians during armed attacks, and 11 others "disappeared" while in their custody.
In March the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (untac) began to oversee the country's administration in the run-up to internationally supervised multiparty elections scheduled for May 1993. untac's role was mandated by the 1991 Paris Peace Agreement (see Amnesty International Report 1992] which was signed by the State of Cambodia (soc) Government and the three other main political factions - the pdk; the National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNaNPEc); and the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front (kpnlf). However, cease-fire violations between soc and pdk forces continued throughout the year, increasing in November, and the last two months of the year saw a sharp increase in politically motivated killings by both scx: and pdk forces. The Supreme National Council (snc), created to embody Cambodian sovereignty during the transitional period, and comprising the four factions, continued to meet throughout 1992 in the presence of untac. The untac human rights unit opened offices in almost all of Cambodia's 21 provinces by the end of the year. In September untac human rights monitors began work in zones controlled by funanpec and the kpnlf, However, the pdk denied untac ofiicials access to territory it controlled and refused to cooperate with the disarmament program. In October untac began registering voters for the 1993 elections.
Some legal reforms were introduced during the year. The snc adopted a new penal code drafted by untac to be enforced by the four main factions. The code provides for the establishment of a new coiul structure and requires detainees to be given access to a lawyer and to be brought before a judge within 48 hours. However, it was unclear whether soc laws which contravene the penal code were still being enforced.
In May the snc acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. In October the snc also acceded to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
cambodia
Punishment, and the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. From January the soc Government allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) access to prisons in its territory to supervise the release of political prisoners and prisoners of war.
Hundreds of political prisoners were released, including possible prisoners of conscience Kang Tong Heang and Kuch Siek, who had been held without charge or trial since October 1991. Seven kpnlf members arrested in 1990 remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1992. In June the soc Government stated that all political prisoners had been freed. However, it did not provide a comprehensive list of all political prisoners released.
In August untac closed Tasang and t-6, two secret military prisons in Battambang province, freeing 12 prisoners, four of whom had reportedly been held for political reasons. Sang Seth, a common criminal, was believed to have been taken from Tasang Prison and killed by prison guards on 30 June. Prisoners at t-6 were reportedly routinely beaten, kicked and deprived of food. A few hours before untac entered t-6, prison guards reportedly removed three prisoners and one guard from the prison and shot them dead. Their bodies were later discovered buried in shallow graves.
Prisoners were tortured and ill-treated in Battambang provincial prison and Poipet police lock-up, as well as in the Ministry of National Security compound. There were continued reports of prisoners being shackled in dark cells, but the practice appeared to have ceased by the end of 1992. In July the Ministry of National Security established a commission to investigate prison conditions.
In Battambang provincial prison common criminals were beaten with axes, pistol butts and sticks, and severely burned. In Poipet police lock-up prisoners were reportedly beaten with chains, bamboo and wooden sticks, and fists. In September a man apparently arrested solely for his alleged political affiliation was severely beaten in the Ministry of National Security compound; he was later released and treated in hospital for two broken ribs, a fractured sternum and severe bruising.
Several people were killed in circumstances suggesting they may have been extrajudicially executed. Tea Bun Long, an
soc official who had spoken out against soc corruption, was found shot dead in January after being abducted by two men in a jeep of a type driven by soc security forces. Also in January an attempt was made to assassinate Ung Phan, leader of the newly formed Liberal Social Democracy Party and a former prisoner of conscience; he was hit three times by gunmen but siuvived. At least three Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party (bldp) activists, including Ath Sod-han, and four funcinpec members, including In Dar and his 12-year-old son, Vun Thom Dar, were apparently extrajudicially executed. During November and December at least eight funcjnpec offices and one bldp office were attacked with grenades or bombs, injuring at least 20 people. In November untac discovered five bodies buried in Battambang province; the five victims had all been arrested by soc forces a few days previously. The circumstances of their deaths remained unclear.
soc security forces violently dispersed several demonstrations, killing at least three people. In February military police opened fire on families protesting against their forcible eviction from land on the outskirts of Phnom Penh. A woman street vendor was reportedly killed and five others were injured. In April soc police allegedly opened fire on villagers demonstrating in connection with a land dispute: one person was reportedly killed and another seriously injured, untac investigators were turned away at gunpoint by local police from the scene, but the soc Government later cooperated with untac in an investigation. In December soc forces opened fire on a group of squatters near Phnom Penh, after reportedly being attacked with knives. One woman was killed.
pdk forces killed at least 39 ethnic Vietnamese civilians and 11 others "disappeared" while in pdk custody. In April pdk troops reportedly killed seven Vietnamese men in Kompong Chhnang province. In July pdk troops shot dead or disembowelled eight Vietnamese men and women, including a week-old baby, in Kampot province. On 3 October pdk forces shot dead 11 Vietnamese fishermen, and three others "disappeared" in their custody. In September eight Vietnamese fishermen and women "disappeared" while in pdk custody in Kompong Chhnang province. In December the bodies of three ethnic Vietnamese were discovered in the Mekong
cambodia/cameroon
river by untac personnel, apparently victims of deliberate killings by pdk forces. The same month pdk forces shot dead 13 ethnic Vietnamese civilians and two Cambodians in Kompong Chhnang province; 13 other civilians were injured in the attack. In December pdk forces took prisoner four groups of untac military personnel; all were released unharmed after a few days.
In April Amnesty International published a major report, Cambodia: Human Rights Developments, 1 October 1991 to 31 January 1992. This and a further report, Cambodia: Update on Amnesty International's concerns, published in October and previously submitted as a Memorandum to the soc Government, drew attention to the continued detention without charge or trial of political detainees, harassment and intimidation of government opponents, and the lack of an independent judiciary. Amnesty International also criticized the authorities' failure to ensure independent investigation of killings by soc forces. In May and June, an Amnesty International delegation visited Cambodia to discuss these and other concerns with Prince Norodom Sihanouk, soc Government ministers and untac officials. The delegation also met funcinpec and kpnlf representatives, but could not gain access to zones controlled by the pdk. Three Amnesty International representatives visited Cambodia in late 1992 to investigate human rights violations in the context of the election campaign.
