ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
About 25,000 Palestinians were arrested in 1992 on security groiuids, with more than 10,000 imprisoned at any one time. Most were serving sentences passed by military courts or were awaiting trial. Several hundred were administratively detained without charge or trial; over 500 of them were still held at the end of the year. There were Palestinian and Israeli prisoners of conscience, including conscientious objectors to military service. Palestinians under interrogation were systematically tortured or ill-treated. Four died in circumstances related to their treatment under interrogation. At least 120 Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli forces, often in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions or other unjustifiable killings. Investigations of abuses and subsequent measures appeared inadequate. One person remained under sentence of death. Members of Palestinian armed groups committed human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings.
The Palestinian intifada (uprising) increasingly took the form of attacks with firearms or knives against Israelis. Twenty Israeli civilians and 18 soldiers and policemen were killed in these attacks. Over 200 Palestinians were also killed, mostly on suspicion of "collaborating" with the Israeli authorities (see below). Those who carried out the killings were believed to include members of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo) and the Islamic
Resistance Movement (Hamas).
Following elections for the Knesset (Parliament) in June, a new government was formed under Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. The new government announced its intention to repeal 1986 legislation forbidding unauthorized contacts with organizations like the plo, previously used to hold prisoners of conscience. In August it cancelled deportation orders issued in January against 11 Palestinians, who remained in custody in administrative detention. However. in December the government deported 415 Palestinians to south Lebanon following an upsiorge in attacks against Israeli forces by Hamas. Lebanon did not accept the deportees, and by the end of the year they remained stranded in south Lebanon. In the Occupied Territories, the Israeli authorities continued to make extensive use of firearms, arrests and restriction orders.
Renewable administrative detention orders of up to six months were imposed on several hundred Palestinians. Appeals against such orders under a two-step process of judicial review usually took place several weeks after arrest. Almost always, detainees and their lawyers were not provided with crucial evidence about the reasons for detention, thus undermining existing legal safeguards. Almost all administrative detainees were held in the Ketziot detention centre in Israel.
Prisoners of conscience among the administrative detainees included political activists Nayef Sweitat, arrested in April, and Walid Zaqut, arrested in June. They were issued with detention orders of six and four months respectively, reduced on appeal to two and a half months. Sami Abu Samhadanah, another prisoner of conscience, was held for four months after a deportation order issued against him in January was cancelled in August.
Israeli prisoners of conscience included Abie Nathan, released in March, and David Ish Shalom, released in July (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992). Both were granted presidential pardons after undertaking not to break legislation forbidding unauthorized contacts with the plo. Other prisoners of conscience included conscientious objectors to military service. For example, Yonatan Ben Efrat was sentenced in September to 56 days' imprisonment for refusing to serve on the West Bank.
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
At least 14 Lebanese nationals apprehended in Lebanon between 1986 and 1989 remained held under deportation or administrative detention orders. They included Shi'a Muslim leader Shaikh 'Abd al-Karim 'Ubayd and three others, who were abducted in Lebanon by Israeli forces in 1989, and 10 held after the expiry of prison sentences. The Israeli authorities said the 14 were held "in accordance with the law" but did not disclose the legal basis for these detentions. Ten others, including Lebanese and other foreign nationals, who had been held since 1985, were released and deported in June. The authorities gave no information about six Lebanese Shi'a Muslims arrested in Lebanon by the Lebanese Forces militia in 1987 and held in Israel after having been secretly moved there in 1990.
About 200 detainees were held without charge or trial at any one time in the Khiam detention centre in an area of south Lebanon controlled by Israel and the South Lebanon Army (sla) (see Lebanon entry).
Some 14,600 Palestinians were tried by military courts on charges including acts of violence. Adults were commonly held for up to 18 days before being brought before a judge and longer without access to lawyers and relatives. The maximum period of detention .without judicial review was reduced from 18 to eight days for detainees aged 16 or below. Confessions were often obtained during these periods of incommunicado detention. Although improvements appeared to have been made in some military court procedures, defendants continued to be put under undue pressure to enter into plea bargains. Several hundred prisoners were pardoned and released during the year.
Palestinian detainees continued to be systematically tortured or ill-treated, mostly during interrogation. Methods included beatings, hooding with dirty sacks, sleep deprivation, and confinement in small, dark cells known as "closets" or, when cold, "refrigerators". Ahmad Qatamesh said he was hooded, deprived of sleep, and shackled in painful positions while held under interrogation by the General Security Service (gss) for more than 12 weeks. He had been arrested in September on suspicion of being a senior official of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a faction of the plo. In October Palestinian prisoners went on hunger-
strike to protest against ill-treatment and prison conditions.
A police unit operating in the West Bank since 1990 was said to have specialized in interrogating detainees at night with methods including severe beatings with wooden sticks and electric shocks. The results of an official investigation into this unit, which started in February, were not known at the end of the year.
Three Palestinians died in detention and another died shortly after release after interrogations which reportedly included hooding, beating and sleep deprivation. They included Mustafa 'Akkawi, who died in custody in February. According to a pathologist who attended the autopsy on behalf of the victim's family, death was caused by a heart attack triggered by emotional and physical pressure, and exposure to the cold, with medical negligence a contributory factor. Mustafa Barakat died in August some 36 hours after arrest. A pathologist representing the victim's family found that he had died due to an acute asthma attack brought about by conditions in detention, and also that he could have been subjected to "severe mistreatment".
Mordechai Vanunu, a former nuclear technician, remained held in solitary confinement for the sixth consecutive year (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1988 to 1992). Amnesty International continued to appeal for his isolation to be ended as it believes it constitutes cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
At least 120 Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli forces, including undercover police and army units. Some were shot in the context of armed clashes, others in circumstances suggesting that they were the victims of extrajudicial executions or other unjustifiable killings. In some cases medical help was not given or was hindered. In March Jamal Ghanem was playing football in Tulkarem when four undercover police chased him on the pitch and shot him dead. An ambulance was reportedly not allowed to enter the football pitch. In May Anton al-Shumali was shot at point-blank range with rubber bullets by one of two border policemen who stopped him on a road in Beit Sahur. They left him dying by the roadside. Official investigations into these killings were not known to have been completed by the end of the year.
Thirty-four members of the Israeli forces were prosecuted for offences including
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
illegal use of force and theft. In July, the commander of the "Shimshon" undercover army unit operating in the Gaza Strip received a suspended sentence of one month's imprisonment and was later demoted. He was tried in connection with the killing of a Palestinian in 1989 and found guilty after appeal of exceeding his authority by ordering his subordinates to fire at a suspect's body rather than the legs, in violation of standing orders. Also in July, an army colonel was reprimanded in connection with punitive beatings of Palestinians in 1988.
In June the Jerusalem District Court acquitted a Border Police officer who had been charged with manslaughter following the death of Fadi Zabaqli, a Palestinian killed in Bethlehem in December 1989. Television footage of the incident showed the officer firing towards Fadi Zabaqli as he was running away. An army investigation had found in 1990 that the officer had violated standing orders for opening fire. The court ruled that there was insufficient evidence linking the officer's shooting to Fadi Zabaqli's death. An appeal by the prosecution against the court's verdict was pending at the end of the year.
It was announced in June that responsibility for investigating alleged offences by the police had been transferred from the police to the Ministry of Justice, except for minor offences. In October a Ministry of Justice representative told the Knesset that her ministry would in future be responsible for investigating all complaints against members of the gss. The findings of investigations by the gss and the Ministry of Justice into allegations of torture or ill-treatment by the gss, announced in May 1991, were not publicly known, although the authorities said that measiues had been taken against a number of interrogators.
John Demjanjuk remained under sentence of death while his appeal before the Supreme Court continued. He had been convicted in 1988 of offences including crimes against humanity (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1992).
Palestinians - members of armed groups and others - killed 20 Israeli civilians and over 200 Palestinians, many of them suspected of "collaborating" with the Israeli authorities. Some were interrogated and tortured before being put to death. Palestinian political leaders condemned the torture and wanton killing of suspected "collabo-
rators". However, they seemed generally to endorse the view that "collaborators" could be punished with death if this was approved by the top Palestinian leadership. In December Hamas took hostage and then killed a Border Policeman, Nissim Toledano.
Amnesty International called for the immediate and unconditional release of prisoners of conscience and for all administrative detainees to be brought to trial promptly and fairly, or be released. It called for an end to interrogation practices amounting to torture or ill-treatment and for the impartial investigation of deaths in detention and killings by the security forces. It also called for the immediate return of the Palestinians deported in December.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Israel/South Lebanon: The Khiam Detainees: torture and ill-treatment. The organization called on the Israeli authorities to clarify the legal situations of the detainees and ensure the release of any held as a hostage. It also called for an end to all forms of torture and ill-treatment in the centre and for the detainees to have access to the International Committee of the Red Cross.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in January, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns relating to torture and ill-treatment dxuing interrogation and administrative detention in the Israeli Occupied Territories.
In correspondence and meetings with Amnesty International representatives, the Israeli authorities replied in detail on a number of individual cases and commented on the Amnesty International Report 1992. They provided information on cases of Druze objectors to military service, saying that their number was "minuscule" and that their objection rose often from socio-economic reasons rather than conscience. In April the Military Advocate General's Unit issued a 17-page response to a report on the military justice system published by Amnesty International in July 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The authorities criticized the report's methodology, arguing that it had arrived at "misleading and inaccurate conclusions". They said that progress had been made in areas including the prompt notification to families and lawyers of
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
individuals' arrests and trial sessions. They also stated that although "the use of a certain degree of force is often necessary in order to obtain information, the disproportionate exertion of pressure on suspects (i.e. by torture or maltreatment) is strictly forbidden". With regard to the Khiam detention centre in south Lebanon, the authorities said that no Israeli personnel were stationed there and that they had no authority over the sla, which staffed the centre.
Amnesty International called on the PLO and Hamas to prevent torture and deliberate and arbitrary killings. With regard to the killing of Jamal Faddah, an alleged "collaborator" taken prisoner and shot dead in December by a man who claimed to be an activist for Fatah (a faction of the PLo), the PLO told Amnesty International that it had "strongly condemned the acts of shooting that took place" in the Occupied Territories. In response to appeals by Amnesty International and its condemnation of the killing of Nissim Toledano, Hamas stated that "Imjilitary operations against foreign occupation" were "legal" and "a natural human response".
Amnesty International expressed great concern to plo Chairman Yasser Arafat about the execution in 1991 of Hamza Abu Zaid, who was alleged to have shot dead Salah Kh^laf, a plo leader, and others in Tunis in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Hamza Abu Zaid was taken from Tunisia to Yemen where he was sentenced to death by a plo coiut and executed. Amnesty International appealed to Yasser Arafat to commute any death sentences imposed by the plo (see Lebanon entry).
