PARAGUAY
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects, including juveniles, by police and prison authorities continued to be reported. An army colonel was arbitrarily detained after opening an internal investigation into corrupt practices by senior army commanders. Five former police ofRcials were convicted of the death in custody of a teacher in 1976. Judicial investigations into other human rights violations during the previous administration were not completed. Judicial authorities discovered important new evidence of the torture, killing and "disappearance" of political prisoners during the past administration of President Stroessner.
In June a new Constitution containing extensive human rights provisions was introduced. Among other safeguards, it guarantees the right to life and prohibits the death penalty for ordinary crimes. Also in June, Paraguay acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Renewed reports were received of the torture and ill-treatment of detainees, including minors, in police stations and detention centres. Although a number of
PARAGUAY
formal complaints of torture were presented in the courts, in the majority of cases judicial authorities failed to conduct thorough investigations into such complaints and to bring those responsible to justice. A judicial investigation was opened into allegations that in April police officers had arbitrarily detained and tortured 16-year-old Ramón Melgarejo Ortega in the 26th police station in San Lorenzo on the outskirts of the capital, Asunción. According to Ramón Melgarejo's sworn statement, when he arrived at the police station he was blindfolded and handcuffed to a chair and a plastic bag was repeatedly placed over his head to the point of near-asphyxiation. He was interrogated about alleged thefts. The following day he was allegedly beaten and injured in his mouth when a police officer used pliers to grip and tear the tissue under his tongue. He was released without charge four days later. In October Ramón Melgarejo's mother presented to the court a petition on his behalf, alleging that her son had been harassed and persecuted by the police since lodging his complaint of torture.
No progress was reported in judicial investigations into previous allegations of torture of detainees in the San Lorenzo police station (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In June at least 12 inmates of Tacumbú National Penitentiary, including a 16-year-old youth, were tortured and beaten by prison guards. They were then transferred with over 50 other prisoners to a remote army garrison known as Lagerenza in the western Chaco region. The prisoners were returned to Asunción weeks later after the Attorney General formally accused the prison authorities of acting unconstitutionally by denying the prisoners access to deWce lawryers. On their arrival in Asunción, several prisoners required hospital treatment for injuries resulting ft'om the beatings. Prisoners testified before the courts that the beatings had been carried out on the orders and under the direct supervision of the Director of Penal Institutes in reprisal for widespread internal disturbances in the prison days before. A judicial investigation was opened into the allegations of torture. The Director and four prison guards were arrested pending the outcome of the investigation.
Investigations which opened in August into allegations of widespread corruption,
including alleged drug-trafficking, led to a major political scandal in which senior military commanders were implicated. Army Colonel Luis Catalino González Rojas, commander of the iv Infantry Division. was relieved of his command and arrested in September and held for several weeks after initiating an internal military investigation into corrupt practices by senior armed forces officials, including the army commander General Humberto Garcete. Colonel González was held in incommunicado detention in the barracks of the Presidential Guard for six days before being allowed access to a lawyer and relatives. Defence lavi^er Hermes Rafael Saguier accused army commander General Humberto Garcete of responsibility for a machine-gun attack on his house shortly after he had presented a petition of habeas corpus on behalf of Colonel González. Military authorities failed to respond to requests from a civilian court judge that Colonel González should be presented before the court in response to the petition of habeas corpus. Charges of defamation and slander were brought against Colonel González but he was provisionally released when investigations in the civilian courts led to arrest warrants being issued against three senior army generals, including General Garcete. Amnesty International was concerned that the underlying motive for the detention of Colonel González appeared to be to prevent him proceeding with his inquiries. Colonel González reported receiving anonymous death threats following his release.
In a significant ruling, five former senior police officials were found responsible for the death under torture of teacher Mario Schaerer Prono in 1976 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). In May Pastor Coronel, the former head of the Departamento de Investigaciones de la Policía (dip-c), Police Investigations Department, and three of his subordinates, Juan Martínez, Lucilo Benítez and Camilo Almada, were sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment for aggravated homicide and torture; former police chief General Francisco Britez Borges was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for covering up the crime. Appeals against the convictions had not been resolved by the end of the year. There were few developments in dozens of other complaints pending before the courts for the tortme, murder and "disappearance" of
PARAGUAY/PERU
political opponents under the government of General Alfredo Stroessner. However, in December judicial authorities discovered extensive dip-c dociunentation in a police centre on the outskirts of Asunción. The documents, which were impounded by a criminal court judge, were believed to contain information about the fate of dozens of political opponents who "disappeared" or were killed by dip-c agents during the 1970s.
In February Amnesty International submitted a series of recommendations to the Constituent Assembly urging it to incorporate comprehensive hiunan rights safeguards into the new Constitution.
In July Amnesty International wrote to the Interior Minister expressing concern at reports of the ill-treatment of prisoners in Tacumbú prison and urged the government to take all necessary steps to ensure the physical integrity of all prisoners. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
