CYPRUS
There were at least 15 prisoners of conscience, all Jehovah's Witnesses who had refused on conscientious grounds to perform military service or reservist exercises. Some detainees alleged they were tortured or ill-treated by the police.
In January the House of Representatives passed legislation, recognizing for the first time the right to have conscientious objections to military service and providing for "unarmed military service" inside and outside military camps. However, its provisions fall short of international standards in several respects. It was unclear whether the service outside the military camps would be completely civilian; its length -42 months as against the 26 months of ordinary military service - is punitive, particularly since conscientious objectors have to perform supplementary service equiva-
lent to periods of reservist exercises; it was not clear whether it would be open to conscientious objectors on grounds other than religious; and the right to transfer to alternative service from military service would be suspended during periods of emergency or general mobilization. No conscientious objectors were known to have been offered the option of "unarmed military service" by the end of the year.
In April Cyprus ratified the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Conscientious objectors were imprisoned for periods of up to 15 months. Among them was Christakis lonathan Christoforou, who was sentenced to one year's imprisonment in November for refusing to perform military service. Athi-nakis Zinonos was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment in December on the same charge. It was the second time in two years that both men had been sentenced to terms of imprisonment for refusing to perform military service.
Several detainees in police custody alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated. For example, Mehmet Canbulut, a Turkish Cypriot, was allegedly threatened, slapped, punched, beaten on the soles of his feet, burned with a cigarette and verbally abused by members of the Special Branch in April. He had voluntarily gone to Limassol Central Police Station to report his arrival in the Republic from the northern part of the island (under the control of the Turkish armed forces and the Turkish Cypriot administration). The Attorney General reportedly rejected a complaint on his behalf saying that according to information submitted by the police, it could not be substantiated. In July Dimos Dimos-thenous, mistakenly detained by police in Limassol for a bank robbery, said four or five police officers blindfolded him, beat him all over, gave him electric shocks and hung him upside-down. Following an investigation, in October two police officers were indicted for trial on charges of ill-treating Dimos Dimosthenous and causing bodily harm. Their trial, which was scheduled for December, was postponed until 1993.
Amnesty International called for the release of all imprisoned conscientious objectors. It repeatedly urged the government to bring the new legislation on conscientious objection into line with
cyprus/czech and slovak federal republic
international standards. In March President George Vassiliou informed Amnesty International that an entirely civilian service would be available for objectors on a variety of grounds but that the authorities did not consider the length of the alternative service to be punitive, nor would they permit conscripts who developed conscientious objections during periods of emergency or mobilization to switch to alternative civilian service.
Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government about allegations of torture and ill-treatment. The government informed Amnesty International that the trial of the police officers indicted for ill-treating Andreas Zinonos in May 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) was still pending. It had not responded to Amnesty International's other concerns with regard to torture and ill-treatment by the end of the year.
In October Amnesty International sent an appeal to the heads of both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities prior to their meeting that month in New York under United Nations auspices. The organization called on them to ensure that the subject of people who had gone missing in Cyprus between 1963 and 1964 and in 1974 would be put on the agenda of their talks and urged that full investigations into the fate of all those who had "disappeared" should be carried out.
