SOUTH AFRICA
Hundreds of government opponents were victims of politically motivated killings carried out by the security forces or with their acquiescence. Some were assassinated, others killed in mass attacks on residents of black townships and squatter camps. The authorities annoimced various inquiries into these killings but rarely brought those responsible to justice. Some 500 people were detained under security legislation. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, with at least 121 deaths in custody in suspicious circumstances. Over 400 prisoners remained under sentence of death but there were no executions.
A whites-only referendum in March resulted in a majority vote in favour of the reform process initiated by state President F.W. de Klerk's National Party government. However, the government and the African National Congress (anc) failed to reach agreement at the Convention for a Democratic South Aft-ica (codesa) summit in May. In June the anc withdrew from negotiations following the Boipatong massacre (see below), and launched a series of mass protest actions against the government, but direct talks between the government and the anc were resumed in December.
There was a continued high level of political violence, particularly in Natal. More than 3.000 people were killed, many of them victims of security force action or fighting between supporters of the Inkatha Freedom Party (ifp), headed by KwaZulu "homeland" Chief Minister, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, and the anc. The worst single incident occurred at Boipatong on 17 June, when 49 people, including children, were massacred, apparently by iff supporters. Following this, the United Nations (un) Security Council authorized the un Secretary-General to deploy international observers to reinforce mechanisms established by the September 1991 National Peace Accord (see Amnesty International Report 1992). By December about 100 observers from the un, the Commonwealth, the European Community and the Organization of African Unity were operating in South Africa.
The judicial commission chaired by Appeal Court Judge Richard Goldstone continued to conduct inquiries into incidents of political violence, ranging from armed attacks on black train commuters to the operations of covert military intelligence units (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, in November President de Klerk rejected a request from Judge Goldstone for additional powers and resources to investigate the security forces.
Throughout the year new evidence of covert security force involvement in killings and other unlawfril acts against opposition organizations came to light. The evidence implicated senior officers in the security forces and government ministers. However, the government enacted an amnesty law in November, effectively providing immunity from prosecution for human rights violators.
Some of those killed were victims of
SOUTH AFRICA
attacks on black train commuters or on anc-supporting communities by armed men believed to be operating from ifp-controlled hostels and acting with the acquiescence of the poHce. Others, including middle-level leaders of the anc, the South African Communist Party (sacp) and the trade unions, members of the anc's military wing and other returned exiles, were assassinated by hit squads composed of elements within the security forces or men acting with their acquiescence. In other incidents, local iff leaders, members of the police force and white civilians were believed to have been killed by members of the military wings of the anc and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (pac).
Clear evidence emerged of direct security force involvement in extrajudicial executions. On 7 September, for example, 29 anc supporters were shot dead and hundreds of others injured when members of the Ciskei Defence Force opened fire without warning on a peaceful demonstration. The Goldstone Commission's inquiry into the incident concluded that the conduct of the Ciskei soldiers was "morally and legally indefensible...[and] deliberately aimed at causing as many deaths and injuries as possible".
Further evidence implicating the military in assassinations and attempted assassinations emerged through inquest hearings. The inquest into the death of a human rights lawyer, Bheki Mlangeni, who had been killed in 1991 by an explosive device apparently intended for Dirk Coet-zee, a former member of a covert police hit squad, revealed evidence of military intelligence and security police involvement in a further assassination attempt against Dirk Coetzee in 1992. Other evidence suggested that the police investigating Bheki Mlan-geni's death had attempted to cover up police involvement.
In May newspapers published a secret military document which implicated the head of Military Intelligence and cabinet ministers in the 1985 assassinations of Matthew Goniwe and three other Eastern Cape political activists (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1986).
During the judicial inquest into the 1989 assassination of human rights activist David Webster, evidence from former operatives of the covert military unit, the Civil Co-operation Bureau (ccb), and other witnesses appeared to implicate a former ccb
member. In November the Goldstone Commission seized documents from a secret military intelligence base. These revealed that the Chief of Staff of Military Intelligence had authorized the hiring in 1991 of the same man, a convicted double-murderer, to run a task force aimed at destabilizing the anc and its military wing. Despite the commission's request for additional resources and powers to pursue its inquiries. President de Klerk ordered a military and a police general to lead the investigation. The police general, however, had been implicated in a previous cover-up of police and ccb involvement in hit squads. On 19 December President de Klerk announced that he had ordered the suspension or early retirement of 23 military officers for alleged involvement in illicit political activities, including murder. The list did not include key senior officers implicated in covert activities.
A member of a military battalion appeared in court charged with the murders of an ifp leader and four members of his family, who had been shot dead at their Natal home on 23 August by six men wearing seciuity force uniforms. In November the Goldstone Commission released a report on East Rand violence, in which it concluded that the killing of 18 ifp supporters in Thokoza on 8 September 1991 had been planned and carried out by a police informer operating a "self-defence unit" in Phola Park, an anc-supporting squatter camp.
In April the Natal Supreme Court found five police officers responsible for the 1988 murder of 11 people in Trust Feed, Natal. The presiding judge concluded that the main accused, a police captain then in charge of New Hanover police station, had ordered the killings at the behest of certain ifp officials and had himself shot two of the victims. The case also revealed an extensive senior police cover-up of the officers' involvement in the murders. The court sentenced the police captain to death and four "special police constables", who were found to have acted on his orders, to 15 years' imprisonment.
Witnesses, including a police constable, who testified to the Goldstone Commission about the Boipatong massacre said that they had seen security force armoured vehicles escorting and transporting the attackers, among whom were white men in camouflage uniforms. The majority of the
SOUTH AFRICA
attackers came from a nearby ifp-controlled hostel, Kwa-Madala. The police denied that they had been forewarned of the attack or that their vehicles were present during the attack. However, the Commission had not produced its final report by the end of the year because it was still awaiting additional forensic analysis of the tapes of radio and telephone messages made in the police control room on the night of the massacre.
Approximately 500 people were detained for varying periods under security legislation. They included about 70 people held under the Ciskei National Security Act as the security forces sought out anc supporters after the 7 September shooting of unarmed demonstrators. More than 100 people were detained under the Public Safety Act's emergency regulations following the 17 June massacre in Boipatong. In Bophuthatswana, over 100 students of the University of Bophuthatswana were detained on 18 September for refusing to disclose information relating to disturbances at the university. Most were released the same day, but seven were held for almost a month. After lawyers challenged their detention in court, the seven were charged under security legislation and released on bail.
Most detainees were not held for long periods. However, during the year a pattern emerged of prolonged detention without charge for months under "uru-est areas" regulations declared in various parts of the country under the Public Safety Act. In one such case, Japie Maphalala was detained in June and held without charge until he was released, following intervention by his lawyers, in November.
At least 121 people died in police custody in suspicious circumstances. Some had been arrested for political reasons; others were criminal suspects. Jonas Kgo-sietsile, a mineworker, died on 20 January while held in indefinite, incommunicado detention at Phokeng police station, Bophuthatswana. He had been assaulted and tortured with electric shocks at the same police station two months earlier. According to an official post-mortem, he died as a result of a broken neck and internal bleeding. The police gave contradictory versions of the circumstances leading to his death. By the end of the year no inquest had been held,
In another case, Simon Mthimkulu was found dead on 16 July, two days after his
arrest by police in Sebokeng towmship. A fellow detainee said the police had beaten and kicked Simon Mthimkulu during interrogation at Sebokeng police station and dropped a large stone on his ribs. The findings of a post-mortem by an independent forensic pathologist, Dr Jonathan Gluck-man, were consistent with the witness's account.
In July Dr Gluckman told the press he had details of scores of deaths in police custody since the mid-ig80s. Ninety per cent of these, he said, contained evidence that the police had killed people in their custody. The Minister of Law and Order responded to these allegations with an internal police investigation, the results of which were announced in November. The Minister dismissed the allegations as unsubstantiated. Following the publication of his concerns, Dr Gluckman was subjected to death threats and his office was placed under surveillance, apparently by the security authorities.
In October the government agreed for the first time to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross access to all detainees in police custody to examine conditions of detention and recommend possible improvements. Similar agreements had been negotiated earlier with at least three of the nominally independent "homelands".
While the authorities, in general, still failed to act effectively against police officers implicated in deaths in custody, there were several prosecutions arising from cases in previous years. In September, for example, the Pretoria Supreme Coiul convicted a police officer for the murder of Michael Nkabinde, who died in custody in November 1990. The police officer had continued to assault Michael Nkabinde even after he became unconscious. He was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment. Another police officer was charged with murder, after a 1991 inquest court found him criminally liable for the death of "Bongi" Nyokong, a schoolboy. In October another inquest court decided that the same police officer, together with one other, had unlawfully killed another detainee in 1990. Despite this, the police officer remained on active duty.
There were no executions during the year. In March the government turned down clemency appeals from 17 prisoners sentenced to death. However, five days
SOUTH AFRICA/SPAIN
later the Minister of Justice announced that all executions would be suspended pending agreement on an "interim bill of rights". At the end of the year at least 300 prisoners remained on death row in Pretoria Central Prison. Twelve prisoners remained on death row in the Bophuthat-swana "homeland". Lawyers won a last-minute stay of execution for three of these prisoners, who were scheduled to be executed in November. Eighty-nine prisoners remained under sentence of death in the Transkei "homeland" where a moratorium on executions continued.
The Minister of Justice announced in March that the tribunal appointed to review death sentences imposed before July 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) had completed its work in November 1991. The majority of the cases had been referred back to the Appeal Court. Amnesty International was not aware of how many of these resulted in commutations of the death sentences.
Throughout the year Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about individual cases of human rights violations, including the torture and killing of detainees and extrajudicial executions by members of the security forces. In their responses, government officials denied that state agents had been negligent or responsible for political killings or other human rights violations and accused Amnesty International of bias. In June Amnesty International published South Africa: State of Fear - security force complicity in torture and political killings. 1990-1992. The report documented continuing security force involvement in extrajudicial executions and other serious human rights violations, and the authorities' failure in most cases to hold the perpetrators accountable or bring them to justice,
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in January, Amnesty International described its concerns in South Africa.
In August an Amnesty International observer attended part of the proceedings of an anc commission of inquiry into reports of torture in its camps, in particular in Angola, during the 1980s. In November Amnesty International published South Africa: Torture, ill-treatment and executions in African National Congress camps, which documented evidence of torture and executions committed by anc officials at
military and prison camps, notably in Angola, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, on occasions with the active collaboration of agents of the governments concerned. Amnesty International urged the anc to implement the recommendations of its own commission, which were made public in October, in particular by establishing a further and independent commission to establish the full truth of what had occurred and by compensating the victims. Amnesty International said that those responsible for torturing and killing prisoners should be brought to justice and never again be permitted to hold posts with responsibility for prisoners. The anc announced that it had appointed an independent tribunal and would take Amnesty International's report into account in drawing up the tribunal's terms of reference.
