ARGENTINA
There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the police and one person died in police custody, reportedly as a result of torture. One person in police custody allegedly "disappeared". A new commission was set up to investigate the fate of hundreds of children who "disappeared" during the years of military rule. A draft law to reintroduce the death penalty was presented to Congress.
In January the government passed a law giving financial compensation to detainees held during the years of military rule from 1976 to 1983. Political prisoners who were detained "at the disposal of the Executive Power" and civilians detained by order of military courts are entitled to compensation, which is increased for detainees who suffered "very serious injuries".
There were new allegations of ill-treatment and torture of detainees held as criminal suspects in police units in the federal capital, Buenos Aires, and the provinces. According to the authorities, between 1989 and 1991 there had been 773 complaints of unlawful coercion, which includes ill-treatment of detainees, by police in different units in Buenos Aires. Only one person had been prosecuted as a result of these complaints.
argentina
Among the cases of torture reported during 1992 was that of Ramón María Centurión, who was arrested in January on suspicion of theft in the city of Corrientes, Corrientes Province, by police from Chaco Province. He was taken to the Investigations Department of Chaco Province Police Force, where he was allegedly tortured with electric shocks to the testicles and by having one of his hands burned with hot paraffin. He was released after a few days and was subsequently rearrested several times. He was reportedly tortured again when detained in June. To Amnesty International's knowledge, none of those allegedly responsible for the torture of Ramón María Centurión was brought to justice.
In May around 30 youths who were trying to attend a rock concert in Lanús, Buenos Aires Province, were detained near Lanús stadium. They were taken to a police station where they were allegedly beaten. Most of the youths were released a few hours later. However, according to reports, nine of them, including Diego Dotro, were detained for up to five days without access to their relatives and without being brought before a judge. Two days later another group of about 50 youths, who were trying to see the same rock group in Lanús stadium, were chased and beaten by the police. The youths were marched through the streets of Lanús while being hit and verbally abused. Judicial inquiries were initiated into both incidents.
Seventeen-year-old Sergio Gustavo Durán died in police custody in Morón, Buenos Aires Province. He had allegedly been taken into custody to check his police record on 6 August but the following morning was taken to hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival. The Juvenile Court was reportedly not notified of his detention until 10 hours after his death, Although a police doctor's certificate stated that at the time of his detention Sergio Gustavo Durán had no signs of cuts or bruises, a post-mortem examination showed that he had cuts on his upper lip and tongue, and severe bruises, consistent with blows, on his body, including his testicles. A judicial inquiry was opened into Sergio Gustavo Durán's death.
One person in police custody was alleged to have "disappeared". In May Pablo Cristian Guardatti was reportedly detained at gunpoint in the city of Men-
doza, Mendoza Province, by a man believed to be a policeman wearing civilian clothes whom he had accidentally hit with a stone. Pablo Cristian Guardatti was allegedly taken by the man to the nearby "La Estanzuela" police unit. However, the police denied having detained Pablo Cristian Guardatti and a writ of habeas corpus filed on his behalf was rejected. In September witnesses identified the man who reportedly detained Pablo Cristian Guardatti as a police officer from "La Estanzuela" police unit. The police officer and three other officers from "La Estanzuela" police unit were then detained and charged with kidnapping following a judicial investigation. However, the whereabouts of Pablo Cristian Guardatti remained unknown. The investigation was continuing at the end of the year.
Judicial investigations failed to clarify the fate of three people who reportedly "disappeared" in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Adolfo Argentino Garrido and Raúl Baigorria "disappeared" in April 1990 after allegedly being detained by uniformed police in General San Martin park, Mendoza city. Andrés Alberto Nuñez "disappeared" in September 1990 after reportedly being taken into custody by the Investigations Force of La Plata, Buenos Aires Province (see Amnesty International Report 1991). In all three cases the police denied arresting the men or having any record of their detention, despite evidence to the contrary.
The governor of the Federal Penitentiary System was charged with unlawful coercion for his part in the ill-treatment of detainees belonging to the Movimiento Todos por la Patria (mtp). All for the Fatherland Movement, who were involved in an armed attack on La Tablada army barracks in 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1990 to 1992). However, the case was dismissed by a judge who ruled that the criminal action was inadmissible because the judicial investigation had taken over three years to complete. Investigations were still not completed into the allegations that two mtp prisoners were extrajudicially executed after they surrendered and that three others "disappeared" after giving themselves up to military personnel on the day of the attack.
In November a new commission was set up within the Sub-Secretariat of Human Rights of the Ministry of the Interior to
argentina/armenia
investigate the fate of hundreds of children who "disappeared" during the "dirty war" of the 1970s and 1980s. Only 53 of the "disappeared" children had been traced by the end of 1992.
In March the Vice-Président of the Chamber of Deputies presented draft legislation to Congress to reintroduce the death penalty for certain crimes including rape and kidnapping resulting in death, acts of terrorism, subversion, sabotage resulting in death, and drug-trafficking. The draft bill was being considered by the Commission for Penal Legislation of the Chamber of Deputies.
During the year Amnesty International called on the authorities in various provinces to thoroughly and impartially investigate reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and to take steps to prevent such abuses. It also urged the authorities to investigate the "disappearance" of Pablo Cristian Guardatti.
In October Amnesty International told the government of its concern that in the past decade very little progress had been made in clarifying the fate of thousands of people who "disappeared" dnring the years of military rule. The organization welcomed President Carlos Menem's pledge in 1992 to track down any information on the "disappeared" and asked the authorities to take all necessary measures to disclose the information on the "disappeared" allegedly available in police and military archives.
In April Amnesty International expressed concern at the proposal to reintroduce the death penalty and stressed that its reintroduction would be in breach of Argentina's obligations under the American Convention on Human Rights.
