SAUDI ARABIA
Over 50 people, many of them possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested and detained briefly for their religious or political activities: at least four were still held at the end of the year. Seventeen government opponents arrested in previous years, including six prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial throughout 1992, and at least five others continued to serve prison sentences imposed after unfair trials. New reports of torture were received and at least three detainees died allegedly as a result of torture or ill-treatment. Judicial punishments of flogging and amputation continued to be imposed. Sixty-six people were executed.
In March King Fahd bin 'Abdul-'Aziz issued decrees as part of his promised political reforms (see Amnesty International Report 1992). One decree established a 60-member Consultative Council, the principal functions of which were to be advisory. Its members were to be appointed by the King, but this had not been done by the end of the year. Another decree envisaged the creation of local consultative councils in the Kingdom's 14 provinces. The King stressed that all the proposed changes were based on Shari'a (Islamic law as interpreted in Saudi Arabia) and that human rights would be respected.
In September over 100 prominent religious scholars and university professors submitted a memorandum to the King entitled al-Nasiha (the Advice). The document criticized the Kingdom's foreign and economic policies as well as the alleged corruption of members of the royal family. It called for press ft'eedom and meaningful political reforms. Several of the signatories were later prevented from travelling abroad by the authorities.
In January over 30 suspected opponents of the government, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested, principally in Riyadh and Qaseem. All were Sunni Muslims and suspected followers of Salafiyya, a fundamentalist Sunni Muslim doctrine. Among them was Ahmad al-'Abdani, a Mu'athin (caller to prayers in a mosque) from Riyadh. Most were released uncharged after being held for questioning for several days, but it was still not clear at the end of the year whether they had all been ft'eed.
Between January and October, at least six other suspected opponents of the government, including possible prisoners of
SAUDI ARABIA
conscience, were arrested in al-Qatif and other cities in Eastern Province. All were Shi'a Muslims suspected of being supporters of the Organization of Islamic Revolution in the Arabian Peninsula (oirap). Three were released uncharged, but the others remained in detention, apparently without charge or trial, at the end of the year. Among those still held were Abdul-Khaliq al-)anbi and Mulla Turki Ahmad al-Turki, both students at King Abdul-'Aziz University in Jeddah. They were arrested in October following an argument with a lecturer over texts which they perceived to be insulting to the Shi'a faith. They were believed to be held in al-Mabahith al-"Amma Prison in al-Dammam.
In October at least 18 Korean and Indian Christians were arrested following a raid on their place of worship in Riyadh by members of the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, an official body which supervises the observance of Shari'a. They were initially held at Suedi police station but were later transferred to Malaz prison in Riyadh, Among them was Sun-Keon Park, a Korean employee of the Saudi Ministry of Telecommunications. It was not clear whether any of the 18 had been released by the end of the year,
At least 17 government opponents arrested in previous years remained in detention, apparently without charge or trial. Six were prisoners of conscience: five students from King Sa'ud University in Riyadh arrested in 1989 and one suspected oirap supporter arrested in 1990. Eleven were alleged supporters of Hizbullah fil Hijaz, Party of God in Hijaz, arrested in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Four other suspected Hizbullah fil Hijaz supporters continued to serve prison terms imposed after unfair trials in late 1989 or early 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1989 to 1992). Zuhair al-Safwani, a student and freelance journalist arrested in January 1991 and reportedly sentenced to four years' imprisonment and 300 lashes, also remained in prison.
Muhammad al-Fasi, a Saudi Arabian businessman, remained in unacknowledged detention at the end of the year. He had been arrested in Amman, Jordan, by Jordanian security forces in October 1991, apparently for speaking in support of Iraq during the Gulf War, and was later handed
over to Saudi Arabian authorities (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Information was received during 1992 about the release in 1991 of three prisoners of conscience, all oirap supporters arrested in 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). At least two other prisoners of conscience who had been arrested in March 1991 were released uncharged in April 1991 and February 1992. They were among a group of six Shi'a Muslims arrested between January and July 1991, At the end of the year, confirmation was being sought of the release of the remaining members of this group.
New reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees were received. Among methods allegedly used were beatings, including falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet) and sleep deprivation. Muhammad bin Fahd al-Mutayr, a bank employee, died in custody in April, allegedly as a result of severe beatings. He had been arrested a few days earlier following a robbery at his workplace in Riyadh. Zuhair Ibrahim al-'Awami, aged 18, died in mid-November, one week after his arrest. His body allegedly bore marks of severe beatings. 'Abdullah 'Abbas, a Ghanaian national, died in King Fahd Hospital in Jeddah in April several hours after his transfer from a deportation centre in the city where he had been detained for two weeks. Other detainees held with him at the deportation centre said that his legs and other parts of his body were swollen as a result of beatings by guards and that his urine was bloodstained. No investigation by the authorities into his death was known to have taken place.
New information was received during the year suggesting that scores of Iraqi refugees had been tortured or ill-treated while held in Rafha refugee camp and Artawiyya camp in 1991. The alleged victims were people who had fled from Iraq during and after the Gulf War or who had been captured and held as prisoners of war. The torture methods allegedly used included beatings, public floggings and rape. Reports of deaths as a result of torture were also received. Among the reported victims was Muhammad Khidhayer, who died in Artawiyya in September 1991 shortly after his arrest on suspicion of organizing a protest against camp conditions the previous month. In November and December the authorities transferred
SAUDI ARABIA/SENEGAL
inmates from the Artawiyya camp to new facilities in Rafha, and by the end of the year almost all inmates had been transferred.
Between April and October, eight judicial amputations were carried out in Jed-dah, Jizan and other cities. Among the victims were Filipino, Yemeni and Indian nationals. All had their right hands severed at the wrist after being convicted of theft.
During the year, 66 men were publicly executed by beheading. The victims were Filipino, Pakistani, Saudi Arabian, Sudanese and Yemeni nationals who had been convicted of murder, drug-trafficking, apostasy, kidnapping and sexual offences. Among them was Saddiq Malallah. a Saudi Arabian Shi'a Muslim who was reportedly beheaded in September after being convicted of apostasy. However, the details of the charges against him were unknown.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about the arrests of Christians and Sunni and Shi'a Muslims for the peaceful expression of their religious beliefs and called for the immediate, unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience, including those arrested in previous years. Amnesty International also urged the government to investigate deaths in custody and all torture allegations, and reiterated its opposition to the continued imposition of the death penalty and of the cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments of flogging and amputations. No response was received.
In July Amnesty International again indicated its wish to send a delegation to Saudi Arabia to discuss human rights violations with the government, but without response.
