TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Three prisoners were scheduled to be executed in November and two in December; the executions were suspended pending appeals. New death sentences were passed and over 100 prisoners were under sentence of death. A group of 114 people charged with treason were released. At least one person was sentenced to be flogged.
The government of Prime Minister Patrick Manning, elected in December 1991, was "considering in further detail" the report of a Commission of Inquiry into the effectiveness and status of the death penalty. The report had been submitted to President Noor Hassanali in 1990 and its recommendations, which included executing prisoners who had exhausted their appeals, had been accepted by the previous government.
New death sentences were passed during 1992 and over 100 prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
Cayman Jurisingh, Peter Matthews and Faizal Mohammed were scheduled to be executed on 10 November and Brian Francois and Lai Seeratan on 8 December. These would have been the first executions since 1979. Lawyers submitted constitutional motions arguing that execution would violate their constitutional rights. The motion on the first three cases was dismissed by the High Court on 11 November. An appeal against this decision was heard by the Court of Appeal in December; a ruling was pending at the end of the year.
Daniel Pinto was granted clemency by President Hassanali in October on the recommendation of the Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy. His death sentence was
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGOAUNISIA
commuted to life imprisomnent. In 1990 the United Nations Human Rights Committee, which supervises implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, had recommended that he should be released (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Three men who had been sentenced to death for murder in 1989 were released in March. The Court of Appeal allowed their appeal on the ground that the judge had erred on various matters at their trial, including failing to warn the jury against over-reliance on identification evidence for a conviction.
In March the High Court heard the case of 114 people charged with treason, murder and other offences. In December 1991 the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, the final court of appeal for Trinidad and Tobago, had ruled that they should have a new hearing in the local courts (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The group was involved in an attempt to overthrow the government in 1990 in which over 30 people had been killed during five days of confrontations. The group had taken 46 hostages, including the Prime Minister, who were released after the Acting President promised an amnesty to their captors. If convicted as charged, the defendants would have faced a mandatory death sentence. The court ruled in June that all 114 should be released and paid damages; it held that the amnesty negotiated with the group was valid. They were released on 1 July. The government appealed against the decision in August but the appeal had not been heard by the end of the year,
Corporal punishment (including flogging), which constitutes cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, remained in force both as a penalty for criminal offences and as a disciplinary measure for prisoners. In May a man convicted of attempted murder was sentenced to 39 years' imprisonment and 20 strokes with the cat-o'-nine-tails (a device of nine knotted cords or hide thongs attached to a handle). It was not known whether this or other previous flogging sentences had been carried out.
In August Amnesty International wrrote to Prime Minister Manning about the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into the death penalty, Amnesty International criticized several of the Commission's recommendations, noting testi-
mony at the public hearings in which it was stressed that hanging is not a deterrent to murder. Amnesty International lu^ed the government to commute all existing death sentences as a first step towards abolition. In September Amnesty International received an acknowledgement fi:om the Prime Minister's office but no substantial reply had been received by the end of the year.
In November Amnesty International appealed to the government not to carry out the scheduled executions and to commute the death sentences. An Amnesty International representative observed the appeal hearing in December.
