GREECE
There were about 400 prisoners of conscience, all of them conscientious objectors to military service. Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and prisons continued.
There is no alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors to military service. Some 400 conscientious objectors, most of them Jehovah's Witnesses, were in prison. Most were serving four-year sentences which they could reduce to about three years by working while in prison.
The military authorities continued to imprison Jehovah's Witness ministers (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992). Anastasios Georgiades, a Jehovah's Witness minister, was jailed in January after refusing to perform military service on conscientious grounds. The military authorities refused to grant him the exemption enjoyed by ministers of other religions on the grounds that they considered that the Jehovah's Witness faith was not a recognized religion under Greek law. He was acquitted of insubordination on two separate occasions, but following both trials he was immediately recalled to the army and reimprisoned. He was finally released in July after the Council of State ruled he was a minister of a recognized religion eligible for exemption from military service.
A number of people were prosecuted for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of expression. Stratis Boumazos, Maria Kalogeropoulou, Vangelio Sotiropoulou and Christina Tsamoura were each sentenced to 19 months' imprisonment in May for a statement they had made advocating peace in the Balkans and opposing government foreign policy and domestic policy
regarding Greece's ethnic minorities. They remained free pending appeal. In a separate case, Christos Sideropoulos and Anastasios Boulis were prosecuted for stating in a magazine interview that there was a Macedonian minority in Greece and criticizing the government's foreign policy. Their trial, which was postponed twice during the year, was rescheduled for 1993. There was no indication that any of these people had advocated violence and if imprisoned they would be prisoners of conscience.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police stations and prisons continued. For example, in February police in Patras allegedly slapped and punched Youssef Akroumi, a Moroccan asylum-seeker detained on criminal charges, until he lost consciousness and suffered temporary hearing loss in his left ear. He was subsequently treated for a ruptured ear-drum in hospital. He reportedly informed the examining magistrate about his ill-treatment, but no action appeared to have been taken to investigate his allegations.
Several conscientious objectors alleged they had been ill-treated by military personnel in the initial detention period. For example, in March military policemen at Kozani Army Camp kicked and punched Dimitris Tsironis. threatened him with loaded weapons and made obscene remarks insulting to his religious beliefs.
In June prison staff allegedly beat Ibrahim Liunwe before he was held for 10 days in isolation in Patras Closed Prison, Fellow prisoners said that when Ibrahim Lumwe was released from isolation he had severe bruising on his body, legs and arms. In July Georgios Avgoustidis, also held in Patras Closed Prison, alleged that he was punched and kicked by the chief guard and director of the prison after he questioned them about a punishment.
In September Manolis Tsapelis died one month after police in Hydra had allegedly headbutted him in the chest and punched him in the stomach following an argument. An autopsy report recorded the cause of death as an embolism following an operation on an injured spleen resulting from a fall or beating. An investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment, which was initiated by the Public Prosecutor's Office, had not concluded by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed repeatedly for the release of all imprisoned
greece
138
There were about 400 prisoners of conscience, all of them conscientious objectors to military service. Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and prisons continued.
There is no alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors to military service. Some 400 conscientious objectors, most of them Jehovah's Witnesses, were in prison. Most were serving four-year sentences which they could reduce to about three years by working while in prison.
The military authorities continued to imprison Jehovah's Witness ministers (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992]. Anastasios Georgiades, a Jehovah's Witness minister, was jailed in January after refusing to perform military service on conscientious grounds. The military authorities refused to grant him the exemption enjoyed by ministers of other religions on the grounds that they considered that the Jehovah's Witness faith was not a recognized religion under Greek law. He was acquitted of insubordination on two separate occasions, but following both trials he was immediately recalled to the army and reimprisoned. He was finally released in July after the Council of State ruled he was a minister of a recognized religion eligible for exemption fi:'om military service.
A number of people were prosecuted for peacefully exercising their right to ft-eedom of expression. Stratis Bournazos, Maria Kalogeropoulou, Vangelio Sotiropoulou and Christina Tsamoura were each sentenced to 19 months' imprisonment in May for a statement they had made advocating peace in the Balkans and opposing government foreign policy and domestic policy
regarding Greece's ethnic minorities. They remained ft-ee pending appeal. In a separate case, Christos Sideropoulos and Anastasios Boulis were prosecuted for stating in a magazine interview that there was a Macedonian minority in Greece and criticizing the government's foreign policy. Their trial, which was postponed twice during the year, was rescheduled for 1993. There was no indication that any of these people had advocated violence and if imprisoned they would be prisoners of conscience.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police stations and prisons continued. For example, in February police in Patras allegedly slapped and punched Youssef Akroumi, a Moroccan asylum-seeker detained on criminal charges, until he lost consciousness and suffered temporary hearing loss in his left ear. He was subsequently treated for a ruptured ear-drum in hospital. He reportedly informed the examining magistrate about his ill-treatment, but no action appeared to have been taken to investigate his allegations.
Several conscientious objectors alleged they had been ill-treated by military personnel in the initial detention period. For example, in March military policemen at Kozani Army Camp kicked and punched Dimitris Tsironis, threatened him with loaded weapons and made obscene remarks insulting to his religious beliefs.
In June prison staff allegedly beat Ibrahim Lumwe before he was held for 10 days in isolation in Patras Closed Prison. Fellow prisoners said that when Ibrahim Lumwe was released from isolation he had severe bruising on his body, legs and arms. In July Georgios Avgoustidis, also held in Patras Closed Prison, alleged that he was punched and kicked by the chief guard and director of the prison after he questioned them about a punishment.
In September Manolis Tsapelis died one month after police in Hydra had allegedly headbutted him in the chest and punched him in the stomach following an argument. An autopsy report recorded the cause of death as an embolism following an operation on an injured spleen resulting from a fall or beating. An investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment, which was initiated by the Public Prosecutor's Office, had not concluded by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed repeatedly for the release of all imprisoned
conscientious objectors and for the government to introduce alternative civilian service of non-punitive length. It urged that all charges against people prosecuted for peacefully exercising their right to fi^eedom of expression be dropped and that all convictions in such cases be quashed. Amnesty International urged that all allegations of torture and ill-treatment be investigated promptly and impartially and that those responsible be brought to justice. In December an Amnesty International observer travelled to Greece to attend the trial of Christos Sideropoulos and Anastasios Boulis which was postponed.
In June Amnesty International published a report, Greece: Torture and ill-treatment, which drew attention to the many cases of torture and ill-treatment reported in recent years. The report made specific recommendations for safeguards to protect detainees, including an effective and impartial complaints mechanism.
In August the Minister of Public Order commented on cases mentioned in Amnesty International's report. One of these concerned Siileyman Akyar, who died in police custody in January 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In his case the Minister stated that disciplinary measures had not been taken pending the outcome of the judicial inquiry. In another case, he said 'disciplinary measures had been taken against a policeman. In four cases, including the alleged ill-treatment of Dimitris Voglis and Stella Evgenikou, a judicial inquiry was pending (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 2992). The case against police officers alleged to have tortured Vasilis Makrinitsas, Vasilis Makripoulias and Argyris Kavatas was dropped following a decision by the Council of Judges (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The Minister's response contained virtually no information on the methods used to investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment, although Amnesty International had asked for full details of the methods and findings of each investigation. The government made no substantive comment on the allegations Amnesty International had received regarding ill-treatment of people in prison, nor did it respond to Amnesty International's proposals regarding the protection of police detainees and prisoners from abuse.
In September the government informed Amnesty International that it was unable
greece/grenada
to introduce alternative civilian service because, according to a decision by the Legal State Council (which does not have binding authority), such a service would be unconstitutional.
