JAMAICA
A law which created new categories of "capital" and "non-capital" murder was applied retroactively to more than 270 prisoners already under sentence of death. By the end of the year, at least 46 death sentences had been commuted under the new law and 83 prisoners (already on death row) had had their offences reclassified as "capital murder". At least 15 new death sentences were
JAMAICA
passed during the year but no executions were carried out. There were allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners, four of whom died while in police custody. A number of people were killed by police officers in circumstances suggesting they may have been extrajudicially executed.
Michael Manley, who had been Prime Minister since 1989 and between 1972 and 1980, resigned the leadership of the ruling People's National Party in March, a post he had held for 23 years. He was replaced in both posts by Percival J. Patterson.
The Offences against the Person (Amendment) Act was passed by parliament and became law in October. It repealed legislation which had provided a mandatory death sentence in all cases of murder, and created new categories of "capital" and "non-capital" murder. Capital murder under the Act includes the killing of members of the security forces, judicial and correctional officers and witnesses in civil and criminal cases, and murders in the course of other crimes. The death sentence remains mandatory in such cases. Other murders carry a sentence of life imprisonment.
The law applied retroactively to more than 270 prisoners who were under sentence of death for murder in October 1992. and stipulated that such prisoners' offences would be reclassi^ed as "capital" or "noncapital" by an appeal coxut judge. The law further stipulated that prisoners whose offences were reclassified as "capital murder" had 21 days in which to apply for a final review of their classification by three judges of the Court of Appeal, and the right to be represented by counsel.
The first reclassifications took place in December when at least 46 death row inmates had their death sentences commuted to life imprisorunent and 83 had their offences reclassified as "capital murder". There were fears that prisoners whose
offences had been reclassified as "capital murder" would not be able to obtain legal representation at their final review hearings, despite the provisions of the new law. Few of these prisoners had lawyers in Jamaica as there was no legal aid after the trial and direct appeal, and United Kingdom lawyers who represented Jamaican prisoners in appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (jcpc) in London (the final court of appeal for Jamaica) had initially not been informed which prisoners' offences had been reclassified.
The situation was made even more serious by the Minister of Justice's announcement in December that executions would resume early the next year. At the end of 1992 lavi^ers were still seeking information on cases and appealing to the authorities for adequate time in which to provide legal representation.
There was concern that, without a thorough review process and adequate legal representation, many prisoners on death row who should benefit from the new law might not be identified. The new law stipulated, for example, that where two or more people were convicted jointly of murder, only the actual killer would receive the death sentence; others would be convicted of "non-capital" murder. Despite this provision, some prisoners whose offences were reclassified as "capital murder" were not the killers and in other cases the record was unclear.
There were serious concerns about the quality of the evidence in some cases. In 1989 the jcpc had quashed the convictions and death sentences of 10 Jamaican prisoners who had been sentenced solely on the uncorroborated identification testimony of a single witness, on the ground that the trial judges had failed to warn juries of the dangers of convicting on such evidence. Despite this ruling, a number of prisoners who had been convicted on similar evidence had their offences reclassified as "capital murder".
In six of the cases classified as "capital murder" under the new law - those of Paul Kelly, Ivan Morgan, Earl Pratt, Carlton Reid, Leroy Simmonds and Clifton Wright - the United Nations (un) Human Rights Committee had recommended that the death sentences be commuted or the prisoners released because their rights under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) had been violated.
JAMAICA
However, the Jamaican Government had not acted on the recommendations.
In the case of Clifton Wright (sentenced to death in 1983) important forensic evidence had been overlooked at his trial. In July the un Human Rights Committee adopted the view that his rights had been violated under Article 14 of the iccpr (the right to a fair trial) and Article 6 (the right to life), since the death sentence had been imposed after judicial proceedings that fell short of international standards for a fair trial. The Committee concluded that he was entitled to "an effective remedy... entailing his release". (The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights had previously considered his case and in 1988 found a violation of Article 25 - the Right to Judicial Protection - under the American Convention on Human Rights.)
In October the un Human Rights Committee adopted the view that Leroy Sim-monds' rights had also been violated under Articles 14 and 6 of the iccpr and concluded that he, too, was entitled to release. Similar views had been adopted in the cases of Carlton Reid in 1990 and Paul Kelly in 1991.
In the cases of Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan (sentenced to death in 1979) the un Human Rights Committee had recommended in 1989 that their death sentences be commuted on the ground, among other things, that a four-year delay in the issuing of a written appeal judgment had deprived them of the right to a fair trial without undue delay. However, they remained on death row. In June 1992 the Court of Appeal dismissed a constitutional motion in their cases, stating that "delay in execution cannot be regarded as inhuman and degrading punishment or other treatment". In July they were granted leave to appeal to the jcpc, which was still pending at the end of the year.
Glenford Campbell, Aston Little and Raphael Henry - who had also been recommended for release by the un Human Rights Committee - were among those whose death sentences were commuted to life imprisonment under the new law.
At least 15 people were sentenced to death for murder during the year. There were no executions: the last had been carried out in 1988.
Three prisoners died from suffocation after being held with 16 other prisoners in a small, unventilated cell in the Constant
Spring Police Station from 22 to 24 October. In December an inquest jury found the deaths were caused by criminal negligence amounting to manslaughter by the police although the verdict did not identify individual officers responsible. According to testimony at the inquest, the prisoners were given no food or water from around midday on 23 October until the three were found dead the following morning; some inmates had been forced through intense heat and thirst to drink their own sweat or urine; and no one had attended to calls for help during the night. A government pathologist found bodily injuries, including head injuries, on the three who died, which could have contributed to their deaths, although the cause of the injuries was not established. A decision on whether there was evidence to charge individual police officers was pending at the end of the year,
A decision was also pending in the case of John Headley, who died in the Ramble Police Station in November, allegedly after being beaten by police officers. Inmate witnesses alleged that John Headley was bleeding and unable to stand when he was placed in a police cell where he was found dead some hours later.
A number of people were shot and killed by police in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed. Many people were reportedly killed during shoot-outs, while resisting arrest or during confrontations. However, some victims who were shot dead were unarmed or appeared to offer no immediate threat of deadly resistance. In some cases suspects had allegedly siuxendered or were in police custody at the time they were shot. They included Fitzgerald Poison who was shot dead by a police officer in the street in September. Police claimed that he was shot when he tried to disarm an officer, but eye-witnesses disputed this; one eye-witness stated that he had his hands in the air at the time. The case was submitted to the Dfrector of Public Prosecution for a ruling on possible action and a decision was pending at the end of the year.
In May Amnesty International wrote to the Governor General, Sir Howard Cooke, and Prime Minister P.J. Patterson welcoming the fact that there had been no executions since 1988, and expressing the hope that the moratorium would be maintained
JAMAICA/JAPAN
and that steps would be taken to abolish the death penalty. It also urged the Governor General to use his prerogative of mercy to commute all death sentences. Amnesty International also wrote to the government in May about the bill, which was then before parliament, to amend the Offences against the Person Act. While Amnesty International welcomed provisions to restrict the use of the death penalty, and to review the cases of all those on death row, it drew attention to concerns about the fairness of capital trials, lack of adequate legal representation and the poor quality of the evidence in many cases. It urged that these and other factors be taken into account in the review of cases and appealed for the commutation of the death sentences of all those on death row.
