GERMANY
At least one conscientious objector served a prison sentence for refusing to perform military service; he was released in January. He was considered a prisoner of conscience. Allegations were received concerning the ill-treatment of asylum-seekers and other foreign nationals.
The Federal Republic of Germany ratified in August the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
In January the first of a number of trials of former East German border guards ended (see Amnesty International Report 1992). They had been charged with the manslaughter of Chris Gueffroy, who was shot dead trying to cross the Berlin Wall in February 1989. One of the former guards
GERMANY
was sentenced by the Berlin Regional Court to three and a half years' imprisonment; another was given a two-year suspended prison sentence. The two other guards were acquitted.
In November the trial of former East German leader Erich Honecker began in Berlin. Erich Honecker, who was returned to Germany in July after spending seven and a half months sheltering in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow, was charged with the manslaughter of 13 defectors at the East German border. Similar charges were also brought against other former high-ranking East German government officials.
Thomas Biskupek served almost three months in detention between October 1991 and January 1992 for refusing to perform military service on grounds of conscience. On 29 October 1991 Thomas Biskupek's application to perform alternative service, submitted some 12 weeks earlier, was rejected. He appealed against this decision and was finally recognized as a conscientious objector on 27 January, having spent a total of 81 days in detention for refusing to put on his uniform.
Ill-treatment of asylum-seekers and other foreign nationals by police was reported on several occasions, In March an asylum-seeker, a 14-year-old Turkish Kurd, was stopped by police officers near the main railway -station in Bremen. He attempted to flee but was caught by police officers and thrown roughly to the ground. His arms were reportedly bent backwards and he was struck when he cried out in pain. He later underwent an operation on a fracture to his arm.
During a trial in August allegations were made that police officers had failed to intervene in an attack by right-wing extremists on an Angolan immigrant worker. Amadeu Antonio Kiowa was kicked and beaten to death in November 1990 in Eber-swalde, a town 45 kilometres northeast of Berlin. Three men who participated in the attack were found guilty of inflicting grievous bodily harm on Amadeu Antonio Kiowa resulting in his death. During the trial it was alleged that police officers had shadowed the attackers but had failed to come to the Angolan's rescue when he was attacked.
In August the Bavarian Ministry of Justice rejected Amnesty International's recommendation that Haus HI. the secure psychiatric unit attached to Straubing
prison, be re-established as an independent and separate clinic. Amnesty International had expressed concern that the close link between the prison and psychiatric facility tended to result in the placing of prison objectives before patients' needs (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The Ministry denied this and stated that the integration of the psychiatric unit into the prison brought considerable advantages to the prisoners detained there.
Amnesty International wrote to the German authorities expressing concern about Thomas Biskupek's imprisonment. The organization urged the authorities to consider the adoption of a procedure to ensure the automatic suspension of call-up once an application to perform alternative service is submitted. In April the Ministry of Defence replied that the Law on Conscientious Objection allowed for such a suspension, provided that an application to perform alternative service was submitted before call-up papers were issued. Amnesty International wrote again to the Ministry of Defence in August emphasizing its belief that conscientious objectors should be allowed to claim conscientious objector status at any time.
In May Amnesty International asked the German authorities whether charges had been brought against the police accused of ill-treating the 14-year-old Turkish Kurd. In October the Minister of Justice in Bremen replied that a judicial investigation into the allegations was still continuing.
In August and October Amnesty International wrote to the authorities asking to be informed of the outcome of an investigation reportedly launched into the behaviour of the police officers who allegedly stood by and watched the attack which resulted in the death of Amadeu Antonio Kiowa. In November Amnesty International was informed by the Ministry of the Interior of the State of Brandenburg that a judicial investigation into the allegations was currently in progress. An earlier decision by the relevant police authorities not to take any action against the officers would be reassessed in the light of any new information which emerged.
