PHILIPPINES
Scores of people were believed to have been extrajudicially executed and at least 16 people reportedly "disappeared" in police or military custody. At least 11 prisoners of conscience remained in detention throughout the year and possible prisoners of conscience were among around 475 other political prisoners. Some political detainees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated. Legislation proposing the restoration of the death penalty was debated by Congress but no vote was taken before the end of the year.
The government continued to face armed opposition fi?om the New People's Army (npa), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines (cpp); the Moro National Liberation Front (mnlf); and other groups seeking independence for predominantly Muslim areas of Mindanao. The authorities publicly accused members of lawful political and social organizations
PHILIPPINES
of being members of armed opposition groups and labelled their organizations as "fronts" for the cpp/npa. Armed opposition groups, particularly the npa, committed abuses, including arbitrary killings, tortme and hostage-taking.
Fidel Ramos, a former Secretary of National Defense, was elected President in May general elections. He announced plans to restore political stability and introduced a series of peace initiatives. In August the new government issued guidelines for the bail, release or pardon of people detained or convicted on political charges. A number of high-ranking members of the cpp were temporarily released from prison. One alleged npa leader, Rodolfo Salas, was granted an absolute pardon by the President in September. The offences covered by the guidelines included rebellion and illegal possession of firearms in furtherance of rebellion. In September the government repealed the Anti-Subversion Law (Republic Act 1700) which had outlawed the cpp, and in December the President announced that political suspects charged with common crimes would qualify for the amnesty. The government claimed that 349 suspected cpp/npa members had been released by the end of December. However, independent human rights groups claimed that only 237 had been freed, the majority after dismissal of their cases or the granting of bail. Scores of military officers, who had been jailed for involvement in coup attempts against the previous government, were also provisionally released.
In September government representatives and leaders of the National Democratic Front (ndf), the umbrella political organization which includes the cpp, signed a declaration calling for a negotiated
political settlement of the armed conflict. The same month rebel military officers agreed to participate in separate peace negotiations with the government. In October the mnlf indicated that it was open to negotiations if these were based on the 1976 Tripoli Agreement, which granted full autonomy to 13 Muslim provinces in Mindanao.
The Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit (cafgu) as well as unofficial vigilante groups engaged in counter-insurgency operations with the support or acquiescence of security forces. Despite considerable evidence of cafgu involvement in human rights violations, a leading military official said in August that military training of cafgu members had "corrected" this problem and the government proposed a substantial budgetary increase for the cafgu in 1993.
Effective investigation of alleged human rights violations and related prosecutions continued to be obstructed by the security forces. Obstuction included intimidating judges, lawyers, witnesses and complainants; and refusing access to information, personnel or military premises. Investigations by the official Commission on Human Rights (chr) continued to be impeded by cumbersome, lengthy procedures and by the chr practice of placing the burden of proof on complainants, despite the risk of reprisals or the lack of resources at their disposal.
At least 60 people were victims of apparent extrajudicial executions by government and government-backed forces, many after being publicly accused of supporting the npa. Those killed were members of farmers' or peasants' organizations, church workers, community workers, trade unionists and civilians living in zones of armed conflict.
In Zamboanga del Sur, human rights advocate Demetria Pedrano and her 63-year-old mother, Basilia, were shot and stabbed to death on 15 February by armed men believed to be members of a military-backed vigilante group. Demetria Pedrano was a church worker who had spoken out against human rights violations by pro-government vigilantes. Cosme Remontar, a farmers' organization member, was shot dead on 13 July in Guihulngan, Negros Oriental. According to witnesses, 11 members of the cafgu and the Philippine National Police (pnp) arrived at his farm and said
PHILIPPINES
they were searching for his brother, an alleged npa member. The witnesses reported that cafgu members forced Cosme Remontar to kneel down before shooting him, and then hacked his body with a machete as he lay dying.
The chr reported in March that an investigation into the killing of Edilberto Bensen (see Amnesty iniernafiona/ Report 1992) had been suspended and the case dossier "archived". Edilberto Bensen. a trade unionist in Negros Occidental, had been killed in August 1991 along with his wife and daughter by armed men believed to be members of the Philippine Army. The chr appeared to have accepted military claims that Edilberto Bensen was an insurgent rebel who had been killed by the npa. The chr provided no evidence to substantiate this claim and friends of the victims maintained that Edilberto Bensen was not an npa member and suggested that he had been killed because he had resisted military pressure to join a militia group engaged in counter-insurgency activities.
Harassment of human rights advocates and others critical of government policy was widespread. Members of farmers' and fishermen's organizations were also particularly vulnerable, as were staff members of non-govemmental organizations. Methods used included death threats, beatings and interrogation by military and military-backed forces.
Marcelo Fakilang, an outspoken critic of military human rights violations and an active member of the Cordillera People's Alliance, an organization working in defence of indigenous people's rights in the region, was threatened by a group of armed soldiers on 26 January at his home in Mountain Province. The soldiers fired guns in the air and reportedly threatened to blow up his house. The soldiers returned on 31 January and took Marcelo Fakilang to a village centre where he was beaten. The military had previously accused him of being a communist sympathizer and had alleged that he received a monthly allowance fi-om the underground ndf, an allegation he vigorously denied.
At least 16 people reportedly "disappeared" after abduction or arrest by gov-errunent or government-backed security forces. Domingo Limbangan, the vice-chairman of an indigenous people's association, and Ernesto Kalan, a community health worker, "disappeared" after arrest
on 4 August. They were reportedly woken at 6am by members of the 3rd Infantry Battalion of the Philippine Army, beaten and then questioned about their alleged involvement with the npa for three hours before being taken to a local police station. Community workers were told at the police station that both men had been released at 2pm the same day, but neither was seen again.
Three people who reportedly "disappeared" during 1991 were found dead in early 1992. The bodies of Norberto Melanes and Julian Lingbawan were recovered from a pit in Tabuk, Kalinga-Apayao on 2 January. Both had been arrested by Cafgu members on 26 December 1991. In February relatives of Jerry Sabal, who "disappeared" in November 1991, were informed that his body had been found buried near the place where he was arrested.
At least 11 prisoners of conscience remained in prison in Cebu City. A twelfth, Rogelio Cinco, was released in July after serving more than four years in prison. The 12 were among a group of 25 farmers from Leyte who had been charged with rebellion in 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989, 1991 and 1992). Despite a number of court hearings, no final verdict had been reached by the end of the year.
Over 100 people were arrested for suspected political offences, the majority under provisions of a July 1990 Supreme Court decision authorizing the arrest without warrant of suspects in crimes of rebellion or subversion (see Amnesty International Report 1991). Most were released after brief periods in detention. About 475 suspected and convicted npa members remained in detention, among them possible prisoners of conscience. Most were accused of supporting the armed opposition and charged with illegal possession of firearms in furtherance of rebellion, or other criminal offences.
There were continued reports of torture or ill-treatment of political detainees. Pag-nas Marcos, a fanner from Dupax del Norte, Nueva Vizcaya, reportedly died after being arrested and tortured by military personnel. According to reports, he and some friends were abducted by soldiers on 15 April and taken to a military detachment in Oyao district. They were accused of being npa members and beaten severely. All were later released and Pagnas Marcos was taken, unconscious, to the local hospital
PHILIPPINES
where he died on 18 April. Military officers reportedly persuaded his relatives not to file formal charges against them and in May paid compensation to the family.
In July President Ramos called for the restoration of the death penalty. Several bills introducing the death penalty for "heinous crimes" such as murder, rape and drug-trafficking were filed in Congress. However, no vote had been taken by the end of the year.
Deliberate and arbitrary killings by the npa continued to be reported. In March npa members claimed responsibility for the killing of Eddie Villegas, a member of a vigilante group facing murder charges for the extrajudicial execution of Father Narciso Pico in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In Cagayan, npa members also claimed responsibility for the April killing of Leonardo Mamba, a congressional candidate in the general elections.
Military officials alleged that npa members had tortured wounded soldiers after an ambush in Marihatag, Surigao del Sur, in February. An investigation team, composed of Department of Justice officials, members of the chr and non-governmental human rights groups, concluded that the majority of the 38 soldiers killed had died of gunshot wounds. Exhumations revealed, however, that two of the soldiers had been shot and stabbed repeatedly, indicating that they had been killed after capture and that tortinre may have occurred.
Several people, including government officials and civilians, were reportedly taken hostage by the npa and some hostages were released after negotiations with local authorities.
In Zamboanga, Mindanao, Muslim opposition groups were believed to have been responsible for the August bombing of a Roman Catholic shrine, which killed four people, and for shooting dead a Christian broadcaster and two others in September.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the government to conduct independent and impartial investigations of all reported extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" and called for those responsible to be brought to justice. It called for the release of all prisoners of conscience and for all other political prisoners to be given fair trials or released. It urged the government to dismantle militia forces, prohibit the use of vigilante groups in counter-insurgency operations and stop
the practice of political labelling of real or suspected political opponents. It appealed to the government and members of Congress not to reinstate the death penalty. Amnesty International appealed to the npa to cease the deliberate and arbitrary killings of non-combatants and to respect the principles of international humanitarian law.
An Amnesty International report. Philippines: The Killing Goes On, was published in February. It described a pattern of extrajudicial execution and provided details of 85 people believed to have been killed by government or government-backed forces between 1988 and 1992. The report also described a number of arbitrary killings apparently committed by npa members. An international campaign was launched simultaneously to draw attention to the killings. During the same month an Amnesty International delegation visited the Philippines and met the Minister of Justice and other government officials. In May the Presidential Human Rights Committee, presided over by the Department of Justice, emphasized the positive aspects of government human rights initiatives but acknowledged continuing violations. In a June response to Amnesty International, the Department of Labor and Employment (dole) referred to government and military failure to provide accurate, timely information about reported human rights violations. The dole report also noted that judicial proceedings in human rights cases were subject to long delays and that convictions were rarely obtained.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to abuses of human rights, including hostage-taking, by armed opposition groups in the Philippines. In August Amnesty International expressed concern about the extrajudicial execution by the security forces of members of tribal communities in an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission Working Group on Indigenous Populations.
In February Amnesty International wrote to the ndf to request information about arbitrary killings allegedly committed by npa members. In a reply, the ndf expressed its determination to protect human rights and stated that npa combatants are required to study the principles of international humanitarian law.
