BULGARIA
Police officers allegedly tortured and ill-treated members of the Roma community in Pazardjik. One death sentence was passed.
Bulgaria became a member of the Council of Europe in May. It ratified the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in September and declared that it recognized both the right of individual petition and the compulsory jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights.
In April four former officials of the Lovech and Skravena labour camps, where political prisoners were detained from 1944 to 1962, were charged with killing inmates. Todor Zhivkov, former General Secretary of the Bulgarian Communist Party, was charged in June, together with four other former officials, with incitement to racial and national hatred for initiating the assimilation campaign against Bulgaria's ethnic Txu-kish minority (see Amnesty International Reports 1986 to 1991). He was also awaiting trial for ordering the creation of a network of forced labour camps.
In June police officers allegedly tortured and ill-treated members of the Roma community in Pazardjik. Policemen surrounded the Romany neighbourhood in order to search the houses for arms and check identification documents. They allegedly used truncheons and sticks to beat indiscriminately men, women and children. The inhabitants of one house were reportedly taken outside, made to stand against the wall and were told by policemen that they would be shot. Nasko Iliev Angelov's leg was allegedly broken with a hammer.
Georgi Assenov Yiutov was reportedly tied and beaten in the street.
One person was sentenced to death in February for murder. This was the first death sentence passed since the introduction of a moratorium on executions in July 1990, which remained in force.
In April Amnesty International urged the authorities to abolish the death penalty. In September it called for a full and impartial investigation into the alleged torture and ill-treatment of Roma in Pazardjik and for those responsible to be brought to justice. It also called for the adoption of legislation providing an alternative service for conscientious objectors to military service.
In July President Zhelyu Zhelev wrote to Amnesty International concerning the death penalty. He stated, "|W]e are doing our best to abolish this anti-human measure ... and align with the majority of European states where this has long been a fact".
In October the Minister of Justice, replying to Amnesty International's September letter concerning the alleged torture and ill-treatment of Roma, wrote that "[Tjhe Ministry of the Interior has initiated a prompt and impartial investigation of the minority situation here in Bulgaria".
