NAMIBIA
There were several reports of torture or ill-treatment of prisoners by police. The authorities responded by ordering investigations. Little progress was made in clarifying the fate of hundreds of people who "disappeared" before independence in the custody of the South African authorities in Namibia or in detention camps run by the South West Africa People's Organisation (swAPo) in Angola.
Namibia became a party to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights in September.
During the year there were several reports of prisoners being tortured or ill-treated. As a result of police investigations, seven cases of assault were lodged against seven police officers. One of the officers was suspected of assisting civilians who assaulted a youth whom they accused of theft in Khomasdal in May: the youth later died, apparently as a result of the assault.
namibia/nepal
The seven officers were suspended or transferred while their cases were referred to the Prosecutor General for a decision on whether they should face criminal charges. None had been brought to trial by the end of the year.
A dozen asyliun-seekers were detained in late 1991 or early 1992 and held for several months: they feared repatriation to countries where they would be in danger of becoming prisoners of conscience or suffering other human rights violations. By the end of the year they had apparently all been released and none had been repatriated.
After Namibia's independence in 1990, the swapo majority government led by President Samuel Nujoma asked the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) to trace those missing as a result of the conflict (see Amnesty International Report 1991). By the end of the year, the icrc had received requests to trace over 2,100 people, the majority of whom were swapo combatants reported missing after military actions. The icrc reported that it had been able to obtain information in some 320 cases, about 30 of which concerned people who had "disappeared" in swapo custody, and had informed relatives of the results. The fate of hundreds of prisoners who had "disappeared" or were killed in South African or swapo custody before independence remained unclear.
Amnesty International made inquiries about reports of torture, to which the government responded, and about the detained asylum-seekers.
