TURKEY
Scores of prisoners of conscience were detained briefiy and several were sentenced to prison terms. Torture of political and criminal detainees continued to be a common practice in police stations and at least 13 detainees died in custody, allegedly as a result of torture. At least four people "disappeared". The number of alleged extrajudicial executions increased: there were more than 200 killings in the mainly Kurdish provinces of southeast Turkey in circumstances which suggested security force involvement. There were also allegations of extrajudicial executions during police raids on "safe houses" of armed political organizations. At least 120 people were killed in the southeast when police and gendarmerie officers fired on apparently unarmed civilians. There were more than 100 apparently deliberate and arbitrary killings of prisoners and other non-combatants by armed opposition groups.
State of emergency legislation was in force throughout the year in 10 southeastern provinces, where the eight-yearlong conflict between security forces and the secessionist guerrillas of the Partiya Karkeren Kurdistan (pkk), Kurdish Workers' Party, grew fiercer in intensity. Over 2,000 people, including civilians, were killed.
In November a number of amendments were made to the Criminal Procedure Code concerning detention and remand procedures. The length of time during which common criminal detainees can be held in police custody before being brought before a judge was reduced to eight days and detainees were given the right to have a
TURKEY
lawyer present during interrogation. However. the new measures do not apply to detainees suspected of political offences -those at most risk of torture - who may still be held incommunicado for up to 15 days (30 ddys in the Emergency Powers Region).
In December the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (ecpt) announced that during a series of visits to Turkey over three years it had found extensive proof that "torture and other forms of severe ill-treatment of persons in police custody remains widespread in Turkey and that such methods are applied to both ordinary criminal suspects and persons held under anti-terrorism provisions". In Ankara and Diyarbakir police headquarters the ecpt discovered equipment apparently used for torturing suspects.
Scores of prisoners of conscience were held for hours or days after being taken into custody at public meetings and demonstrations, A few were sentenced to prison terms under various articles of the Turkish Penal Code (tpc). In May Omer Okgu, who wrote under the pen-name Hekimoglu Ismail for the daily newspaper Zaman, began serving three and a half months in prison following his conviction under Article 159 of the tpc for "insulting the armed forces". Also in May Sinami Orhan, editor of an Islamic political magazine, began serving four months in prison after being convicted under Law 5816 of publishing an article insulting the memory of Mustafa Kemal Atatiirk. In May Sekvan Aytu, President of the §irnak branch of the independent Turkish Human Rights Association (thra), was taken into custody. He was held incommunicado for 15 days at §irnak Police Headquarters, where he was reportedly beaten severely. He was charged with making separatist propaganda and membership of the pkk, However, he appeared to be a prisoner of conscience, imprisoned because of his work on behalf of the thra. At the end of the year he was still in custody.
Torture by police continued to be reported from all parts of Turkey, particularly the major cities and the southeast. Men, women and children were tortured. Some were interrogated in connection with ordinary criminal offences. For example, Barbaros G6kta§, a waiter, was detained on suspicion of theft in January, and held incommunicado for more than a week at the Criminal Investigation Branch of Izmir
Police Headquarters. He testified that he had been suspended by the arms, given electric shocks, and hosed with water at high pressure. He stated that police officers had forced the hose into his throat and turned the water on, squeezed his testicles and kept him naked and soaked with water in the cold for two days. When he complained to a judge that he had been tor-tiu-ed, the judge allegedly replied: "What did you expect, sweets?"
Detainees suspected of links with illegal armed political organizations were at particular risk of torture. Mehmet Polat, aged 15, was taken into custody when he took food to his uncle in police detention in Gaziantep Police Headquarters in February. He was questioned about his relatives' political activities. He said police blindfolded him. kicked him, beat his feet with a truncheon and applied electric shocks to his penis and his big toe. Nazh Top. a nurse, said she was tortured for four days at the Anti-Terror Branch of Istanbul Police Headquarters while three months pregnant. She was detained in April on suspicion of taking part in an attack on a police minibus. She reported that during her interrogation, police ignored her requests to see a lawyer. She stated that they suspended her with her arms tied behind her and gave her electric shocks through her fingers and toes, and then through her nipples and sexual organs. They allegedly punched her all over, especially in the stomach, breasts and belly, raped her with a truncheon, and tried to rape her with a bottle. After 10 days in police custody, she was released without charge. The Forensic Medicine Institute issued a report stating that she was not injured, although an examination carried out by a doctor of the Turkish Human Rights Foundation the following day revealed injuries consistent with the allegations of torture. Nazli Top made a formal complaint, but no charges had been brought by the end of the year.
During the year there were at least 13 deaths in custody allegedly as a result of torture. Tahir Seyhan, a member of Halhn Emek Partisi (hep). People's Labour Party, died in April after four days' interrogation in incommunicado detention at Dargegit Gendarmerie Battalion. The autopsy report registered the cause of death as brain trauma. A member of staff at the hospital where Tahir Seyhan died reportedly stated that he had been brutally tortured and that
TURKEY
his body "was all in pieces". No prosecution had been initiated concerning his death by the end of the year. Miktat Kutlu, a bank clerk, was detained outside his home in Bismil in April and died approximately 24 hoiu-s later of a brain haemorrhage. Witnesses reported seeing Miktat Kutlu being beaten by the police both in the street and during interrogation in Bismil Police Headquarters. No one had been prosecuted in connection with his death by the end of the year.
There were also allegations of ill-treat-ment in prison. In April a group of unconvicted political prisoners arriving at Elazig E-type Prison were allegedly beaten on the hands. When they resisted having their hair forcibly cut, they were reportedly taken into the exercise yard in groups of three and again beaten, as a result of which one prisoner had to be taken to hospital. In September, at Buca Closed Prison in izmir, prisoners who protested against a reduction in exercise periods by refusing to leave the exercise yard were reportedly beaten by more than 100 gendarmes and prison guards in the presence of the prison prosecutor and prison officials. More than 58 prisoners were injured, at least five seriously.
At least four people suspected of involvement with armed opposition groups "disappeared". One of them, Tugrul Ozbek, "disappeared" in October after a police raid on a house in Istanbul used by the illegal armed organization Devrimci Sol, Revolutionary Left. Three detainees testified that he had been detained and held at the Anti-Terror Branch of Istanbul Police Headquarters, but the police denied holding him. By the end of the year the authorities had provided no information on the whereabouts or fate of Tugrul Ozbek and it was feared that he may have died under torture.
The number of alleged extrajudicial executions increased. There were more than 260 "mysterious killings" in southeast Turkey, many of which were attributed to Hizbullab. (a local group apparently not connected to the Lebanese group of the same name). There was a striking degree of coincidence between the targets of the killings attributed to Hizbullab and the targets of police harassment, arbitrary detention, torture and other ill-treatment. There was evidence that the security forces had colluded in such killings, and may actually
have carried them out in some cases. Ramazan §at was detained in Batman in March and interrogated for 12 days at Batman Police Headquarters on suspicion of harbouring members of the pkk. He later made a complaint of torture to the public prosecutor in Batman, and stated that the police had told him: "The next time we will not take you from your house. We shall kill you in the street when nobody is watching." Exactly three months later, Ramazan §at was shot dead in the street by unknown assailants.
The targets of alleged extrajudicial execution included members of hep, members of the thra, and journalists. During the year 10 journalists were killed in southeast Turkey in circumstances which provoked allegations of extrajudicial execution. Musa Anter, a prominent Kurdish writer and journalist and founding member of the hep, was shot dead in Diyarbakir by an unknown gunman in September. He had been imprisoned for his political writings and activities on numerous occasions over the preceding 50 years. Musa Anter had reportedly said that he was aware of being observed by the police from the' moment he arrived in Diyarbakir a few days earlier to participate in a cultural event. He was shot in the outskirts of the city, not far from a police station and a police traffic control point. Three local newspaper reporters who went to the scene shortly afterwards were abducted at gunpoint, apparently by plainclothes police, and driven to a spot 200 kilometres away where they were released.
In Istanbul and Ankara there were allegations of extrajudicial executions during a series of police operations against "safe houses" used by Devrimci Sol. In May Songiil Karabulut and Fikri Kele§ were killed when police surrounded and fired on their apartment in Ankara. Witnesses agreed that a large number of police opened fire without adequate warning, that no fire was returned from the apartment, and that the suspects could have been arrested without loss of life.
At least 120 people were killed during the year in the southeast as a consequence of police and gendarmerie firing on apparently unarmed civilians. During disturbances in March on the occasion of the Kurdish New Year, 16 demonstrators were killed in the city of §imak when they refused to permit male police officers to
turkey/turkmenistan
search female demonstrators, and 19 reportedly unarmed demonstrators were killed by security forces in Nusaybin. In §imak, 22 civilians were killed in March and at least 15 in August when security forces fired at random on residential areas using tanks and mortars, apparently in reprisal for earlier attacks by pkk guerrillas.
A number of Iranian refugees and asylum-seekers in Turkey appeared to be at risk of forcible return to Iran. A group of 100 members and supporters of Iranian political opposition groups were rounded up by the Turkish authorities in January and driven to the Iranian border. Their forcible return was only prevented after the intervention of the Office of the United Nations (un) High Commissioner for Refugees and a local branch of the thra. Fears for the security of Iranian asylum-seekers were heightened in September when a protocol was concluded between the Governments of Turkey and Iran regarding border security and the activities of opposition groups,
During the year there were more than 100 apparently deliberate and arbitrary killings attributed to guerrillas of the pkk. Many of the victims were civilians, killed for allegedly assisting the security forces or passing information to them, pkk guerrillas also captured and then "executed" members of the village guard corps (a paramilitary force organized by the government to deny the pkk access to logistical support from the rural population). According to newspaper reports, in October pkk guerrillas reportedly entered the village of Ceviz-dali, Bitlis Province, and disarmed the village guards. Shortly afterwards, a small group of guerrillas on the far side of the village exchanged fire with reinforcements from a nearby security post. At the sound of gunshots, the main party of guerrillas reportedly opened fire on the assembled villagers, killing 37 people including children. Other armed opposition groups, including Tiirkiye íhtilaJci Komünist Birli^i (tikb). Revolutionary Communist Union of Turkey, and Devrimci Sol, carried out deliberate and arbitrary killings of alleged informers.
Amnesty International published reports summarizing the organization's concerns in May and November - Turkey: Torture, extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and Turkey: Walls of Glass. The organization appealed for the release
of prisoners of conscience. It called for thoroughgoing reform of detention procedures and repeatedly urged the government to initiate full and impartial investigations into allegations of torture and extrajudicial executions. An Amnesty International delegate observed a hearing of the trial of Sekvan Aytu at Diyarbakir State Security Court.
Amnesty International continued to raise concerns about the protection of Iranian refugees and asylimi-seekers. The organization also sought assurances ft"om the Turkish authorities that the new measures concerning refugees contained in the protocol with the Iranian Government would neither obstruct the individual's right to seek protection in Turkey, nor allow for the refoulement (forcible return) of any Iranian who risked serious human rights violations in Iran.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Turkey. In April the organization submitted information about its concerns in Turkey for un review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
