BURUNDI
Over 20 members of opposition parties who were briefly detained were prisoners of conscience. Two prisoners of conscience served prison sentences during the year. Hundreds of suspected supporters of an armed opposition group arrested in 1991 remained in detention without trial. Others were tried, but their trials were unfair: 84 people, some of whom were possible prisoners of conscience, were sentenced to prison terms and five to death, although they were not executed. New evidence emerged of torture of political detainees in 1991 and ill-treatment continued to be reported. The authorities
BURUNDI
rejected calls for an inquiry into the alleged extrajudicial execution by the security forces of at least 1,000 people in late 1991 and failed to clarify the fate and whereabouts of 35 people who "disappeared" at the same time.
Relations between the majority Hutu ethnic group and the politically dominant Tutsi minority remained tense in the wake of armed insiugency and mass reprisal killings in late 1991. Insurgents carried out armed attacks in Cibitoke province in April, but the violence was on a lesser scale than in 1991. The government of President Pierre Buyoya attributed the attacks to the banned Parti pour ¡a libération du peuple Hutu (palipehutu), Hutu People's Liberation Party, palipehutu insurgents were reported to have arbitrarily and deliberately killed civilians during the year, mostly Tutsi, but also some Hutu who refused to support them.
In March an apparent attempt to overthrow President Buyoya and replace him with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Cyprien Mbonimpa, was foiled and about 150 soldiers, mainly Tutsi, were arrested. In April the minister and his alleged accomplices were detained. Cyprien Mbonimpa and one of his alleged accomplices were still held without trial at the end of the year, but the other alleged accomplices were released without trial in December.
A new Constitution adopted by referendum in March ended the one-party state. At least seven new political parties were recognized during the year. The Constitution guarantees a number of internationally recognized human rights, such as the right to life and not to be tortiued. However, mechanisms to ensure that they are respected in practice were not established. The Constitution does not prohibit prolonged detention without charge or trial, nor does it give detainees the right to challenge their detention in a court of law.
In July the Burundi Government said it had ratified the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, but by the end of the year the un had not received the instruments of ratification.
At least 20 opposition party supporters were detained briefly in February, all of whom were prisoners of conscience. They included 18 members of the Parti royaliste parlementaire (prp). Royalist Parliamentary
Party (later renamed the Parti pour la ré-conciUation du peuph, People's Reconciliation Party), who were held for three days for criticizing the new Constitution. They were fined although they did not appear in court and were then released. Several members of the Front pour ¡a démocratie au Burundi (frodebu). Front for Democracy in Burundi, were also briefly detained.
Emile Ruvyiro (see Amnesty International Report 1992) was convicted in April of inciting the public to disobey orders and sentenced to four years' imprisonment, A prisoner of conscience, he had been arrested in March 1991 after encouraging farmers to reclaim land taken by officials. Ephrème Ndabwarukanye, another prisoner of conscience who had been sentenced to a 16-month prison term in 1991. was released around May after completing his sentence.
About 500 Hutu who had been arrested in late 1991 were held throughout 1992. mostly without trial. They included about 70 suspected supporters of palipehutu who had been arrested before the rebel attacks in November 1991. The others had been arrested during or after the attacks. Most were held incommunicado on the blanket charge of "jeopardizing the security of the state". About 200 other Hutu from neighbouring Rwanda who had been detained in December 1991 were released uncharged and deported to Rwanda in the first half of the year.
Over ICQ Hutu were brought to trial during the year for alleged involvement in the 1991 violence or as alleged supporters of palipehutu. The trials, which began in April, each lasted only a few hours and were unfair in many respects. The first trial took place before the High Court and the others before the Criminal Chamber of the Court of Appeal. In court, most defendants alleged that they had been beaten or ill-treated in custody but in no case was any investigation initiated, and confessions and other statements allegedly extracted under duress were apparently accepted as evidence. Defendants in the first three trials had no legal representation. In all, five people were sentenced to death and 84 to prison terms ranging from one year to life imprisonment. Some appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
At the first trial in April six of the eight defendants, who had been arrested in July 1991, were sentenced to 20-year prison terms after being convicted of disturbing
BURUNDI
public order, subversion and collusion with insurgents. A seventh defendant received a two-year sentence and the other was acquitted.
At the second trial, which was held in July, 12 people were convicted on the day of the trial: two were sentenced to death and the others received sentences of between five years' and life imprisonment.
At the third trial, also held in July, Antoine Ntirabampa. Vice-President of palipehutu, and two others were sentenced to death and 55 defendants received prison terms ranging from 10 years to life. Antoine Ntirabampa, who was not permitted by the court to cross-examine prosecution witnesses, was convicted of attempting to overthrow the government and inciting others to kill.
A fourth trial of 18 defendants was repeatedly postponed because they demanded legal counsel. It resumed in September with defence lawyers present, but the presiding judge then ruled that the court would sit for only half a day a week. This trial, the only one in which defendants had legal representation, resulted in lighter sentences than the previous three. Six defendants were acquitted, six were sentenced to one-year prison terms and released because they had spent a year in custody, and six were sentenced to two years' imprisonment.
New information received in 1992 indicated that torture and ill-treatment of political detainees were widespread both before and after the violent events of late 1991. Suspects were commonly beaten at the time of arrest, particularly by the gendarmerie, and tortured in detention by being made to kneel for long periods on sharp bottle tops and pebbles, assaulted with bayonets, pipes, truncheons and machetes, or by having their arms tied so tightly behind their backs as to cause severe injury. Some were reported to have died as a result of torture. For example, in December 1991 a teacher named Byibuza died reportedly after being gagged and hit on the forehead with a piece of piping in Bubanza Gendarmerie Brigade. The main purpose of torture appeared to be to extract confessions. Emile Ruvyiro, for example, had been taken to Bubanza Gendarmerie Brigade in December 1991 and beaten with truncheons for several hours in an attempt to force him to admit to involvement in the November 1991 insurgency.
Many of those held as suspected palipehutu supporters were held incommunicado for long periods in conditions so cramped as to amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. For example, at Bujumbura's Mpimba Prison, each isolation cell, measuring less than four square metres, was used to confine four prisoners.
The government persistently resisted calls for an inquiry into the alleged extrajudicial executions of at least 1.000 mostly Hutu civilians by the security forces in November and December 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The government denied that extrajudicial executions had occurred, despite the emergence of new evidence to the contrary, including eye-witness testimonies and reports by national and international observers which were publicized by human rights activists. The authorities failed to take any steps to identify the victims, many of whose bodies had been taken away by the security forces before relatives could identify or bury them. A government press release in May stated that insurgents had killed 551 people in late 1991 and 61 in April 1992. It did not refer to killings by the security forces. In one exceptional case, however, a gendarmerie commander and several soldiers were arrested in February and accused of killing about 10 Hutu in December 1991. They were still untried at the end of 1992.
The fate of at least 35 people who "disappeared" following their arrest by members of the security forces in 1991 remained unknown, There was no established procedure for discovering the whereabouts of people unaccoimted for after arrest. The missing detainees included Obedi Bambanze and Saidi Hussein, who had been shown on Burundi television in late 1991 "confessing" to being accomplices of the insurgents. There were fears that they might have been secretly executed. Rénovât Ndikumana, a journalist working for the Burundi Press Agency, also remained "disappeared": he was reported to have been arrested by soldiers at the end of November 1991,
Amnesty International repeated its call for a full, impartial and independent inquiry into the mass extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" of late 1991 and urged the government to take steps to stop torture. The organization also called for the release of Emile Ruvyiro and for all
burundi/cambodia
political trials to be conducted in accordance with international standards for fair trial. Amnesty International representatives visited Burundi in February and met the Ministers of Justice. External Relations and the Interior, and other government and seciu'ity officials. The organization published two reports on Burundi: in May, Appeals for an inquiry into army and gendarmerie killings and other human rights violations; and in November, Sectarian security forces violate human rights with impunity. It appealed for the five death sentences imposed to be commuted. In October an Amnesty International representative observed one of the trials of alleged paupehutu insurgents.
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Burundi. Amnesty International also submitted a communication under the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights concerning "a series of serious and massive violations" of human rights guaranteed by the Charter.
