INDIA
Thousands of political prisoners, including several prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial under special or preventive detention laws. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees were widespread throughout the country and the perpetrators operated with virtual
INDIA
impunity. Torture was practised systematically in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab, where its occurrence was facilitated by illegal, incommunicado and secret detentions. Dozens of people died in police custody. "Disappearances" of scores of suspected political activists were reported from Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab, and hundreds of political activists were allegedly extrajudicially executed. At least four prisoners were executed after being sentenced to death by the courts: two of them had been convicted of a politically motivated murder. Armed opposition groups committed nimierous arbitrary killings of civilians, including hostages in their custody.
The government of Prime Minister Narasimha Rao faced a crisis after Hindu nationalists attacked and destroyed the Babri Masjid - a mosque - at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh on 6 December. The Uttar Pradesh state government, ruled by the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (bjp), was dismissed after it allowed work to start on building a Hindu temple at the site, which many Hindus claim is the birthplace of the Hindu god Ram. It had previously undertaken to abide by a Supreme Court ruling prohibiting any construction work at the site. Over 1,200 people were shot dead by police or killed in violence between Hindus and Muslims in the days that followed. Most of the victims were Muslims. In Bombay, where over 200 people died, there were reports that police sided with Hindus and fired indiscriminately at crowds of Muslim protesters. Five extremist groups were banned, including Rashtriya Swaymsevak Sangb (rss), National Service Organization, and Vishwa Hindu Parishad (vHP), World Hindu Council,
both linked to the Hindu nationalist bjp. State goverrmients in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh, which were controlled by the bjp, were dismissed for failing to implement the ban. The bjp's national leader, Lai K. Advani. was among over 1,300 people arrested in the days after the destruction of the mosque. He was charged with inciting communal violence.
In February a Congress party administration was elected in Punjab, which since May 1987 had been ruled directly by the central government in New Delhi. Elections were also promised for Jammu and Kashmir, but at the end of the year the state remained under direct rule by central government, as did the four states formerly ruled by the bjp, Manipur and Nagaland.
Armed opposition groups continued to commit human rights abuses, notably in Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Assam and the northeast states. Among the victims of hundreds of deliberate and arbitrary killings were political fig-m-es and civilians, including women and children.
Many thousands of political prisoners were held without trial under special laws. At least 400 petitions challenging the constitutionality of the broad powers of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (tada) remained pending before the Supreme Court, despite widespread concern among lawyers and human rights activists; some petitions had been pending for eight years. Its sweeping provisions were frequently misused to detain innocent people or to deny to suspects the safeguards normally available in Indian law. According to the government, in October 16,925 people were being held under the act nationwide, including 8,768 in Punjab and 1,452 in Gujarat, a state where no armed opposition to the government was reported. In Bihar, the Chief Minister admitted that innocent people had been detained under the tada and in Tamil Nadu the law was abused to detain people for pasting up posters supporting a Sri Lankan armed opposition organization. Among those detained during the year were a former High Court judge, Ajit Singh Bains, who was held for more than four months under the tada for advocating separatism in Punjab, and Shabir Ahmed Shah, leader of the People's League, which advocates the right to self-determination in Kashmir. Amnesty International appealed
INDIA
for the release of both men. Shabir Ahmed Shah had been held without trial since September 1989 under both the tada and the Public Security Act, a preventive detention law often used to detain political activists, with provisions similar to the National Security Act (nsa). The nsa was also used to detain political suspects without trial. In October 2,369 people were officially reported to be held under the nsa.
Torture of suspects in custody was routine throughout the country. Women were often raped in police cells and in army custody. Most of the victims were poor, often illiterate people from among the most underprivileged and vulnerable sections of society: the scheduled castes and tribes. Such individuals were usually detained illegally and tortured by being beaten, suspended by their wrists or ankles, or subjected to electric shocks to extract confessions or information. In Jammu and Kashmir, torture reportedly included burning with hot irons and electric shocks. One doctor in the state said in October that he had treated 36 cases of renal failure caused by torture in that month alone: foiu of the victims had died.
Senior officials participated in routine cover-ups by police of deaths under torture and police acted with virtual impunity: only in six out of 415 cases of custodial deaths knoWn by Amnesty International to have occurred between 1985 and March 1992 were police officers known to have been tried and convicted in connection with the deaths of detainees in their custody. Although an investigation by a magistrate is obligatory under section 176 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, such inquiries were often not held. With some notable exceptions, the reports of investigations were not published and relatives were often denied copies of post-mortem and other reports, preventing them from taking effective legal action for redress. Only in 14 of the 415 cases was compensation known to have been paid.
At least 65 more cases of torture and deaths in custody were reported to Amnesty International between March and November, One victim was a man named Nandagopal, a university employee belonging to the scheduled castes, who died on 3 June in the Annamalainigar police station, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu. The postmortem report listed 21 wounds on his body. He had been arrested a few days ear-
lier on suspicion of theft together with his wife, Padmini, who was alleged to have been repeatedly raped in her husband's presence. Two detainees testified that Nandagopal was tortured to death, but the doctor carrying out the post-mortem examination was reportedly threatened by police who wished him to report that the victim had committed suicide. The state government eventually ordered a judicial inquiry - the outcome of which was not known -and five police officers were reportedly arrested.
Towards the end of the year, there were increasing reports that dozens of people had "disappeared" after arrest in Jammu and Kashmir, and that others had been summarily executed within hours of arrest and their bodies dumped on the road. Human rights activist H.N. Wanchoo, who had frequently represented the families of people who had "disappeared" before the Jammu and Kashmir High Court, may himself have been a victim of extrajudicial execution: he was killed by unidentified gunmen in Srinagar on 5 December. In Punjab dozens of people "disappeared" after arrest even though their relatives had located some of them in detention. Harjit Singh of Buttar Kalan village was located in detention by his father and a judicial officer, but still "disappeared".
Hundreds of political activists were alleged to have been deliberately killed in "encounters" staged by the police in Punjab. Such killings were also reported from Andhra Pradesh. Extrajudicial executions were also reported from other states: at least 16 tribal trade union workers demonstrating peacefully for better working conditions were shot dead by the Madhya Pradesh police on 1 July, reportedly without provocation. The government ordered a judicial inquiry and small ex gratia payments to the victims' families. However, at least 200 people were arbitrarily detained after the incident and held without being produced in court for several weeks.
At least four people were executed. Sukhdev Singh and Harjinder Singh were executed in October after being convicted of the murder of General A.S. Vaidya, a senior army officer, in 1986. They were tried in camera under the special proced-xues of the tada, even though they had been acquitted of all charges under that act.
Armed opposition groups committed numerous human rights abuses, including
INDIA
hostage-taking, torture and dehberate and arbitrary killings. Reports of such abuses were mainly received from Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Assam and the northeast states. In Punjab, relatives of police officers were targeted for summary killings by armed opposition groups: according to the government, 1,415 people were killed by such groups in the first nine months of the year. In Andhra Pradesh, members of the Naxalite People's War Group, banned by the government in May, were reportedly responsible for numerous killings of people whom they suspected of being police informers. Armed groups in Assam. Andhra Pradesh and particularly in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab were reported to have taken hostages to press their demands for a separate state or greater autonomy, or to obtain the release of captives.
In June Amnesty International mged all armed opposition groups in India to stop deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians and to respect basic humanitarian standards. It specifically condemned the killing of the Acting Director of All India Radio in Patiala, Punjab, who was beheaded after he was reportedly taken prisoner by the Babbar Khalsa International, a Sikh militant group.
Amnesty International called on the government to release prisoners held for the non-violent exercise of basic human rights and for all political prisoners to be charged with a recognizably criminal offence, or released. The organization called for a judicial inquiry into the killing of H.N. Wanchoo, but the government said an inquiry would be conducted by the Central Bureau of Investigation.
In March Amnesty International released a report, India: Torture, Rape and Deaths in Custody, marking the start of a campaign to halt custodial violence in India. Amnesty International said that hundreds if not thousands of men, women and children had died from beatings and other forms of torture in recent years. Amnesty International said that torture was practised throughout the country under successive governments, regardless of the political party in power, and whether there was organized armed opposition or not.
Initially, the government dismissed the report, which was based on information in the Indian press, judgments of the Supreme Court and official reports of the National
Police Commission, as "conjectures and general allegations" and based on "mere hearsay". However, many Indian civil liberties groups and newspapers challenged the government's response. In June the government decided to investigate the specific allegations made in the report, a decision welcomed by Amnesty International. By the end of the year responses had been received on 230 cases. Despite strong evidence to the contrary in most cases, the government claimed that 153 were "unsubstantiated" without, however, providing post-mortem or inquiry reports by magistrates to substantiate its conclusions. The government's response showed that compensation had been paid in a further eight cases. It also reinforced Amnesty International's concern about the lack of official determination to bring the perpetrators of custodial crimes to justice: although the government found Amnesty International's allegations to be substantiated in at least 77 cases, no more than six had resulted in convictions of the police officers responsible, confirming the pattern of impunity described. In many cases, magisterial inquiries, although obligatory, were not known to have been held.
State governments in Kerala and Assam announced specific investigations into the report's allegations, and in June the Calcutta High Court ordered a judicial inquiry into all deaths in custody reported in West Bengal since 1977, although the state government contested the judgment.
For the first time since 1978 an Amnesty International delegation was permitted to visit India to discuss its human rights concerns with the government. In November the delegation met the Home Minister and the Human Resources Development Minister, as well as Secretaries and other officials of relevant ministries. Amnesty International welcomed the commitment expressed by the Prime Minister that human rights violations would not be tolerated and that the perpetrators would be brought to justice. It also welcomed proposals put before state Chief Ministers to strengthen legal safeguards against torture of detainees and to enhance investigation procedures in cases of deaths in custody. A number of the proposals reflected recommendations Amnesty International had made in a 10-point program to prevent torture in India, published in its report. Amnesty International urged the government
INDIA/INDONESIA AND EAST TIMOR
to make judicial inquiries into custodial deaths mandatory, to provide statutory compensation to victims of custodial violence, to make reports of inquiries and post-mortem reports publicly and readily available and to strengthen legal safeguards on arrest. It put forward standards for the effective functioning of human rights commissions, in response to the government's own proposals to establish such a body. It stressed the need for human rights commissions to be independent from government and to have effective powers to investigate alleged human rights violations whether committed by the army, paramilitary forces or the police.
Amnesty International renewed its longstanding request to visit various Indian states, including Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and the northeast states. However, by the end of the year, official authorization for such access had not been granted, although the Home Minister promised that Amnesty International's requests would be actively considered.
