AUSTRALIA
The government published its response to the findings and recommendations of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody (rciadc).
In March the Australian Government published a three-volume response to the findings and recommendations of the rciadc (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The response, comprising the responses of federal and state governments to the rciadc report, endorsed the majority of the 339 recommendations of the rciadc covering areas in law and criminal justice and social and economic development. The response authorized the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (atsic) to monitor the implementation of the rciadc recommendations at all government levels. A Social Justice Unit within the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (hreoc) was created to produce an annual State of the Nation Report on the human rights situation of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
At least four Aboriginal people died in custody during 1992, despite the government's moves to address the issue of Aboriginal deaths in custody. The coroner's inquest into the death in custody of Darryl Leedham Cameron, an Aboriginal, in December 1991 returned an open verdict. This meant the inquest was unable to determine the precise circumstances of his death. Darryl Cameron was found hanged in a cell in the Greenough Regional Prison in Geraldton, Western Australia. He had been arrested six days earlier on an assault charge. His brother, Edward, had died in a similar way while in custody in Geraldton police lock-up in 1988 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989). Edward Cameron's
death was investigated by the rciadc.
In April Amnesty International representatives visited 24 police lock-ups, juvenile detention centres and prisons located in the Northern Territory, and in the states of Western Australia, Queensland and New South Wales. The representatives met federal and state level officials including the Federal Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, and representatives of non-governmental organizations. Amnesty International's representatives found that conditions in certain detention facilities, such as Alice Springs Prison, most of whose inmates were Aboriginal, were so overcrowded and harsh they amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The representatives also found that the criminal justice system functions in such a way as to make Australia's Aboriginal people a group distinctly vulnerable to highly disproportionate levels of incarceration and to ill-treatment in custody.
In January Amnesty International asked the federal government and state authorities in Western Australia to conduct full and impartial investigations into the death of Darryl Leedham Cameron and expressed regret that such deaths were continuing despite the recommendations of the rciadc. In response, the state authorities informed Amnesty International in March that a public inquest would be held, but that the findings of an internal inquiry by the Department of Corrective Services on Darryl Cameron's death would not be made public "for security reasons", the nature of which was not made clear.
In March Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the federal and state governments expressing concern about the high incidence of Aboriginal deaths in custody, some of which may have resulted, at least in part, from ill-treatment. It asked the state and federal authorities for information about all deaths in custody since 31 May 1989, the cut-off date of the rciadc investigations, including the nature of official investigations into the deaths and their findings in each case. Some but not all state and federal territory governments had responded to the memorandum by the end of the year.
In July Amnesty International wrote to the Tasmanian state government to urge the repeal of sections of the Tasmanian Criminal Code Act which allow for the prosecution and imprisonment of
australivaustria/azerbayozhan
consenting adults who engage in homosexual acts in private.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Sub-Commission Working Group on Indigenous Populations in July Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Australia.
