GEORGIA
In the disputed region of Abkhazia scores of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were reportedly held as hostages on grounds of their ethnic origin. Many alleged that they were tortured or ill-treated in detention. Dozens of non-combatant civilians were said to have been deliberately and arbitrarily killed. Elsewhere, dozens of political prisoners alleged that they were beaten while in short-term detention.
Georgia received international recognition as an independent state following the break-up of the Soviet Union. In March it joined the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and in July became a member of the United Nations. President Zviad Gamsakhurdia was deposed in January and replaced by a Military Council. In March this body handed power to a State Council headed by Eduard Shevardnadze, who became Chairman of a newly elected parliament in October.
Armed clashes between government forces and supporters of the ousted president claimed scores of lives during the year. Hundreds were also said to have died after Georgian troops entered Abkhazia, a region in the northwest of the country seeking greater autonomy, in August. The confused situation made it difficult to corroborate allegations of deliberate and arbitrary killings and hostage-taking by both government and opposition forces.
The death penalty was abolished for all offences when the 1921 Constitution was restored in February. Nine prisoners awaiting execution when the death penalty was abolished were officially reported to have had their sentences commuted.
GEORGIA/GERMANY
All public meetings were banned in January after rallies protesting against the ousting of President Gamsakhurdia led to deaths, Scores of his supporters were placed under administrative arrest for up to 30 days for taking part in later demonstrations which were said to have been peaceful. Dozens claimed that they were beaten while in the custody of law-enforce-ment officials. Valeriya Novodvorskaya, for example, reported that she was beaten unconscious when detained on 7 October in the capital, Tbilisi, at a rally calling for a boycott of parliamentary elections.
In Abkhazia, Georgian armed forces were reportedly involved in the arbitrary detention of non-combatants, including the taking of hostages, on the grounds of ethnic origin. They were also implicated in rape, beatings and ill-treatment of detainees and extrajudicial executions. M. K, Dzhindzholiya, for example, an ethnic Abkhazian, said that he was walking in Sukhumi on 17 August with his uncle when they were detained by the Georgian National Guard solely because of their ethnic origin. He alleged that they were beaten, kicked and subjected to a mock execution before being taken to Dranda prison. There, they and about 40 other detainees were reportedly forced to pass between two lines of Georgian guardsmen who beat them severely. Murman Zadrovich Kvitsiniya, who alleged that his skull was fractured in a similar assault at Dranda prison on 27 August, said that the previous day a man detained with him near the Kodor river was shot dead by Georgian troops for answering "Republic of Abkhazia" when asked where he lived.
Similar allegations were made against forces under Abkhaz control, although specific information on concrete incidents was difficult to obtain.
At least 14 people were executed in Abkhazia, some after what were reported to be summciry military proceedings, despite the fact that the death penalty had been abolished. Vitaly Gladkikh, for example, an ethnic Russian accused of sabotage, was said to have been sentenced to death in Sukhumi on 10 November by a Georgian court-martial and executed five days later. Twelve people were reportedly executed for looting by Abkhazian military units in Gagra in October.
After numerous detentions of demonstrators from January onwards, Amnesty
International asked the government to clarify what steps it was taking to ensure that citizens were able to exercise peacefully their rights to freedom of association and expression, and urged that all complaints of beatings in custody be investigated fully and impartially. The organization urged that all alleged abuses in Abkhazia within its mandate be investigated fully and impartially, with the results made public and the perpetrators brought to justice.
Amnesty International expressed regret at the executions in Abkhazia and asked for a full and impartial investigation to be carried out into the circumstances of the deaths. It also asked for confirmation that the nine death sentences pending had been commuted.
