HAITI
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were detained, the majority for brief periods after which they were released without charge. Most detainees were tortured or ill-treated, and at least 10 people allegedly died as a result of torture. Prison conditions continued to be extremely harsh. At least 100 people were killed in circimistances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed, and at least 10 "disappeared".
In February an agreement brokered by the Organization of American States (oas) was reached between deposed President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and representatives of the National Assembly. The accord recognized President Aristide, who had been deposed in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992], as the legitimate president. It
HAITI
agreed on a new Prime Minister and set the basis for a return to the constitutional order, although it did not fix a date for President Aristide's return to Haiti. In March, however, the agreement was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court on the grounds that the National Assembly had no authority to sign such an agreement. In June President Joseph Nérette and Prime Minister Jean-Jacques Honorât resigned. Marc Bazin, who had been a minister in the former government of Jean-Claude Duvalier, became Prime Minister but the presidency was still vacant at the end of the year.
The oas continued to mediate in negotiations between deposed President Aristide and the de facto authorities. In September an oas delegation arrived in Haiti to monitor the human rights situation and the distribution of humanitarian aid, and to evaluate the progress of negotiations. However, by the end of 1992 no agreement had been reached and President Aristide was still in exile.
At least 800 people, most of them prisoners of conscience, were arrested without warrant, apparently for political reasons, by the military, the police, rural police chiefs or by civilians acting in connivance with the security forces. Many were held without charge for longer than the 48-hour limit laid down'by the Constitution. The majority were released without charge or any form of judicial proceedings. The length of their detention generally did not exceed one month. Often the authorities asked prisoners or their relatives to pay money to secure their release, to avoid ill-treatment or to obtain better prison conditions. Prominent among the victims were President Aristide's supporters and former officials in his government, residents of poorer urban and rural areas, joxu-nalists, members and leaders of grassroots organizations, peasants, trade unionists and members of the Roman Catholic Church.
In March Dully Oxéva and Dérose Era-nor, two members of the Mouvement paysan de Papaye (mpp). Papaye Peasant Movement, were arrested without warrant by the military in Mirebalais, Centre Department, where they had been in hiding since September 1991. The two men, who both appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were badly beaten upon arrest at the Mirebalais military barracks where they were held until their release without
charge in April. Their families had reportedly paid 250 gourdes (us$31) to secure their release.
Also in March Harry Nicolas, a plumber and an active member of his local literacy movement and neighbourhood committee, was arrested without warrant in Cap Haïtien by soldiers. He had returned to his home town only days earlier after several months in hiding. He was released without charge about one month later.
Members of the clergy, nuns and religious workers were targeted for arrest because of their role in protecting human rights. In April Venezuelan nun Clemencia Ascanio and two Dominican women. Sunilda Altagracia Céspedes and Bien-venida Valdés, were arrested when soldiers found calendars bearing President Aristide's photograph in the bus in which they were travelling. The three women were released uncharged after five days in custody.
Priests and members of churches were arrested and harassed throughout the year. During a three-week period in May and June, at least seven priests were arrested by the police or the army. All were released uncharged, but some were held for several days. For example. Father Denis Verdier, director of the regional office of Caritas, a Roman Catholic charity, Father Sony Decoste and Brother Jean-Baptiste Casséus were arrested in the South Department, apparently in reprisal for the burning of a military outpost by unidentified civilians. Father Marcel Bussel, a Belgian citizen, was arrested without warrant after his rectory in Ballan, North Department, was searched and ransacked by soldiers. French priest Gilles Danroc, co-ordinator of the Haitian Justice and Peace Commission, was arrested without warrant during a catechism class in his parish in La Chapelle, in the central Artibonite valley. Fourteen of his parishioners, including a pregnant woman, were arrested with him and beaten. They were all released uncharged in the days following their arrest.
A prisoner of conscience, Aldajuste Pierre, the president of an mpp co-operative, was released in February. He had been arrested in October 1991 and badly beaten (see Amnesty International Report 1992). To obtain his release, his family reportedly raised 9,000 gourdes (about us$l,100) from relatives and friends and the sale of most of their possessions.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees
HAITI
continued to be widely reported and at least 10 people died allegedly as a result of torture. Methods of tortiu-e included beatings with fists, sticks and rubber hoses, kickings and a technique known as the djak ~ a baton is wedged under the knees and over the arms of a prisoner, who is then repeatedly beaten all over the body. The kalot marassa, a twin slap on the side of the head that can cause severe damage to the ears, was also used. Many victims were refused medical attention in custody.
Roosevelt Charles, an official of the Parti national progressiste révolutionnaire Haïtien (panpra). National Progressive Revolutionary Party of Haiti, was arrested without warrant by the military in Limbe, North Department, in February after a dispute with another individual. He had stones thrown at him, and was beaten during the arrest and again in custody. On one occasion he was reportedly beaten 250 times with a stick. He was released after eight days. Roosevelt Charles was hospitalized for approximately a month following his release, and required a skin graft.
Wilcéna Dorléus, a teacher, was arrested in May as he was entering a football stadium in the capital, Port-au-Prince, apparently because he was carrying a proAristide leaflet. He was beaten on the head, stomach, waist and ribs, handcuffed and taken to a police station known as the "Cafeteria". There he was beaten with rifle butts and his hand was crushed. He was later transferred to the National Penitentiary, where ill-treatment continued. He was released about two weeks later, after his family reportedly paid about US$450 to the authorities.
In late September five-year old Daniel Raymonvil was among several people beaten by soldiers in the Jubilé slum area of Gonaïves, Artibonite Department. The soldiers had apparently gone to Jubilé to prevent the population demonstrating its support for deposed President Aristide on the first anniversary of the coup.
At least 10 people died allegedly as a result of torture. In January school teacher Jean-Claude Museau died shortly after being released from one week's detention. He had been arrested in late December 1991 in Les Cayes, South Department, reportedly because he was sticking up posters of President Aristide. He was badly beaten on his head and body, slashed with a blade in the buttocks, and made to swal-
low the posters he had with him. Also in January Jacquelin Louis, a member of a neighbourhood committee, was reportedly arrested by two armed civilians and badly beaten. He reportedly continued to be ill-treated in prison at Cap Haïtien, and subsequently died. Woodly Gérard Jacques, a Haitian citizen normally resident in the United States of America (usa), died in March reportedly as a result of torture in the military barracks of Arcahaie. His body had a broken finger, cuts and bruises on the face, and signs of blows on the abdomen. His left ear was partly mutilated from burns, and one of his buttocks had a large wound and severe bruising.
Conditions in prisons and detention centres throughout the country were extremely harsh. Beatings and other forms of ill-treatment were frequent, as was the practice of demanding money in exchange for better prison conditions or to avoid ill-treatment. Most prisoners suffered from malnutrition and a lack of medical treatment, and several reportedly died in custody as a result,
At least 10 people "disappeared" during 1992 and could not be traced, despite efforts by their relatives and human rights groups to find them. The number of "disappearances" was probably much higher, but it was not possible to establish the precise figure because of the difficulties of monitoring human rights in Haiti. One of the "disappeared" was Fritz Dérose, a member of Comité opération délivrance (codel). Operation Deliverance Committee, a local grassroots organization. He was reportedly arrested without warrant in April in Cité Soleil, a poor suburb of Port-au-Prince, by the police and accused of agitation against the goverrunent. According to witnesses, he was beaten upon arrest and taken to the local police station. His family later found out that he had been transferred, but despite their efforts to locate him, his whereabouts remained unknown.
At least 100 people were killed in circumstances suggesting that they had been extrajudicially executed. In late May, at a time of repeated popular protests against the government, uniformed military and police forces, as well as heavily armed men in civilian clothes apparently working with the security forces, made nightly incursions into poor districts in Port-au-Prince, killing at least 17 civilians and wounding many more. In one such incident, an
HAITI/HONDURAS
unarmed civilian, Rodolphe Lominy, was reportedly shot dead in his home in Port-au-Prince by a group of uniformed soldiers. There was no investigation into his killing. Three members of the military, at least one of whom was a known supporter of President Aristide, were shot dead by unidentified, heavily armed men in late May, shortly before a public radio appeal by soldiers for the resignation of the de facto President.
Also in May, Georges Izméry, the brother of an outspoken supporter of ousted President Aristide, was shot dead by an unidentified man near the shop he owned with his brother, Antoine. Antoine Izméry was believed to have been the target of the attack. After the shooting, Georges' stepmother was prevented from approaching him by uniformed police and the family doctor was also prevented by soldiers from seeing him at the morgue.
In August Robinson Joseph, director of the Haiti branch of World Concern International, a us-based organization, and former director of a Protestant radio station, was driving home when he was ordered to stop at a military road-block in Port-au-Prince. He apparently attempted to park his car on the side of the road when several shots were fired at him from the road-block. He was killed instantly. His secretary, who was with hint, was detained for a few hours.
Throughout the year Amnesty International made public its concerns, including the lack of investigations into human rights violations, and called on the government to investigate effectively and put an end to such abuses. In January Amnesty International published Haiti: The Human Rights Tragedy, detailing the gross human rights violations since the military coup of September 1991.
Amnesty International representatives visited Haiti in March and held talks with Prime Minister Honorât and military officials, as well as with private individuals and human rights groups. In August Amnesty International made public the findings of this visit in another report, Haiti: Human Rights Held to Ransom.
