PANAMA
Three leaders of a disbanded paramilitary force continued to be held without trial on charges which appeared to be politically motivated. There were reports of ill-treatment of protesters and detainees by police following anti-United States (us) demonstrations. Prison conditions were reported to be harsh.
On the eve of a visit to Panama by US President George Bush in June, a US soldier was shot dead and another wounded when unidentified gunmen ambushed a us military vehicle. The next day, there was an armed attack on a us air force base by m-20, an armed opposition group. In October a bomb exploded near the office of the Attorney General. There were allegations that the M-20 had been responsible, but the group denied it.
Demonstrations organized by the Movimiento de Desempleados Colonenses (modesco), Colón Unemployed Movement, demanding jobs and development plans for the area resulted in violent clashes with the police in which one protester was killed and dozens were woiinded and arrested. In July a modesco demonstration in Colón was violently dispersed by police, who fatally injured one woman, Marja Columba Calonge Ibarra, a mother of three, and injured several others. The police were alleged to have used excessive force in opening fire on unarmed demonstrators. The police version of the killing, reportedly contradicted by several witnesses, was that the woman had been hit by a ricocheting bullet. An investigation into the killing was reportedly initiated, but no results had been announced by the end of the year.
In June a former soldier was convicted of the murder of Father Nicolas van Kleef, a paraplegic Dutch priest, during aborted elections in May 1989 (see Amnesty Inter-
national Report 1990). The soldier had reportedly entered Father van Kleef s vehicle and shot him in the neck while he was urging people to vote.
Three former leaders of the disbanded Dignity Battalions — Benjamin Colamarco, Arturo Marquínez and Enrique Thompson - arrested shortly after the us invasion of Panama in December 1989, continued to be held on vaguely defined charges which appeared to be politically motivated rather than for a specific criminal act (see Amnesty International Report 1992). No date for a trial had been set by the end of 1992. Over 40 other members of the administration and armed forces of former president Manuel Noriega remained in prison awaiting trial on charges ranging from corruption to murder.
Jaime Simons, former manager of the Savings Bank and a founder member of the Partido Revolucionario Democrático (prd). Revolutionary Democratic Party, who had been arrested by us forces in December 1989, was finally charged with fraud after 22 months' detention. Jaime Simons, who had prostate cancer, reportedly asked to serve his prison term under house arrest but the authorities denied his request. By the end of the year he appeared to have been held longer than the penalty provided by law for the offence of which he was accused. His continued detention appeared to be politically motivated,
Police reportedly ill-treated protesters and detainees after anti-us demonstrations. In January Father Conrado Sanjur, a Catholic priest and coordinator of the Coordinadora Popular de Derechos Humanos de Panamá (copodehupa), Human Rights Popular Coordination of Panama, was manhandled and two youths reportedly severely beaten by police during an anti-us demonstration. No investigation appeared to have been carried out into the incident.
At least 30 people, including some 20 minors, were reportedly arrested in June, at the time of US President Bush's visit to Panama, following an anti-US protest. The demonstrators reportedly threw stones towards the stand where President Bush was to speak, but were too far away to hit it. The police dispersed the demonstrators with tear-gas and birdshot, and the event was cancelled. According to human rights groups, only some of those arrested had participated in the demonstration and others were picked up near by. Many of those
PANAMA/PAPUA NEW GUINEA
arrested were reportedly beaten upon arrest on the head, face, arms and legs. Victor Manuel Cerda was reportedly beaten more severely, sustaining a serious arm injury, when police identified him as a member of modesco. Student Raúl de Gracia Guevara was wounded by birdshot in his foot.
Prison conditions were reported to be harsh because of severe overcrowding, dilapidated facilities, inadequate medical care and endemic violence, particularly in Modelo prison.
