RUSSIA
There were at least two prisoners of con« science, both conscientious objectors to military service. One possible prisoner of conscience was acquitted and released. At least 95 people were sentenced to death. Sixty death sentences were commuted and one execution was carried out. There were reports of inadequate legal protection for asylum-seekers arriving at Moscow airport.
Following the break-up of the Soviet Union, Russia gained international recognition as an independent state under President Boris Yeltsin and took over the seat of the former ussr at the United Nations.
Work continued throughout the year on a new criminal code, with a draft in October envisaging a reduction in the scope of the death penalty from 15 peacetime offences to six, but it had not received parliamentary approval by the end of the year. In February a new law on the Procuracy provided for a stay on a death sentence if the Procurator General or his or her deputy lodged a protest against it. Previously, a death sentence, although suspended during an appeal, could legally be carried out before a judicial review of a protested sentence had been carried out. In May legal changes granted suspects the right to contact a lawyer from the moment they are detained, arrested or charged, a provision made under ussr law in 1989, and for the first time granted a person subject to arrest the right to challenge the legality of his or her detention before a court.
No legal provisions for a civilian alternative to military service had been introduced by the end of the year. At least two people, both Jehovah's Witnesses, served sentences for refusing their call-up papers. Dmitry Sokolov, sentenced to two years' compulsory labour in May 1991, was granted conditional early release in June 1992. He had previously been imprisoned
between 1988 and 1990 on the same charge. Each time his refusal had been because his religious beliefs forbade him to bear arms for a secular power or swear an oath of military allegiance. Oleg Lepin, also sentenced in 1991, ended his two-year term of compulsory laboiu: in March.
Vladimir Mironov, a possible prisoner of conscience who had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment by a Moscow court in May 1991 for his homosexual activity (see Amnesty International Report 1992), had his sentence quashed on appeal in March. He had been sentenced under Article 121 of the criminal code, which punishes sodomy between adult males even if consensual, but a reinvestigation of his case found that his acts did not constitute sodomy. According to official statistics, 10 people were sentenced under this article in the first six months of the year, but stigmatization of offenders continued to make it difficult to obtain details on individuals or the circumstances in which the acts took place.
In May the Clemency Commission released death penalty statistics for 1991, reporting that 144 people had been sentenced to death. Of these 37 had their sentences commuted, 37 were granted clemency and 70 were executed. At that time the commission, which reviews all death sentences, had 308 such cases pending before it. In September the Ministry of Justice announced that 95 sentences had been passed in the first six months of 1992: one for an attempt on the life of a militiaman and the rest for premeditated, aggravated murder. According to the Clemency Commission, 60 death sentences were commuted during the year and one person was executed. A parliamentary proposal to include commutation of all pending death sentences in an amnesty in June was voted down.
Reports were received that Iraqi and Somali asylum-seekers who arrived at Moscow airport were not granted effective protection against being forcibly returned to their countries of origin. For example, Nabil Ali Hussain, an Iraqi, arrived in Moscow on 3 April after leaving Iraq without official authorization. He was detained at Moscow airport on 10 July as he tried to board a plane to the United Kingdom. Two other Iraqis, Samiya al-Khudri and her husband, Hasan, arrived in Moscow on 21 September from Jordan but were refused
RUSSIA/RWANDA
entry. They returned to Jordan where they were also refused entry and were sent back on 2 October to Moscow, where they were detained. All three had connections with the kaqi opposition and risked falling victim to human rights violations if returned to Iraq. They were believed to be still held at the airport at the end of the year.
Amnesty International called on the government to release all people imprisoned for their conscientious objection to compulsory military service, and urged the introduction of a civilian alternative of non-punitive length. It also sought from the authorities further information on possible prisoners of conscience said to be imprisoned for consenting homosexual activity between adults in private, and urged that the criminal code be amended so that such acts were no longer punishable.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the authorities to commute all death sentences and to impose a moratorium on death sentences and executions pending the review of the criminal code.
The organization urged that asylum-seekers at risk of human rights violations in their own countries, including the three Iraqis, be granted effective and durable protection against forcible return.
