UGANDA
In January treason charges against 14 northern political leaders, who were among 18 prisoners of conscience arrested in 1991, were dropped and they were freed (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The cases of the four others, who included Andrew Adimola, Vice-Chairman of the Democratic Party (dp), were referred to the High Court. A few days later the authorities arrested Robert Kitariko, the dp's Secretary General, and Ojok Mulozi, the party's Publicity Secretary, and also charged them with treason. In May, however, the High Court acquitted five of the six defendants. However, one, Tiberio Atwoma Okeny. leader of the National Liberal Party, faced a second treason charge with Irene Apiu Julu, a dp member of parliament. Within days these charges were also dropped and the two were freed.
In May the Inspector General of Government (igg), Uganda's human rights Ombudsman, published the main findings of an investigation into the arrests of the 18 northern political leaders in 1991. The investigation found that the prisoners had been ill-treated and concluded that the arrests had taken place on the orders of the Minister of State for Defence, on the basis of insufficient evidence. In November the Minister was dismissed.
Since 1988 the authorities had used treason charges, which automatically preclude the granting of bail for 480 days, as a means of holding suspected government opponents for long periods without bringing them to trial. During 1992 a review of treason cases was initiated and charges against over 90 people were withdrawn. Among them were Joseph Lusse and eight others who had been arrested in late 1988 and held without charge until January 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The nine were released on bail in May 1992 and the charges against them were dropped in September. Also in September, 59 prisoners arrested in the north between March and May 1991 and charged with treason in October 1991 were released. Four prisoners arrested with them had died in custody during 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
At the end of the year over 100 prisoners charged with treason, some of whose cases were apparently still to be reviewed, remained in custody. They included 11 nra soldiers arrested in January 1990 but not charged until March 1991.
At least 100 other suspected government opponents were held without charge or trial throughout 1992, but over 150 were released during the year. The vast majority of detainees had been arrested by the nra, both in areas affected by armed opposition and in other parts of the country, often on the basis of little or no evidence.
Dozens of suspected opponents were arrested during the year and held in military barracks. In January, for example, Anthony Oracha, the Secretary of the West Acholi Cooperative Union in Gulu, and three of his sons were arrested by nra soldiers and kept in army custody on suspicion of being rebels. All had been released uncharged by the end of the year. In February and March, 12 Sudanese refugees were arrested by nra soldiers in Kampala and refugee camps at Adjumani in Moyo District. The 12 were held in Lubiri barracks in Kampala. They were not referred to court and no reason was given for their arrest, although it was apparently in connection with splits within the Sudan People's Liberation Army (spla), a Sudanese armed opposition group. Five were released in April but seven were held until August. Fifteen Sudanese asylum-seekers, including four prominent critics of the spla leadership who had escaped from spla detention in southern Sudan, were detained by the nra in Arua in September but were released in November.
In June officials stated that there were 200 suspected government opponents detained without charge or trial in civil prisons. In August, 133 long-term detainees, some held since 1986, were released. According to the goverrunent, these prisoners represented the last "lodgers" -prisoners detained by the army in the war zones of the north and east and "lodged" in civil prisons. However, in September it emerged that seven "lodgers" were still in detention in Luzira. It was unclear whether the other 60 "lodgers" acknowledged to be in detention earlier in the year were still in custody in other prisons.
Over 100 other detainees, some arrested for political reasons, remained uncharged in military barracks at the end of the year. The majority were members of the nra and former members of previous government armies. The authorities described the detainees as "army deserters" but they included suspected government opponents.
UGANDA
In August the authorities announced the pardon and release of 1,369 prisoners who in 1991 had been sentenced to terms of imprisonment for desertion .from the nra although they had not received a fair trial (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The prisoners, who included civilians, had been detained in mass round-ups during counter-insurgency operations in the north. In April the authorities promised to review their cases after a protest by 200 prisoners who said they were nra soldiers who had been on authorized leave at the time of their arrest.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees by soldiers were frequently reported and at least four detainees died allegedly as a result. In some cases those alleged to be responsible were arrested - but it was not known whether any soldiers had been tried by the end of the year. Former detainees at Lubiri barracks reported that prisoners were routinely beaten during their initial interrogation and as a form of punishment at the barracks.
In February Jimmy Okello, a police corporal, was reportedly beaten with a whip by an nra officer at the time of his arrest in northern Uganda. He was then given 30 strokes of the cane by another soldier -a summary and unlawful punishment -before being set firee. No action was known to have been taken to bring the soldiers responsible to justice.
In March a woman was beaten by soldiers after being detained at Kitgum Matidi in the north. She died shortly after her release. The Ugandan press reported that eight soldiers had been arrested and charged with her murder.
In April Alphael Moses Alungat died in military custody apparently as a result of torture. After his arrest in Atiri in Tororo District, he was bound by his wrists and ankles, hung upside-down from a tree and interrogated before a crowd of witnesses. Soldiers then took him away and two days later his relatives were told he had escaped. However, his body was returned to his family with an autopsy report attributing his death to a heart attack. A subsequent independent post-mortem concluded that he had died as a result of torture. Five soldiers were later charged with his murder.
Several extrajudicial executions by nra soldiers in the north and east were reported, although significantly fewer than in
previous years. In January soldiers searching for insurgents in Gulu District were said to have detained and then extrajudicially executed three men at an nra post at Palenga. No investigation was known to have taken place.
In April nra soldiers at Olelai in Soroti District reportedly extrajudicially executed John Otim and three other men and disposed of their bodies in a pit latrine. Two soldiers were arrested later that month in connection with the incident. In mid-May seven civilians were executed by nra soldiers in Palebek, Kitgiun District. In mid-July, 11 soldiers were arrested and charged with their murder.
In May the Attorney General announced at a press conference that a number of soldiers had been arrested in connection with past extrajudicial executions, including the killing of 69 youths in a railway wagon at Mukura in 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1990). Among those he implicated was an officer who had remained at large until arrested in 1992 in connection with the death of Alphael Moses Alungat (see above). However, none of them had been brought to trial by the end of the year. In July 1989, immediately after the incident at Mukura, the authorities had similarly announced the arrest of soldiers. It appeared, however, that in practice soldiers often escaped prosecution.
At least nine prisoners were sentenced to death by the High Court for murder. The Supreme Court upheld death sentences against two men convicted of murder, bringing to over 50 the number of people under sentence of death in Luzira Prison whose sentences, which had been imposed by ordinary civilian courts, had been upheld on appeal.
One soldier, Stephen Egunyu, was executed in January on the day a Field Court Martial in Soroti District found him guilty of murdering a pregnant woman, an incident which had occurred the day before. He had no defence counsel or right of appeal. Over 100 soldiers were under sentence of death in Luzira after convictions by military courts in previous years.
Human rights abuses were committed by armed opposition groups, including deliberate and arbitrary killings, mutilation of captives and rape. For example, in May Uganda Democratic Christian Army (udca) insurgents abducted and killed three teenage girls in Gulu District. In the east.
UGANDA/UKf?AlNE
rebels from the Uganda People's Army (upa) killed several captured civilians during an attack on Bukudea town in Kimii District in which 12 people died. In September nalu rebels tortured and then killed civilians in attacks on villages in Kasese District in the southwest.
During the year Amnesty International urged the government to release prisoners of conscience, review the cases of all those charged with treason, and mount impartial and prompt investigations into reported extrajudicial executions.
In September Amnesty International published a report, Uganda: The failure to safeguard human rights, which recognized positive steps taken by the government since it took power in 1986, but highlighted the continuing pattern of extrajudicial executions, unlawful detentions, torture, misuse of serious charges such as treason, and the death penalty. It concluded that the government had failed to respond adequately to such violations and included a comprehensive set of recommendations aimed at stopping human rights violations. The report also described human rights abuses by insurgents, In a 15-page response issued in September, the authorities described Amnesty International's report as politically biased and out of date, but failed to address the substantive issues raised by Amnesty International.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Uganda. In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Uganda for un review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 72BF/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about himian rights violations.
