COTE D'IVOIRE
More than 250 people, including opposition party leaders, were arrested in February following demonstrations: over 80 of them, all prisoners of conscience, were sentenced to between three months' and three years' imprisonment. However, all those still held in late July were released under an amnesty law. Five journalists also appeared to be prisoners of conscience: they too were released under the amnesty law. One person reportedly died in custody as a result of torture. Conditions in at least one prison were extremely harsh, resulting in a large nimiber of deaths.
For the first time in many years a large number of prisoners of conscience were detained when the government put the blame on its opponents for damage to property which occurred during riots in February. The rioting took place after demonstrations called by opposition parties to protest against President Félix Houphouët-Boigny's refusal to accept the findings of a commission of inquiry into a military raid on Yopougon university campus in May 1991 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992). The commission had concluded that members of the security forces had beaten and raped students during the raid. It held the army chief of staff responsible and called for him to be punished. President Houphouët-Boigny rejected the criticism of the chief of staff
and reaffirmed his confidence in him.
In March Côte d'Ivoire acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
More than 250 people were arrested in February after two demonstrations in the capital, Abidjan. Most were prisoners of conscience. The demonstrations started peacefully but were followed by rioting. Some sources alleged this was provoked by government agents, although this could not be confirmed. The government accused the political leaders who had organized the demonstrations of responsibility for damage caused by the rioting. Most of those arrested were released without charge after about two months in prison, or released on the orders of investigating magistrates, but 85 people were convicted at a series of trials and sentenced to between three months' and three years' imprisonment. They were found guilty of "sharing responsibility" for the violence and damage which followed the demonstrations. However, no evidence was produced in court to show that any of those convicted had been responsible for acts of violence or vandalism: some had not even been present during the demonstrations.
An appeal was heard in June. At its conclusion the President of the Appeal Court, Judge Yanon Yapo, announced that the court's decision would be delayed. This gave rise to speculation that the government was putting pressure on the Appeal Court not to acquit the defendants. This speculation in turn led the Public Prosecutor to file a formal request to the Supreme Court for the removal of the Appeal Court President who, he suggested, was unfairly favourable to the defendants. The Supreme Court apparently deliberately failed to meet the deadline for its decision in order to avoid becoming involved, but Judge Yapo was later removed from his post and given no other posting. Independent observers who attended the appeal hearing reported that the judge had in fact been both independent and impartial.
Those arrested included four opposition members of parliament. One was released but three were convicted, including Laurent Gbagbo, leader of the opposition Front populaire ivoirien (fpi), Ivorian Popular Front. In protest, all other opposition
côte d'ivoire
members of parliament withdrew from the National Assembly until the release of their colleagues. Because the authorities said the three had been caught while in the act of committing an offence, they were imprisoned without their parliamentary immunity being formally lifted.
Also convicted were René Dégni Ségui, President of the Ligue ivoirienne des droits de J'homme, Ivorian Human Rights League, and Martial Ahipeaud, President of the Fédération estudiantine et scolaire de Côte d'Ivoire. Ivorian Federation of Students and School Pupils, which had been banned in 1991. Among others convicted were teachers, trades unionists, students and journalists.
Some of those convicted were released after serving their three-month prison sentences. On 31 July, two days after the National Assembly unanimously passed an amnesty law following months of protest against the trials and convictions, the 77 people who remained in prison in connection with the demonstrations were released. The amnesty law also ruled out the possibility of legal proceedings being brought as a result of the May 1991 incident at Yopougon university campus: in effect, it conferred immunity on the security forces responsible for beating and raping students.
At the same time, a new law was also adopted which provides for the prosecution and imprisorunent for up to 20 years of anyone who calls or leads a gathering that becomes violent, whether or not they are personally responsible for inciting or perpetrating violence. Similar legislation had been proposed in February, but in the event the existing penal code was used to prosecute Laurent Gbagbo and others as it provides for prosecution for shared responsibility.
Some prisoners of conscience were injured at the time of their arrest. They included Simone Gbagbo, an fpi activist and the wife of Laurent Gbagbo, and Georges Goffy, a journalist and former prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Simone Gbagbo was arrested by gendarmes as she sought refuge in a building. She was beaten on the head and knocked unconscious, requiring hospital treatment. She spent one month in a surgical collar as a result of the assault, but no action was taken against those responsible.
Five journalists who were sentenced to prison terms because of articles they had written appeared to be prisoners of conscience. In February three journalists working on the independent bi-weekly, Le Jeune Démocrate, were each sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment and a fine, and the newspaper was banned from publishing for three months. Ignace Dassohire, the director, Jean-Sylvestre Lia, the editor, and Emmanuel Koré. the deputy director, were convicted of insulting the Head of State and inciting the military to revolt. The newspaper had compared President Houphouët-Boigny to President Bourguiba of Tunisia and also referred to him as "rubbish". In early March two other journalists - Norbert Gnahoua and Konan Yao. of the weekly L'Oeil du peuple - were sentenced to 18 months in prison on charges of insulting the head of state. All five were released under the amnesty law.
One prisoner reportedly died as a result of torture, Désiré-Lazare Abané died in Divo hospital in May after being taken into police custody in Divo the previous day, apparently on suspicion of criminal offences. He was sent to hospital reportedly because he had taken medication, but his body was apparently severely swollen and his neck fi-actured. It was not clear what steps were taken, if any. by the procuracy to establish if he had been tortured.
Criminal prisoners at the Maison d'Arrêt et de Correction d'Abidjan, the main prison in Abidjan, were reportedly held in extremely harsh conditions, leading to scores of deaths in custody. Lack of hygiene, inadequate medical attention and insufficient nutritious food accounted for over 100 deaths between February and July alone. The prison was holding around 4,600 prisoners, about a third of whom were awaiting trial.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the mass arrests of political activists who had not used or advocated violence, and called for the immediate, unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience. It also urged the goverrunent to ensure that the new law introduced to punish people who organize demonstrations which result in violence should not be used to imprison peaceful demonstrators or to limit peaceful exercise of the rights to freedom of expression and association. Amnesty International also protested against the government's
COTE DWOIRE/CROATIA
decision to grant immunity to members of the security forces responsible for human rights violations and called for all perpetrators of human rights violations to be brought to justice.
