LITHUANIA
One person was executed.
In a referendum held in October a new constitution was approved. In November the former leader of the Lithuanian Communist Party, Algirdas Brazauskas, replaced Vytautas Landsbergis as President and Head of State. Bronislovas Lubys was chosen as Prime Minister in December.
In August Aleksandras Novadkis was executed by shooting. His petition for clemency had been rejected three months earlier. Aleksandras Novadkis had been sentenced to death for the murder of a young girl. He was the first person to have been executed in Lithuania since restoration of independence. One other death sentence passed during the year was commuted.
In July Amnesty International asked the Ministry of Justice how many people were currently detained under Article 122 of the criminal code which prohibits homosexual acts between males. The organization said that it considered people imprisoned solely because of consensual homosexual acts in
LITHUANIA/LUXEMBOURG
private with other adults to be prisoners of conscience. In September the Ministry of Justice replied that since March 1990 two people had been convicted under the second part of Article 122 which concerns homosexual acts involving minors, violence or the threat of violence, or exploiting the dependent situation or helplessness of the victim. In a third case a minor had been sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment, reduced from three and a half years after appeal, for engaging in consensual homosexual intercourse with another minor and had been released on probation before completion of sentence. However, according to figures provided by the Ministry of the Interior to the Lithuanian aids Prevention Centre in September, a total of 17 people had been convicted under Article 122 since the beginning of 1990, all under part two. At least one of these convictions dated from 1991. In December Amnesty International asked the Ministry of Justice for clarification of these figures.
In August Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of National Defence raising again its concern about the punitive length of the ^alternative service to military service - 24 months compared to 12 months (see Amnesty International Report 1992). No reply had been received by the end of the year. There were no reports of people being imprisoned for refusing to perform military service on grounds of conscience.
In October Amnesty International representatives visited Lithuania to collect information on human rights issues related to the organization's mandate. This was the first research visit by Amnesty International to the country.
Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for commutation of the death sentence passed on Aleksandras Novadkis and urged the complete abolition of the death penalty.
